SEVENTH EDITION
Edward Teyber  |  Faith Holmes Teyber
Interpersonal Process  
in Therapy
A N  I NTE GR ATIVE  M ODE L
To register or access your online learning solution or purchase materials 
for your course, visit www.cengagebrain.com.
SEVENTH EDITION
SEVENTH 
EDITION
Edward Teyber  |  Faith Holmes Teyber
Teyber 
Teyber
Interpersonal Process 
in Therapy
Interpersonal Process in Therapy
A N INTEGRATIVE MODEL
A N  I NTE GR ATIVE  M ODE L
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,   
some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed  
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the  right 
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For  
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate  
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN, author, title, or keyword for  
materials in your areas of interest.  
Important notice: Media content referenced within the product description or the product  
text may not be available in the eBook version.  
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Want to turn C’s 
into A’s?
Obviously, right?
But the right way to go about it isn’t always so obvious. Go digital to 
get the grades. MindTap’s customizable study tools and eTextbook  
give you everything you need all in one place.
Engage with your course content, enjoy the ﬂexibility of  
studying anytime and anywhere, stay connected to assignment due 
dates and instructor notiﬁcations with the MindTap Mobile app...
and most of all…EARN BETTER GRADES.
TO GET STARTED VISIT 
WWW.CENGAGE.COM/STUDENTS/MINDTAP
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INTERPERSONAL 
PROCESS IN THERAPY
An Integrative Model
Edward T eyber
Faith Holmes T eyber
California State University,  
San Bernardino
SEVENTH EDITION
Australia • Brazil • Mexico • Singapore • United Kingdom • United States
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

© 2017, 2011 Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright 
herein may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, 
except as permitted by U.S. copyright law, without the prior written 
permission of the copyright owner.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016930889
Student Edition:
ISBN: 978-1-305-27153-1
Loose-leaf Edition:
ISBN: 978-1-305-86647-8
Cengage Learning 
20 Channel Center Street
Boston, MA 02210
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions 
with employees residing in nearly 40 different countries and sales in 
more than 125 countries around the world. Find your local representative 
at www.cengage.com.
To learn more about Cengage Learning Solutions, visit www.cengage.com.
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred 
online store www.cengagebrain.com.
Interpersonal Process in Therapy:  
An Integrative Model, Seventh Edition
Edward Teyber and Faith Holmes Teyber
Product Director: Jon Goodspeed
Product Manager: Julie Martinez 
Content Developer: Elizabeth Momb
Product Assistant: Stephen Lagos
Marketing Manager: Jennifer Levanduski
Art and Cover Direction, Production 
Management, and Composition: Lumina 
Datamatics, Inc. 
Manufacturing Planner: Judy Inouye
Cover Image: SJ Travel Photo and Video/
Shutterstock.com
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at 
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, /one.lf-/eight.lf/zero.lf/zero.lf-/three.lf/five.lf/four.lf-/nine.lf/seven.lf/zero.lf/six.lf.
For permission to use material from this text or product, 
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.  
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com.
Printed in the United States of America
Print Number: 01 Print Year: 2016
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Dedicated to those who are struggling to change;
  To our children, who have strengthened our  
commitment to making a difference;
And to all those who have come before  
and taught about the power of relationships to  
bring about change.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

v
P/r.sc/e.sc/f.sc/a.sc/c.sc/e.scxi
A/c.sc/k.sc/n.sc/o.sc/w.sc/l.sc/e.sc/d.sc/g.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.scxv
A/b.sc/o.sc/u.sc/t.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc A/u.sc/t.sc/h.sc/o.sc/r.sc/s.scxvii
P/a.sc/r.sc/t.sc 1
I/n.sc/t.sc/r.sc/o.sc/d.sc/u.sc/c.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc O/v.sc/e.sc/r.sc/v.sc/i.sc/e.sc/w.sc 1
/c.sc/h.sc/a.sc/p.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc /one.taboldstyle
The Interpersonal Process Approach 3
Therapists-in-Training Struggle with Performance Anxieties 4
Therapists are More Effective When They Have a Treatment Focus 7
Core Concepts 8
The Process Dimension 8
The Corrective Emotional Experience 10
Client Response Specificity 15
Teresa: Case Illustration of Core Concepts 19
Theoretical and Historical Context 22
The Interpersonal Domain 23
The Cognitive Domain 24
The Familial/Cultural Domain 28
Closing 33
P/a.sc/r.sc/t.sc 2
R/e.sc/s.sc/p.sc/o.sc/n.sc/d.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc /t.sc/o.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc 35
/c.sc/h.sc/a.sc/p.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc /two.taboldstyle
Establishing a Working Alliance 37
Conceptual Overview 37
The Working Alliance 38
Collaboration: An Alternative to Directive and Non-Directive Styles 39
Collaboration Begins with the Initial Interview 43
CONTENTS
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

vi  CONTENTS
Empathic Understanding: The Foundation for a Working Alliance 48
Ways in Which Clients Do Not Feel Understood 50
Communicate Understanding Overtly and Specifically 54
Identifying Recurrent Themes Facilitates Empathic Understanding 60
Performance Anxieties Make It Harder to/uni00A0Establish a Working Alliance65
Empathic Understanding as a Precondition of Change 66
Closing 67
/c.sc/h.sc/a.sc/p.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc /three.taboldstyle
Honoring the Client’s Resistance 69
Conceptual Overview 69
Reluctance to Address Resistance 71
The Therapist’s Reluctance to Work with Resistance 72
The Client’s Reluctance to Work with Resistance 75
Identifying Resistance 80
Formulate Working Hypotheses to Clarify Resistance 81
Responding to Resistance 83
Addressing Resistance During the Initial Telephone Contact 84
Exploring Resistance at the End of the First Session 88
Resistance During Subsequent Sessions 95
Shame Fuels Resistance 102
Shame Versus Guilt 103
Shame-Prone Sense of Self 104
Shame-Rage Cycle 104
Shame-Anxiety 105
Success in Treatment Can Be Threatening 107
Closing 108
/c.sc/h.sc/a.sc/p.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc /four.taboldstyle
An Internal Focus for Change 110
Conceptual Overview 110
Helping Clients Focus Inward on Their Own/uni00A0Experience112
Therapy Intensifies When Clients Focus Inward 116
Reluctance to Adopt an Internal Focus 118
Therapists’ Reluctance 118
Points of Entry 120
Clients’ Reluctance 122
Developing Agency: Placing the Locus of/uni00A0Change with Clients125
Fostering the Client’s Initiative 125
Enlist Clients in Solving Their Own Problems 132
Resolving Client’s Conflict 133
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CONTENTS  vii
Tracking Clients’ Anxiety 136
Identify Signs of Client’s Anxiety 137
Approach Client’s Anxiety Directly 138
Observe What Precipitates Clients’ Anxiety 139
Focusing Clients Inward to Explore Their Anxiety 140
Closing 142
/c.sc/h.sc/a.sc/p.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc /five.taboldstyle
Helping Clients with/uni00A0Their/uni00A0Feelings 143
Conceptual Overview 144
Responding to Clients’ Feelings 144
Work with Clients about Addressing Their Ambivalence 144
Clients Avoid Feelings Because of Unwanted Interpersonal Consequences 145
Approach the Client’s Most Salient Feeling 148
Expand and Elaborate the Client’s Affect 152
Identify the Predominant Affect 157
An Old Wound 158
Multiple Stressors 158
A Characterological Affect 159
Recognize the Constellation of Feelings That/uni00A0Clients Frequently Present161
Anger-Sadness-Shame 162
Sadness-Anger-Guilt 166
Attachment Theory Provides Helpful Guidelines for Responding  
to Clients’ Distress 167
Containment: Using Attachment Constructs to Guide Intervention 170
A Safe Haven Facilitates Change from the Inside 174
The Client’s Feelings Often Evoke Countertransference 175
Familial Rules and Roles Shape Counertransference Propensities 175
Differentiating the Therapist’s Issues from the Client’s 178
Closing 179
P/a.sc/r.sc/t.sc 3
C/l.sc/a.sc/r.sc/i.sc/f.sc/y.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc’/s.sc P/r.sc/o.sc/b.sc/l.sc/e.sc/m.sc /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc D/e.sc/v.sc/e.sc/l.sc/o.sc/p.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc  
/a.sc T/r.sc/e.sc/a.sc/t.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc F/o.sc/c.sc/u.sc/s.sc 181
/c.sc/h.sc/a.sc/p.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc /six.taboldstyle
Familial and Developmental Factors 183
Conceptual Overview 183
Attachment Style and Clinical Presentation in Adult Treatment 184
Four Categories of Attachment 185
Secure Attachment Style in Adult Clients 186
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

viii  CONTENTS
Dismissive Attachment Style in Adult Clients 
Preoccupied Attachment Style in Adult Clients 193
Fearful Attachment Style in Adult Clients 197
Concluding Thoughts on Adult Attachment Styles 200
Parenting Styles 200
Authoritarian Parenting 201
Permissive Parenting 203
Disengaged Parenting 205
Authoritative Parenting 207
Love Withdrawal and Conditions of Worth 208
Guidelines for Responding to Clients with a Diversity of Parenting  
and Attachment Styles 212
Additional Clinical Guidelines 214
Family Interaction Patterns 217
Closing 222
/c.sc/h.sc/a.sc/p.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc /seven.taboldstyle
Inflexible Interpersonal Coping Strategies 224
Conceptual Overview 224
Interpersonal Framework for Conceptualizing Clients 225
Unmet Developmental Needs 227
Internal Working Models and Interpersonal Coping Strategies 228
Internal Working Models Shape Symptoms and Problems 228
Interpersonal Coping Strategies 230
Inflexible Interpersonal Coping Strategies: Moving-Toward, Moving-Against,  
and Moving-Away 231
Rigid Interpersonal Coping Styles: A Defense Framed as a Virtue 232
Shoulds for the Self and Expectations of Others 234
Resolving the Core Conflict 235
Case Study of Peter: Moving-Toward Others 238
Developmental History and Precipitating Crisis 238
Precipitating Crisis, Maladaptive Relational Patterns,  
and Symptom Development 240
Course of Treatment 241
Two Case Summaries 244
Juan: Moving-Against Others 244
Maggie: Moving-Away from Others 247
Closing 251
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CONTENTS  ix
/c.sc/h.sc/a.sc/p.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc /eight.taboldstyle
Relational Themes and Reparative Experiences 253
Conceptual Overview 253
Three Ways Clients Reenact Their Problems with Others  
in the Therapeutic Relationship 253
Eliciting Maneuvers 254
Clients’ Testing Behavior 261
Transference Reactions 272
Finding Interpersonal Balance 280
Enmeshment 281
Disengagement 282
Effective Middle Ground of Balanced Involvement 284
Ambivalence: Responding to Both Sides of Clients’ Experience 288
Closing 291
P/a.sc/r.sc/t.sc IV
R/e.sc/s.sc/o.sc/l.sc/u.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc C/h.sc/a.sc/n.sc/g.sc/e.sc 293
/c.sc/h.sc/a.sc/p.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc /nine.taboldstyle
Working With the Process Dimension 295
Conceptual Overview 295
Resolving Problems through the/uni00A0Interpersonal Process296
Responding to Clients’ Conflicts in the  
Therapeutic Relationship 296
Bringing Conflicts to the Therapeutic Relationship 297
Using the Process Dimension to Facilitate Change 299
Using Process Comments to Provide an Interpersonal Solution 313
Therapists’ Initial Reluctance to Work with/uni00A0the Process Dimension323
Closing 332
/c.sc/h.sc/a.sc/p.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc /one.taboldstyle/zero.taboldstyle
Working-Through and Termination 333
Conceptual Overview 333
The Course of Client Change: An Overview 333
Working-Through 336
The Working-Through Process 336
Family-of-Origin Work 345
The Dream: The Future 351
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

x  CONTENTS
Termination 354
Client Ends Treatment Early 354
Client and Therapist Talk about Therapy Ending 357
Ending the Relationship 363
Closing 363
A/p.sc/p.sc/e.sc/n.sc/d.sc/i.sc/x.sc A365
A/p.sc/p.sc/e.sc/n.sc/d.sc/i.sc/x.sc B367
G/l.sc/o.sc/s.sc/s.sc/a.sc/r.sc/y.sc369
R/e.sc/f.sc/e.sc/r.sc/e.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc/s.sc377
N/a.sc/m.sc/e.sc I/n.sc/d.sc/e.sc/x.sc396
S/u.sc/b.sc/j.sc/e.sc/c.sc/t.sc I/n.sc/d.sc/e.sc/x.sc405
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

xi
WHO ARE WE AND WHAT IS OUR PURPOSE?
We are both practicing therapists and clinical instructors who feel so fortunate to have 
spent our careers doing this work. Throughout the 80 collective years we have been 
practicing, we continue to find this work deeply meaningful. We have spent our careers 
involved in every aspect of clinical work: seeing clients, supervising graduate student ther-
apists, directing treatment/training clinics, conducting psychotherapy process research, 
and carrying out empirically validated intervention projects. As we have grown older, we 
hold even more respect for the clients we see— often feeling genuine admiration for many 
who are coping and living as well as they are despite having grown up with so little help 
for the very big problems they are still contending with. 
We find that the problems most clients bring to treatment are not simple or superfi -
cial but often complex, painful, and not so easily resolved. However, with helpful train -
ing and supervision, student therapists can learn much about how to help and make a 
meaningful difference in their clients’ lives. We have been privileged to have taught and 
supervised so many rewarding graduate students, most of whom have gone on to become 
practitioners, teachers, and clinical supervisors. We love this work, feel honored to have 
had the privilege of entering deeply into our clients’ lives, and believe that therapists help 
clients change through the reparative relationships they offer.
WHO IS THIS BOOK FOR?
Interpersonal Process in Therapy: An Integrative Model, 7/e, is a clinical training text for 
those who are seeing clients: graduate student therapists in practicum, internship and 
other applied practice courses. It is also suitable for advanced students in upper division 
and pre-practicum courses that provide an in-depth, applied introduction to counseling 
and therapy. Foundational clinical concepts are introduced throughout each chapter 
and illustrated with numerous clinical vignettes and sample therapist-client dialogues 
that student therapists will find informative and compelling. Clinically authentic and 
personally engaging, this text will help developing therapists understand the therapeutic 
process and how change occurs. 
Clinical training is stressful for many new therapists because they are painfully 
uncertain of what to do and how to proceed with their clients. Although they take 
helpful courses on counseling theories, helping/micro skills, and psychopathology, 
student therapists need more specific help as they approach their first clients in session. 
Fully cognizant of their limited experience and knowledge, and sometimes receiving 
contradictory input from different supervisors and practicum instructors, these trainees 
are often aware that they do not really know what to do or how to help their clients. 
Although bright and caring, many feel inadequate and worry about making mistakes or 
PREFACE
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

xii  PREFACE
doing something wrong that could hurt their clients. New therapists need a conceptual 
framework to help them understand where they are trying to go in treatment, and why, 
in order to help their clients change. One of the primary goals of this foundational text is 
to replace the ambiguity that students often have about treatment with a well-developed 
framework for understanding how change occurs and what role the therapist-client 
relationship plays in the change process.
WHAT IS THIS BOOK ABOUT?
We believe that the relationship between the therapist and the client is the foundation for 
therapeutic change. Thus, this text offers an integrative treatment approach that draws 
from different theoretical approaches and teaches student therapists how they can use the 
therapeutic relationship as a focus for understanding and intervening with their clients. 
In order to help, developing therapists need guidance learning how to make sense of the 
complex interactions taking place in the therapeutic relationship, and to find effective 
ways to talk with clients about what may be transpiring between them. With a better 
understanding of what is going on between the therapist and the client, the therapist is 
able to intervene effectively by providing clients with a new and reparative relationship 
that disconfirms clients’ early maladaptive schemas and maladaptive relational patterns. 
With this in vivo or experiential relearning, we are teaching student therapists how 
to understand and intervene in the current interaction or interpersonal process that is 
occurring between the therapist and client to provide a corrective emotional experience. 
Specifically, this text aims to help developing therapists learn how to use process 
comments and other immediacy interventions, such as metacommunication, self-involving 
statements, and interpersonal feedback to intervene in the here-and-now, current 
interaction with clients. Written in a direct and conversational tone, this text provides an 
integrative treatment approach that highlights how new therapists can use the process 
dimension — talking sensitively yet forthrightly about “you and me” and what may be 
going on between the therapist and client, right now, to facilitate change. 
The model teaches readers to (1) identify significant relational themes and cognitive 
patterns in the client’s behavior; (2) help the client recognize how these patterns function 
both for better and for worse in the client’s life — that is, what they provide and what 
they cost; (3) change how these maladaptive relational patterns and outdated coping 
strategies that are causing problems with others are also coming into play during sessions 
in the real-life relationship between the client and therapist; and (4) generalize the in 
vivo relearning from this experience of change with the therapist to others beyond the 
therapy setting. This treatment model demonstrates a way of being with clients in session 
that is genuine, actively engaging but not directive, empathic, and highly collaborative. 
It encourages therapists to explore with clients what is going on between them so they 
can work together to change faulty patterns that are being enacted with the therapist and 
others, and provide the experiential relearning that will help clients change.
Describing the course of treatment from the initial session through termination, this text 
provides practical intervention guidelines for working with the primary issues that emerge 
during different stages of treatment, and shows how theory leads to practice. With clarity 
and immediacy, it highlights the challenging clinical situations that new therapists are facing, 
and captures the questions and concerns that are salient for student therapists as they begin 
seeing clients. The interpersonal process model is an integrative approach that incorporates 
client-centered, cognitive-behavioral, family systems, interpersonal-dynamic, and 
attachment theories; uses the therapeutic relationship as an organizing focus for treatment; 
and encourages student therapists to draw flexibly from varying theoretical perspectives and 
develop their own personal styles. This text presents a comprehensive treatment approach 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

PREFACE  xiii
that teaches student therapists how to use themselves, and the relationships they establish 
with their clients, as the most important way to help clients change.
WHAT’S NEW IN THIS SEVENTH EDITION?
The goal for improving this foundational text on clinical training has always been the 
same: to make it simpler, clearer, and more practical for new therapists. Because this ma-
terial is clinically authentic and so personally evocative for student therapists, we have 
tried to make the Seventh Edition more concise. Every chapter is shorter. However, we 
also wanted to develop more fully certain core concepts that run throughout the text, 
especially empathic understanding, working collaboratively, rupture and repair in the 
working alliance, and further guidelines for engaging clients in more depth. The Seventh 
Edition has thoroughly integrated the burgeoning literature linking attachment theory 
to clinical practice, especially adult attachment styles and clinical presentation. There is 
further attention to the trans-diagnostic role of shame in many clients’ symptoms and 
problems, and to its role in resistance and premature termination. 
This new edition also provides more attention to case formulation and treatment 
planning, and empirical support for treatment guidelines. A revised and expanded 
reference section provides improved access both to classic and current clinical and 
research literature. Finally, it is challenging for new therapists to work “in the moment” 
with clients and try out the process-oriented interventions that can be so helpful yet 
intimidating in the beginning. To assist with these immediacy interventions and other 
core concepts, many new therapist-client dialogues and case vignettes have been added in 
every chapter to illustrate effective and ineffective intervention. In conjunction with new 
video demonstrations that accompany the Seventh Edition, these illustrative dialogues will 
help trainees “see” concepts and apply them to practice. We hope this will help trainees 
become more effective clinicians as they sort through their own identities as therapists 
and choose their own personal styles for working with clients.
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALS
M/i.sc/n.sc/d.scT /a.sc/p.sc
MindTap for Interpersonal Process in Therapy: An Integrative Model, 7th Edition  en-
gages and empowers students to produce their best work—consistently. By seamlessly 
integrating course material with videos, activities, apps, and much more, MindTap creates 
a unique learning path that fosters increased comprehension and efficiency. 
For students, MindTap: 
 /uni25CFDelivers real-world relevance with activities and assignments that help build critical 
thinking and analytic skills that will transfer to other courses and students’ profes-
sional lives. 
 /uni25CFHelps them stay organized and efficient with a single destination that reflects what’s 
important to the instructor, along with the tools students need to master the content.
 /uni25CFEmpowers and motivates with information that shows where students stand at all 
times—both individually and compared to the highest performers in class.
Additionally, MindTap allows instructors to: 
 /uni25CFControl what content students see and when they see it with a learning path that can 
be used as-is or matched to a syllabus. 
 /uni25CFCreate a unique learning path of relevant readings, multimedia, and activities that 
move students up the learning taxonomy from basic knowledge and comprehension 
to analysis, application, and critical thinking. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

xiv  PREFACE
 /uni25CFIntegrate their own content into the MindTap Reader using their own documents or 
pulling from sources like RSS feeds, YouTube videos, websites, Google Docs, and more.
 /uni25CFUse powerful analytics and reports that provide a snapshot of class progress, time in 
course, engagement, and completion.
In addition to the benefits of the platform, MindTap for Interpersonal Process in 
Therapy: An Integrative Model, 7th Edition  also includes self-assessments, case studies, 
practice exercises, a chapter quiz, and video demonstrations by the authors. These dem -
onstrations show both authors applying core concepts from the text in clinical situations. 
The videos focus on critical practice issues discussed in the text that are often challenging 
for new therapists. 
I/n.sc/s.sc/t.sc/r.sc/u.sc/c.sc/t.sc/o.sc/r.sc S/u.sc/p.sc/p.sc/l.sc/e.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc
Online Instructor’s Manual. The Instructor’s Manual contains a variety of resources 
to aid instructors in preparing and presenting text material in a manner that meets their 
personal preferences and course needs. It presents chapter-by-chapter suggestions and 
resources to enhance and facilitate learning.
Online T est Bank. For assessment support, the updated test bank includes questions 
for each chapter.
Cengage Learning T esting Powered by Cognero. Cognero is a flexible, online 
system that allows instructors to author, edit, and manage test bank content as well as 
create multiple test versions in an instant. Instructors can deliver tests from their school’s 
learning management system, their classroom, or wherever they want.
Online PowerPoint. These vibrant Microsoft ® PowerPoint ® lecture slides for each 
chapter assist instructors with their lectures by providing concept coverage directly from 
the textbook.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

xv
I (Ed) started percolating on this text 40 years ago while working at the Student Counseling 
Center at Michigan State University. I have learned much from good mentors and been fortu-
nate to continue finding wise friends and colleagues over the years who keep teaching me about 
counseling relationships and helping clients change. Most importantly, I would like to thank my 
wife, Faith Holmes Teyber, for teaching me so much over the years— usually by her example — usually by her example —
rather than words. She joined me as a co-author for the Sixth Edition of Interpersonal Process 
in Therapy, and has enriched this Seventh Edition with her understanding and compassion. She 
is a gifted therapist and supervisor, and a uniquely loving person who offers every child a trust-
worthy friend. I also wish to thank my family and three loving sisters for their lifetime of sup-
port—port—port oldest sister Julie typed my dissertation for me in 1976 and, still typing, helped with this 
manuscript in 2016! I am especially thankful for two caring and creative sons, Ted and Reed— manuscript in 2016! I am especially thankful for two caring and creative sons, Ted and Reed— manuscript in 2016! I am especially thankful for two caring and creative sons, Ted and Reed
I am immensely proud of the person each has become. Finally, I wish to thank the clients I have 
worked with over the years. They have honored me by taking the risk of letting me become 
someone who mattered to them, and thereby giving me the simple pleasure of being able to help.
I (Faith) have been privileged to have the support of a nurturing family, loyal friends, 
and affirming mentors. My friends, especially Laura Kamptner, have provided both personal 
and intellectual fuel over the years. I am deeply grateful for the partnership I have with Ed 
Teyber— he is a master therapist and provides tremendous safety to those who have the plea-
sure of being in his circle. I am especially thankful to my sons, Andrew and Cameron, who 
have taught me so much about the power of relationships. I am also thankful to the many 
children and families who have given me the honor of letting me into their lives and allowing 
me to help them with their problems. I have been fortunate to find this meaningful work.
Together, we would like to thank our friend and colleague, Dr. Rayna Markin at 
Villanova University for her significant help in making this edition better. We would also 
like to thank four helpful graduate students, Nicoletta Dragan, Cadisha Gravesande, 
Chelsea Lamb, and Jenn Rizk, who have offered us skillful editing with this revision and 
helped us stay close to the experience of the beginning therapist. We also would like to 
thank Chris Vallejo for his help with videotaping. We appreciate how much they, and 
many other rewarding graduate students over the years, have given us. It will be a great 
pleasure to watch and share in all they are going to accomplish and offer to others in 
the years ahead. Additionally, we would like to thank the reviewers who made many 
helpful suggestions for this revision: Jeffrey Bulanda, Aurora University; Arthur Clark, 
St. Lawrence University; Matthew Domico, Lewis University; Jeffrey Cornelius-White, 
Missouri State University; Randi Smith, Metro State University of Denver; Lorraine Guth, 
Indiana University of Pennsylvania; Mary Houston-Vega, University of Texas at San 
Antonio; and Michael Chovanec, St. Catherine University/University of St. Thomas. 
Finally, thanks to our many good colleagues over the years at Cengage. In particular, 
we would like to thank Julie Martinez and Elizabeth Momb for their support and part -
nership for this edition, as well as Kailash Rawat at Lumina Datamatics.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

xvii
Edward T eyber is Professor of Psychology Emeritus, director of the Psychology Clinic, 
and president of the Foundation Board of Directors at California State University, San 
Bernardino. He received his Ph.D. in clinical psychology from Michigan State University. 
Dr. Teyber is also the author of the popular book Helping Children Cope with Divorce , 
and co-author with Dr. Faith H. McClure (now Teyber) of Casebook in Child and Ado -
lescent Treatment: Cultural and Familial Contexts. His work has focused on the effects 
of marital and family relations on child adjustment, attachment and psychotherapy, and 
counseling relationships. He is interested in clinical training and enjoys maintaining a 
private practice.
Faith Holmes T eyberis Professor of Psychology Emeritus at California State University, 
San Bernardino, and provides consultation to organizations serving the mental health 
needs of children. She grew up in South Africa during apartheid and received her Ph.D. 
in clinical psychology from the University of California, Los Angeles. Her clinical and 
research interests are in the areas of attachment and psychotherapy and at-risk children, 
families, and adults, with a particular focus on factors that promote resilience in those who 
have experienced trauma. She is currently conducting an attachment-based, parent -child 
therapy intervention project with incarcerated parents. She is co-author with Dr. Edward 
Teyber of Casebook in Child and Adolescent Treatment: Cultural and Familial Contexts. 
Her publications are in the area of coping with stress and trauma.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

1
PART
I
I/n.sc/t.sc/r.sc/o.sc/d.sc/u.sc/c.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc 
O/v.sc/e.sc/r.sc/v.sc/i.sc/e.sc/w.sc
CHAPTER ONE
The Interpersonal Process Approach
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

3
CHAPTER /one.alt
The Interpersonal  
Process Approach
Claire, a first-year practicum student, was about to see her first client. She had been 
looking forward to this event for a long time. Like many of her classmates, Claire had 
decided to become a therapist while working on her undergraduate degree. Counseling* 
had always been intrinsically interesting to her. For Claire, being a therapist meant far 
more than having a “good job”; it was the fulfillment of a dream. How meaningful, 
she thought, to make a living by helping people with the most important concerns in 
their lives.
At this moment, though, Claire felt the real test was at hand: Her first client would be 
arriving in a few minutes. Worries raced through her mind: What will we talk about for 
50 minutes? How should I start? What if she doesn’t show up? What if I do something 
wrong and she doesn’t come back? Claire also worried if her client—a 45-year-old His -
panic woman—would have difficulty relating to her, a Caucasian woman in her mid-20s. 
Needless to say, Claire was anxious. And even though she was painfully uncertain about 
how to proceed, she was still committed to finding a way to help this client with her prob-
lems. She had learned something about therapy in her undergraduate psychology classes 
and a good deal more from her volunteer experience with callers on the local crisis hot -
line. But even with these experiences and a supervisor to guide her, Claire was keenly 
aware of her novice status and the fact that she didn’t know very much about actually 
doing therapy.
Claire’s classmates shared her excitement about becoming a therapist. Many of 
them were older than Claire and more experienced in life. Some had raised children; 
others had already had careers as teachers, nurses, and businesspeople. These new thera -
pists were often coming from life roles in which they had already been successful and 
felt confident. A counseling career held new hopes for these classmates as well but also 
evoked anxiety about their ability to become effective therapists. Like Claire, they knew 
that realizing their hopes and plans for a rewarding new career would also depend on 
their ability to establish their credibility with their clients in order to work effectively 
with them. And with the arrival of their first clients, their ability to help was about to 
be tested.
*The terms “counseling” and “therapy” are used interchangeably throughout the text.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

4  CHAPTER /one.alt
THERAPISTS-IN-TRAINING STRUGGLE WITH 
PERFORMANCE ANXIETIES
It is indeed really difficult to begin seeing one’s first clients. Those initial sessions can be 
both exciting and intense for new therapists like Claire, who often struggle with perfor -both exciting and intense for new therapists like Claire, who often struggle with perfor -both exciting and intense for new therapists like Claire, who often struggle with perfor
mance anxieties and fears about their own inadequacy. We recall how worried we were, 
years ago, about making mistakes and as clinical supervisors, we often listen to bright 
and caring practicum students express concerns about somehow “hurting my client.” If 
new therapists are too worried about making a mistake, or become overly preoccupied 
about what their supervisor might want them to say or do, they often become too quiet 
or passive—and the client doesn’t feel heard, helped, or responded to. Similarly, when 
they are trying too hard to figure out what they are going to say or what they are sup -
posed to do next, or grasp the key meaning in what they just said, therapists cannot 
listen intently and actively engage with the client. In this way, performance anxieties can 
significantly impede the treatment process. These unwanted performance pressures are 
generated when new therapists frame what they don’t know or can’t do yet as a “deficit” 
or as evidence of their inadequacy, rather than more realistically regarding it as just their 
own inexperience. A useful starting point for learning how to use the therapeutic relation-
ship to help clients change is to gain a better understanding of these initial performance 
anxieties that diminish therapists’ effectiveness. Let’s look at some of the typical concerns 
practicum students express as they begin seeing their first clients.
Jessica expresses concerns that are fairly realistic for a new therapist: “My biggest anx-
iety about being a student therapist is that I really don’t have any idea what I am doing—iety about being a student therapist is that I really don’t have any idea what I am doing—iety about being a student therapist is that I really don’t have any idea what I am doing
and feel like I’ve been thrown headfirst into the water! Don’t get me wrong, I am definitely 
enjoying the chance to start seeing clients, but it ’s just a little scary taking other people ’s 
problems into my own hands and trying to help them without a clue of where to go next. 
I’m OK with exploring things, but when it comes to the “action stage” and actually trying 
to help somebody change, well, that concerns me most.”
Chanté brings a more personal concern to her initial sessions—the fear of being 
found out or exposed as an imposter: “My biggest anxiety stems from a fear of failing or 
being incompetent—a feeling that somehow I have managed to sneak through my educa-
tional career and land in this great training program without anyone figuring out that I’m 
really not cut out for this. Perhaps I am just as afraid myself of realizing that I may not 
be very good at this work. That would be devastating for me because the more I see my 
clients, the more I enjoy and appreciate every aspect of this. And even though I’m aware 
that I’m going to make mistakes as I go along, I am afraid of doing more harm than good 
sometimes. So, with every new case that gets passed out, the first thing I think about is all 
the reasons why I may not be the right therapist to help that person.”
Carol connects how the anxiety that she experiences in her new role as a counselor 
links to a problematic role she played in her family. “My biggest anxiety about becoming 
a therapist is feeling that I am inadequate. My instructors reassure me that this is a nor -a therapist is feeling that I am inadequate. My instructors reassure me that this is a nor -a therapist is feeling that I am inadequate. My instructors reassure me that this is a nor
mal feeling, that most therapists experience this in their first year or two of training, and 
that we’re not expected to be perfect. But it doesn ’t make any difference— it remains my 
biggest anxiety. I believe it’s because I was always second best in my family of origin. No 
matter what I did, my sister was always smarter … more creative. I learned to feel really 
uncomfortable whenever I wasn ’t in complete command and didn ’t know just exactly 
what I was supposed to do. So, even though some part of me knows that I ’m really not 
inadequate, it still churns my stomach when I am not good at something right away.”
Dennis relays how his performance anxieties keep him from grasping, in the moment, 
what his client is really saying or meaning. “My anxiety level goes way up when I feel lost 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   5
in the session. Sometimes I feel so lost in there, like I ’m going in circles, and I just don ’t 
know what to do. And that just makes my anxiety even worse. Then I start wracking my 
brain about what to do next and I start missing even more issues. It just kills me when I 
review the videotape after the session and then, when it ’s too late, I ‘get’ what they were 
really saying or think of what I could have said. But why couldn ’t I get it during the 
session, right then when it was happening… it’s so frustrating!”
As these promising student therapists are telling us, counselor training certainly is 
challenging. But new therapists need to be patient with themselves and appreciate that 
learning to be an effective therapist is a long-term developmental process (Rizq, 2009). It 
often takes three or four years to find one’s own professional identity and feel competent 
in this work. Within a year or so, most new therapists do become more confident, start 
to feel like they can be themselves in the session, and begin to enjoy the hour as they 
find that they can indeed help their clients. Lorraine, a second-year student, captures 
this rewarding transition: “ Everything considered, I have enjoyed conducting therapy 
this year. Instead of being nervous in the room, like I felt last year, I feel at home now. 
I’m actually able to enjoy my clients instead of being caught up in my fear of failure. 
I’m not nearly as worried about making mistakes, and I view the misunderstandings or 
ruptures that occur as opportunities to develop a better relationship with my client. So, 
the best part of therapy this second year is that my performance anxiety has decreased 
exponentially. I spend a lot more time thinking about what’s going on with the client and 
conducting therapy, and a lot less time thinking about myself and waiting to fail.”
What helps therapists like Lorraine resolve their initial performance anxieties so 
they can begin responding more effectively to their clients? We introduce three sugges -
tions here, and will return to this important developmental issue throughout the chap -
ters ahead. First, new therapists are encouraged to question the unrealistic performance 
expectations they often place on themselves, accepting that it is OK to make mistakes—
all therapists do. Often, this means they need to focus more on what they are learning 
rather than on how they are performing . This will progress readily for some, especially 
those who can be non-defensive, learn from their mistakes by being open to constructive 
feedback from supervisors, and move on. In contrast, this will be more difficult for other 
practicum students who may have grown up in families where they received too much 
criticism from their caregivers, were expected to be perfect and could not make mistakes, 
or were judged too frequently. An important consideration to keep in mind is that we are 
human; we are all going to make mistakes with our clients. We will be most effective if 
we focus instead on how to recover from them and can grasp that our mistakes are not 
indicative of being inadequate. Join in this thought exercise:
Right now, think of the professional you regard as the single most effective therapist 
you have known—a particular instructor or supervisor, or perhaps a personal therapist 
you have worked with, whom you trust and admire. Pause now, and reflect for a moment 
on the reality that this esteemed and seasoned therapist makes mistakes in her or his prac-
tice every day. (If you don’t think they do, then ask them.) The therapist you are think -
ing about probably is highly skilled, in part because s/he can recover from mistakes (the 
inevitable misunderstandings that occur in every relationship or “ruptures in the working 
alliance”) by being non-defensive. That is, she/he regularly checks out potential problems 
by asking clients about potential misunderstandings, is willing to look at his/her own con-
tribution to whatever problem may be occurring, and is able to talk through or sort out 
these misunderstandings that occur. For example:
THERAPIST:
 “You seem more distant, Jason. Maybe I said something, that doesn’t feel quite 
right.Can I check in with you about this?” 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

6  CHAPTER /one.alt
Second, new therapists will do a better job of managing whatever anxieties they may 
be experiencing if they can set their intention to de-center and focus more on the client 
and what the client is really saying rather than on themselves and their own performance. 
Too often, new therapists are self-absorbed, which can, at times, develop to a state of 
painful self-consciousness or obsessive self-awareness (e.g., Therapist: “What should I 
say when she looks at me like that…what am I going to ask about next…I’m being way 
too quiet…I keep saying um hmm”). As new therapists develop a reflective self-awareness 
that is more balanced—that is, process both what is going on for the client, while simul -
taneously considering what might be going on between client and therapist as well—they 
will become more effective. We are going to explore this participant/observer ** stance
closely, because it is a challenging stance that involves being in the relationship experi -
entially while simultaneously stepping out of it and observing and thinking about what 
might be going on between the therapist and client. This often feels elusive in the begin -
ning, but it is an essential therapeutic skill that we will be helping you develop.
Third, to help with these normative and expectable performance anxieties, new thera-
pists need active support from their supervisors and instructors. In particular, they need to 
be reassured about the acceptable reality that most new therapists do not really know very 
much about the change process, what to do in their sessions, or how to help clients change. 
Student therapists also need practical guidelines for how to proceed and suggestions that they 
can apply, especially in their initial sessions. This support and preparation often includes real-
life illustrations or examples such as watching videotapes of instructors conducting intakes 
and initial sessions, watching actual sessions of your supervisor with a client, and role-playing 
with instructors who model effective ways to respond and conduct initial sessions. These 
real-life role models are especially effective and can go a long way toward diminishing the 
student therapist’s initial anxieties about seeing clients and knowing “what to do.”
In sum, new therapists’ anxieties about their ability to help are not to be dismissed as 
just neurotic insecurity or obsessive worrying. It is realistic to be concerned about one’s 
performance in a new, complex, and ambiguous arena. It is simultaneously important 
that new therapists like Claire not lose sight of the significant personal strengths they 
already have. Most trainees already possess sensitivity, intelligence, and a genuine 
concern for others. Such personal assets, and all they have learned from their own life 
experiences, will prove helpful to their future clients. Although proponents of different 
theoretical approaches often claim superiority of their approach over others, treatment 
outcome studies repeatedly find that success rates in treatment have far more to do with 
the personal characteristics and the skill of the therapist than the theoretical orientation 
(Norcross, 2002; Norcross & Beutler, 2014; Norcross & Lambert, 2014; Norcross & 
Wampold, 2011; Seligman, 1995; Wampold, 2011, 2006; Wampold & Budge, 2012).
Personal experience, common sense, good judgment, and intuition are useful indeed. 
However, in order for a therapist to be effective with a wide range of people and prob -
lems, these valuable human qualities need to be wed to a conceptual framework, which 
provides a compass for the work you are going to do with the client. It is from this com -
pass that you develop a case formulation for your client. Therapists working within every 
theoretical orientation become more effective when they understand specifically what is 
wrong and where they need to go in treatment, in order to help clients change. When 
therapists have this kind of focus for treatment, and know where they are going in treat -
ment and why, they can be more consistently helpful. Without a conceptual framework 
as a guide, however, therapists do not have a focus for treatment and, in each successive 
session, are just putting out the next fire or wandering around without direction. We will 
turn to this key competency in the next chapter. 
**Boldface terms are defined in the glossary.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   7
THERAPISTS ARE MORE EFFECTIVE WHEN THEY HAVE 
A TREATMENT FOCUS
The interpersonal-process approach is fundamentally grounded in the common factors lit-
erature (D’Aniello, 2015; Imel & Wampold, 2008; Messer & Wampold, 2002; Wampold 
& Budge, 2012). They are necessary for change and essential to every brand of successful 
therapy (Wampold, 2015). For many clients, however, the core conditions of empathy, 
genuineness, and warmth are not enough, especially for those who have more significant 
problems such as being violated or betrayed by a primary caregiver. For these and other 
clients with complex and challenging problems, something more is needed. Therapists will 
have much greater impact when they are able to conceptualize or discern more precisely 
what this client’s core problem really is, how it came about developmentally, and how it is 
being played out and causing symptoms and problems in daily life. The most widely used 
term for this key competency is a “case formulation” or “case conceptualization.” Hav-
ing a case conceptualization to guide treatment can prevent therapists from getting lost in 
the different stories the client brings in each week—not knowing how to find the unifying 
thread or recurrent themes as the clients keeps moving from topic to topic.
Clearly, the opportunity for more enduring and significant change is lost without a 
case conceptualization and the focus for treatment it provides (Ingram, 2012; Persons, 
Beckner & Tompkins, 2013). Without this focus, clients might feel understood or cared 
about by their therapists, and may like them very much, but often little change occurs. In 
support, a burgeoning research literature highlights that greater effectiveness is associated 
with more focused interventions (Roth & Fonagy, 2005). Distinguishing a general sym -
pathy, warmth, friendliness, or benevolence from a more specific and accurate empathy 
or conceptual clarity, Allen et al. (2008) suggest the metaphor that “we should visualize 
psychotherapy as being less like lounging in a warm bath and more like swimming in a 
cool, crystal-clear lake. Warmth is easier; clarity is harder.” Thus, while core conditions 
are necessary, they are insufficient—therapists also need to discern more clearly a focus 
for treatment that clarifies what’s really wrong, how the central problem came about, 
and what needs to be done to change it. In the chapters ahead, we will further elucidate 
how therapists can hone in and clarify more precisely the themes and patterns that link 
together the different problems and concerns the client is presenting.
Additionally, the process of learning how to contextualize or make sense of a cli -
ent’s problems involves exploring various theoretical frameworks (Fernando, Cohen & 
Henskens, 2012). Before therapists can find their own professional identities and feel 
confident in their abilities, they need to integrate a theoretical framework that they can 
apply with diverse clients and that is congruent with their own personal values and life 
experiences. Developing therapists cannot claim their own professional identity by simply 
taking on the same theoretical approach as their mentor or adopting what their instruc -
tors and supervisors do. To work most effectively in whatever theoretical orientation they 
eventually adopt, and to enjoy being a therapist, student therapists are encouraged to 
actively explore and try out different approaches for several years—eventually integrating 
and choosing for themselves how they are going to work with clients.
Continuing with this concern for the therapists’ personal development, one purpose of 
this book is to provide a conceptual framework for understanding the therapeutic relation-
ship, and learning how therapists can use the interpersonal process or current interaction 
with their clients to intervene and help clients change. Throughout this text, readers will be 
actively encouraged to modify this framework to fit their own personalities and therapeutic 
styles. The interpersonal process approach is integrative and can be applied by therapists 
who choose to work within different theoretical orientations (Norcross & Lambert, 2014). 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

8  CHAPTER /one.alt
With support from supervisors and instructors, new therapists will be able to personalize 
this model, integrate it with other theoretical approaches, and modify it to make it their own.
In this approach the emphasis is on providing clients reparative experiences with the 
therapist that will allow them to create self-narratives that are more coherent, affirming, 
and flexible. Many clients who come to therapy have suffered significant developmental 
wounds—their experiences lacked safety, protection, boundaries, and predictability, and 
in many cases their attempts to differentiate and develop autonomy were met with threats 
of abandonment or guilt inducement (Cassidy & Shaver, 2008; Lieberman & Van Horn, 
2008). As a result, many were left to cope in a variety of symptomatic ways in order to 
manage developmental challenges and unmet needs—such as adopting rigid coping styles 
and living their lives in ways that can be characterized as being pervasively compliant or 
pleasing, strident or rigidly controlling, invisible or without needs, detached or demand -
ing, and so forth. Thus, therapists working within a relational framework, whether they 
eventually come to identify as cognitive-behavioral therapists, interpersonal/dynamic 
therapists, existential-humanistic therapists, family systems therapists, narrative thera -
pists, or others, can use the interpersonal process approach to work more effectively.
CORE CONCEPTS
In the chapters ahead, we are going to apply three core concepts to understand clients and 
guide our interventions: the Process Dimension, a Corrective Emotional Experience, and 
Client Response Specificity. In this section, these three orienting constructs are introduced 
and then illustrated with a case example.
T/h.sc/e.sc P/r.sc/o.sc/c.sc/e.sc/s.sc/s.sc D/i.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/s.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc
The relationship between the therapist and the client is the foundation of the therapeu -
tic enterprise and shapes the extent to which clients will be able to change (Markin & 
Hilsenroth, 2014). In order to utilize the therapeutic relationship as a vehicle for change, 
however, therapists need to understand the interpersonal process or the way that the cli -
ent and therapist are interacting.
What do we mean by the process dimension? The therapist–client relationship is com-
plex and multifaceted; different levels of communication occur simultaneously. It is help-
ful, for example, to recognize the subtle but important distinction between the overtly 
spoken content of what is discussed and the process dimension of how the therapist and 
client interact (Kiesler, 1988). In order to work with the process dimension, the therapist is 
making a perceptual shift away from the overt content of what is discussed and is begin -
ning to track the relational process of how two people are interacting as well (Altenstein, 
Krieger & Holtforth, 2013; Thomas, Hopwood, Woody, Ethier & Sadler, 2014). This 
means that the process-oriented therapist is going to step beyond the usual social norms 
at times and talk more directly with clients about their current interaction or what may be 
going on between them right now. For example,
THERAPIST:
 Since I asked you about your canceling our session last week, and then coming late 
to our appointment today, you’ve become quiet. Maybe something about my question didn’t 
feel quite right to you. Can I check in with you about that?
OR
THERAPIST:
 Right now, John, I’m having a little trouble keeping up with you. You’re speak-
ing fast, and sometimes it feels a little like we are almost jumping from topic to topic. Any 
thoughts here…what do you think might be going on between us?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   9
In both of these queries, the therapist is not addressing what the client is saying (con-
tent) but how the therapist and client are interacting with each other (the interpersonal 
process). Let’s look at one more example but this time, we’ll extend the therapist’s initial 
process comment into a longer therapist–client dialogue and see how process comments 
like these can uncover important new issues to explore in treatment, resolve misunder -
standings that arise between the therapist and client, and bring greater intensity to the 
therapeutic relationship by moving the dialogue beyond surface issues:
THERAPIST:
 I’m honored that you choose to share such an important part of yourself with me. 
What’s it like for you to risk sharing this sensitive feeling with me?
CLIENT:
 Uh, I’m not really sure what you’re asking me?
THERAPIST:
 You just said so much to me, and I’m wondering how that was for you. What do 
you think I might be thinking about you as you’re telling me this?
CLIENT:
 Well, you probably have to be nice, you know, because you’re a therapist so that’s how 
you have to act. But maybe inside you’re judging me or something.
THERAPIST:
 “Judging you.” That sure wouldn’t feel very good. Tell me more about how I might 
be judging you.
CLIENT:
 Well, come on, you can’t possibly respect me now that I’ve told you about this.
THERAPIST:
 I’m so glad we’re talking about this misunderstanding, because no part of me is 
feeling judgmental toward you. Actually, I was appreciating your courage to bring this up and 
talk with me so honestly. But maybe you’re telling me that others have often judged you?
CLIENT:
 Oh yeah, I know my mom loves me but she was always so judgmental…and now, 
whenever my husband says something that’s the least bit critical, I just shut down inside and 
completely go away…
We are going to call these types of here-and-now, present-focused interventions, which 
focus on “you and me” or explore what is going on between the therapist and the client 
right now, as process comments (Hill, 2014). Because it may conflict with familial rules or 
cultural prescriptions for new therapists to speak directly in these ways, it may feel awkward 
at first for some. For other therapists, it may seem impolite or disrespectful to use process 
comments and speak forthrightly or inquire in open-ended ways about what may be going 
on between “you and me.” However, as new therapists become more confident and less 
concerned about performance anxieties, and their supervisors help them understand better 
where they are trying to go in treatment with this particular client, they will be ready to 
begin trying out and exploring these process comments. New therapists soon will see how 
helpful it can be when they link the problem that the client is talking about with others to 
their current interaction in the therapist–client relationship—that is, highlighting how the 
client is utilizing the same problematic thought processes, faulty expectations, or ineffective 
coping strategies with the therapist, right now, that have been causing problems with others 
in their lives (Kasper, Hill & Kivlighan, 2008). Or, similarly, the therapist is non-defensive 
and willing to explore and sort through with the client potential misunderstandings, 
inaccurate perceptions, “mistakes,” or other interpersonal conflicts that may be going 
on between them in their real-life relationship; that is, “restoring ruptures” (Safran et 
al., 2002). Therapists can meta-communicate  and talk with clients about how they are 
interacting together, and use a variety of other immediacy interventions, in an empathic 
and respectful manner. When we use process comments in this way, clients will welcome 
them as a collaborative invitationfor genuine understanding and honest communication—
something they want and need. This can be done in a way that does not make them feel 
uncomfortable, but brings them closer to their key concerns (Crits-Cristoph & Gibbons, 
2002; Hill, 2014; Kiesler, 1996). Consider the following example.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

10  CHAPTER /one.alt
During their first session together, the client tells the therapist that he resents his wife 
because she is “bossy” and “always telling me what to do.” He explains that he has often 
had trouble making decisions on his own and, as a result, his wife has come to make 
decisions for him. Even though she said that she was just trying to help him with his 
indecisiveness, he resents her “pushiness” and “know-it-all attitude.” After describing the 
presenting problem in this way, the client asks the therapist, “What should I do?”
Let’s think first about the process dimension in their interaction. Suppose the thera -
pist complied with the client’s request and said, “I think the next time your wife tells you 
what to do, you should…” If treatment with this particular client continues in this pre -
scriptive vein, the therapist and client will quickly begin to reenact in their relationship 
the same type of conflict that originally led him to seek treatment. That is, the therapist 
will be telling the client what to do, just as his wife has been doing. The client has cer -
tainly invited this advice, and will probably welcome the therapist’s suggestions at first. 
In the long run, however, he will probably come to resent the therapist’s directives just as 
much as he resents his wife’s and will ultimately find the therapist’s suggestions to be as 
unwanted and of as little help as hers.
As an alternative to this directive response, a more non-directive therapist might 
respond to the other side of the client’s conflict and say, “I don’t think I would really 
be helping you if I just told you what to do. I believe that clients grow and learn more 
when they find their own solutions to their problems.” Frustrated by this non-directive 
response, which he only finds evasive, the client retorts, “But I told you I don’t know 
what to do! It’s hard for me to make decisions. Aren’t you the one who’s supposed to 
know what to do about these things?”
This non-directive response throws the client back on the other side of his conflict 
and leaves him stuck in his presenting problem—his own inability to make decisions. If 
this mode of interaction continues and comes to characterize their relationship, their pro-
cess will reenact the other side of the client’s problem. His inability to initiate, make his 
own decisions, and be responsible for his own actions will immobilize him in therapy, just 
as it has in other areas of his life.
Thus, one of the things new therapists are going to observe is that clients do not 
just talk with therapists about their problems in an abstract manner. Rather, in their 
interpersonal process with the therapist, they often “enact” or recreate the same types 
of problematic interactions that originally led them to seek treatment. That is, clients 
also convey their problems in how they interact with the therapist (the process), bringing 
critical aspects of their problems with others into their current interaction (Hill et al., 
2008). This repetition or replaying of the client ’s problem is a regular and predictable 
phenomenon that will occur, at times, in many therapeutic relationships . We will return 
to this in Chapter 3, and throughout the chapters that follow, and see how therapists can 
use the process dimension to find more effective ways to respond and help clients change. 
For now, let’s turn to the second core concept, the Corrective Emotional Experience.
T/h.sc/e.sc C/o.sc/r.sc/r.sc/e.sc/c.sc/t.sc/i.sc/v.sc/e.sc E/m.sc/o.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc/a.sc/l.sc E/x.sc/p.sc/e.sc/r.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc
Like most far-reaching and enduring concepts in therapy, the Corrective Emotional Expe-
rience (CEE) has many grandparents. It was developed most fully in the 1940s by Franz 
Alexander and Thomas French (1946), and has become the cornerstone of many short-
term dynamic and interpersonally oriented therapies (Bernier & Dozier, 2002; Bridges, 
2006). Although it was not appreciated by the psychoanalytic community of its day, this 
more active, direct, and personal approach provided clients with a real-life experience 
of change in the here-and-now relationship with the therapist. Accurately anticipating 
the future of therapy, Alexander and French originally advocated the CEE to shorten the 
length of treatment, put less emphasis on insight as the primary means of effecting change, 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   11
and focus instead on a more experiential, behavioral, or in vivo relearning. They actively 
encouraged clients to approach or engage in anxiety-arousing behavior that previously 
they had avoided, and even suggested giving homework assignments to clients between 
sessions. Initial support for this came from Horowitz and colleagues (1976; 1984; 1993) 
who found strong empirical support for enduring change in clients who received CEEs in 
a more supportive therapeutic approach.
Contemporary short-term relational approaches (Binder, 2004; Levenson, 2010; 
Silberschatz, 2005) describe the same direct, immediate experience of change in the real-
life relationship between the therapist and client. The basic concept is that all therapists, 
working within different theoretical orientations, can help their clients change: they 
do so by providing a new and more satisfying response to the clients’ old relationship 
patterns than they have usually found with others. That is, working collaboratively with 
clients, the therapist helps clients identify maladaptive relational patterns or themes that 
commonly occur with others, and works with clients to alter this problematic pattern, 
disconfirm the faulty expectations or schema, or change this familiar but unwanted 
interpersonal scenario in their real-life relationship or therapeutic interaction (Castonguay 
& Hill, 2012). Following Alexander and French, we are going to call this core concept 
a CEE (some interpersonal and attachment-oriented therapists use the term “reparative 
relational experience,” whereas some behavior therapists may describe this as “in vivo 
learning” or “exposure trials”).
 When therapy fails and clients terminate prematurely, or treatment bogs down and 
reaches an impasse, the therapist and client are often reenacting in their interpersonal 
process some aspects of the same conflict that the client has been struggling with in 
other relationships, although neither of them may be aware of this reenactment. Based 
on their schemas and expectations, clients soon come to hold the same misperception or 
faulty expectation toward the therapist, or respond with the same maladaptive relational 
patterns, that have been causing problems with others in their lives. For example, even 
though the therapist has not behaved accordingly, when clients become distressed or 
vulnerable, they soon may believe the following:
 /uni25CFThey are being controlled by the therapist and have to do everything his or her way, 
just as they have done with others.
 /uni25CFThey have to take care of and meet the therapist’s needs, just as they have been doing 
with others in their life.
 /uni25CFThey must please the therapist and win his or her approval, just as they keep striving 
to do with significant others throughout their lives.
When this occurs, the therapeutic process is metaphorically repeating the same type 
of conflicted interaction that clients have not been able to resolve in other relationships, 
and that they have often experienced in formative, attachment relationships. When clients 
begin to play out with the therapist the same relational patterns that originally brought 
them to treatment, the therapist’s goal is to respond in a new and more effective way that 
allows clients to resolve the conflict and change the pattern within their relationship. The 
benefit to clients from this in vivo experience of change is that fixed or narrow schemas 
will expand and become more flexible or realistic, and it will become easier to begin 
changing these problematic patterns with others, such as spouses, children, and friends. 
Although providing a corrective emotional experience may sound easy, it can be chal -
lenging to do—especially when all of this is so new to therapists-in-training. To help, Hill 
(2014) encourages therapists to be asking themselves the same process-oriented question 
throughout each session:
THERAPIST:
 Right now, am I co-creating a new and reparative relationship, or am I being drawn 
into a familiar but problematic interaction sequence that is reenacting for this client?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

12  CHAPTER /one.alt
When the therapist and client are able to resolve these reenactments, which occur 
in most therapeutic relationships, change has begun to occur. Clients learn that they no 
longer have to respond in their old ways (such as always having to be in control, be 
the responsible one, or have to take care of others) or always have to receive the same 
unwanted responses from others (e.g., being ignored or dismissed, judged or criticized, 
envied or competed with). In this way, clients develop a wider range of expectations and 
begin to learn how they can respond in more flexible and adaptive ways— especially in 
the safety of their relationship with the therapist. And, as their behavior begins to change 
with the therapist, it is usually relatively easy to take the next step and help clients gen -
eralize this experiential relearning with the therapist and adopt similar, more adaptive 
responses with others outside in their everyday lives.
Clients believe actions not words . Long ago, Frieda Fromm-Reichmann (1960) cap -
tured this central tenet best by saying that the therapist needs to provide clients with an 
experience rather than an explanation. Interpretations, facilitating insight, empathic under-. Interpretations, facilitating insight, empathic under-. Interpretations, facilitating insight, empathic under
standing, cognitive reframing, self-monitoring techniques, education, skill development, and 
other interventions are utilized in the interpersonal process approach and will be helpful 
with most clients. They are not the primary seat of action in this approach, however. 
This is an experiential learning model. Following Strupp and Binder (1984), clients 
change when they live through emotionally painful and long-ingrained relational 
experiences with the therapist, and the therapeutic relationship gives rise to new and 
better outcomes that are different from those anticipated and feared. That is, when the 
client re-experiences important aspects of his or her primary problem with the therapist, 
and the therapist’s response does not fit the old schemas or expectations, the client 
has the real-life experience that some relationships can be another way. This new or 
reparative experience is a powerful type of relearning that can be generalized readily to 
other relationships (Bandura, 1997). The key point here is that this behavioral experience 
of change with the therapist is far more compelling than words alone can provide.
We are going to be exploring many different ways that therapists can use this correc-
tive emotional experience to facilitate change. In particular, the new or corrective response 
from the therapist helps clients change by creating greater interpersonal safety for the cli-
ent. This is far more than the good feeling that comes from being taken seriously and 
treated with respect in the therapeutic relationship. Instead, it is a more significant sense 
of deep personal safety that results when the client is not hurt again by receiving certain 
interpersonal responses that are familiar and expected, yet unwanted or even dreaded. As 
we are emphasizing, this pivotal moment is not the end point in treatment but a window 
of opportunity for a range of important new behaviors to emerge . For example, in the 
next few moments following a reparative experience with the therapist, clients often feel 
safer and may be empowered to:
 /uni25CFExperience or risk feeling more fully certain painful or difficult emotions;
 /uni25CFResolve their ambivalence and make an important personal decision;
 /uni25CFRisk trying out new ways of responding with the therapist or others in their lives;
 /uni25CFMake significant self-disclosures or bring up relevant new issues or concerns to explore;
 /uni25CFFeel bolder and risk addressing unspoken misunderstandings with the therapist or 
bring up more directly a problem the client has been having with the therapist;
 /uni25CFFeel better about themselves or forgive themselves for things they have felt unrealisti-
cally shameful or guilty about;
 /uni25CFGrasp more fully how much this faulty coping strategy or self-defeating behavior has 
hurt others or cost them in their own lives;
 /uni25CFHave insight or make meaningful links between current behavior and formative 
relationships where these schemas and patterns originally were learned.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   13
In these ways, corrective emotional experiences with the therapist begin to expand 
early maladaptive schemas and problematic relational patterns, and a wider range of 
responses becomes available to the client—often in the next few moments. A single CEE 
usually is not sufficient for sustainable change, but it is often the pivotal experience that 
initiates new behavior. Based on the interpersonal safety that arises as clients find that 
they reliably receive this new, reparative response, the therapist is seen as someone who 
can help—earning achieved credibility (Sue & Zane, 2009). Clients then invest further in 
the therapeutic relationship and in the treatment process, and often become more willing 
to try out new coping strategies and ways of responding with others. In contrast, when 
clients elicit the same type of reactions from the therapist that they tend to find with oth-
ers (e.g., the therapist begins to feel frustrated, controlled, discouraged, or disappointed, 
as significant others in the client’s life often feel), intervention techniques from every theo-
retical perspective will falter. In this way, the interaction between the therapist and client 
provides a “meta” perspective both for understanding what is occurring and for knowing 
how to intervene in the therapeutic relationship, and it can be integrated readily with 
other treatment approaches (e.g., schema confirming versus schema disconfirming inter -
actions with the therapist). 
Using the Process Dimension to Provide a Corrective Emotional Experience. 
Linking our first two core constructs, the therapist needs to be able to work with the pro-
cess dimension in order to provide this CEE. Recall the previous example of the client who 
was complaining that his wife was “pushy” and always telling him what to do. When the 
client asked his therapist what he should do, one option would have been for the thera -
pist to offer a “process comment” that makes their current interaction overt as a topic for 
discussion:
THERAPIST:
 Right now, it seems that you’re asking me to tell you what to do. But I’m wondering 
whether that will only bring up the same problem for us here in therapy that you are having 
at home with your wife. Let’s see if you and I can figure out a way to do something different 
in our relationship. Rather than having me tell you what to do, let’s try and work together to 
understand what’s going on for you when you are feeling indecisive. Where do you think is the 
best place to begin?
CLIENT:
 I’m not sure.
THERAPIST:
 Take your time, and let’s just see what comes to you.
CLIENT:
 (pause) I’ll get criticized. No matter what I decide, she’ll find something wrong with it.
THERAPIST:
 OK, that’s a good place for us to start. You can’t get it right in her eyes— you’ll 
always do it wrong. Sounds like there’s a lot of feeling in that for you, tell me more.
CLIENT:
 Well, I hate it because she wants to be the parent—you know, the one in charge, and 
treat me like a child…
In this dialogue, the therapist’s intention is to ensure that the same problematic but 
familiar pattern does not play out in the relationship with the client. The therapist is try -
ing not to take the bait and repeat the pattern by telling the client what to do. Instead, the 
therapist is trying to offer the client a new and different type of relationship—a collabora-
tive partnership in which they can work together. To support this, the client will rehearse, 
role-play, and try out these new behaviors with his wife and others. Typically, he will have 
some successes and some failures in his attempts to adopt this stronger way of relating to 
her and to others. However, the therapist’s initial attempt to offer the client a corrective 
response will need to be repeated in different ways for change to consolidate. If the thera-
pist can keep finding ways to engage him more actively in their interaction (easier to say 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

14  CHAPTER /one.alt
than to do with this client), this new interpersonal process will be corrective, and it will 
facilitate other therapeutic interventions as well. That is, behavioral alternatives, inter -
pretations, and interpersonal feedback will all become more effective with this corrective 
interpersonal process. This client’s life has been ruled by his Subjugation/Control schema, 
but now he is a collaborator in the treatment process with his own voice and is not just 
being told what to do again (Baldwin et al., 2007; Miller & Rollnick, 2013). We aren’t all 
the way around the block yet, but change is under way.
Countertransference Issues and Fears about Making Mistakes Diminishes 
New Therapists’ Engagement with Their Clients. As we have seen, the guiding 
principle in the interpersonal process approach is to provide clients with an experience 
of change (Florsheim & McArthur, 2009). With this in vivo relearning, clients live out 
a new relationship with the therapist that disconfirms their faulty expectations and ex -
pands their schemas for what they can have in life—for what can take place for them in 
relationships. For example, clients learn that, at least sometimes—first with the therapist, 
and then with some other people in their lives, they find—they can: Be responded to sup -
portively if they ask for help; Say “no” and have others respect their limits; Give priority 
to their own needs sometimes rather than always submerging them and going along with 
what others want; Succeed without always evoking competition or envy; and so forth. 
Providing this type of CEE is a personally engaging and highly rewarding way to work 
with clients but—make no mistake about it—it demands much on the part of the thera -
pist. In particular, countertransference  issues, and our previous topic of new therapists’ 
fears of making mistakes, make it harder to provide a CEE. Let’s look further at both.
First, it requires personal involvement from therapists to work with the client 
in this way. The therapist must be willing to engage genuinely with and risk being 
personally affected by the client (Rogers, 1980). That is, in order to have the emotional 
impact necessary to provide a corrective emotional experience and propel change, the 
relationship must hold real meaning for both participants (Gelso, 2011; Horvath & Bedi, 
2002; Kivligan, Gelso, Ain, Hummel & Markin, 2015). In this simple human way, it is 
the relationship that heals—the relationship itself facilitates “ collaborative , purposive 
work” (Hatcher & Barends, 2006). If the therapist is merely an objective technician, 
psychologically removed and safely distant from the client, the relationship will not hold 
real meaning for either person. It will be too insignificant to effect change—even if the 
therapist does indeed respond in new ways that do not follow along with old problematic 
patterns, beliefs, and expectations.
On the other side of this issue, treatment also falters if therapists over-identify with 
clients or become too invested in the client’s choices or ability to change. In this situation, 
therapists often lose sight of the process they are enacting with the client and unwittingly 
begin to respond in problematic ways that reenact aspects of the client’s maladaptive rela-
tional patterns. Thus, a prototypic situation for many new therapists is to find that they 
are experiencing the client’s predicament or concerns as similar to their own. This occurs, 
for instance, when the therapist is thinking, “She’s just like me!” The solution to this lack 
of differentiation is a supportive yet honest supervisory relationship that helps therapists 
see their own countertransference issue and recognize the numerous ways that their own 
experience really does differ significantly from the client’s. There may be important simi-
larities between them, yet, in reality, the client’s problems—and the broader context that 
shapes their meaning—are never really the same as the therapist’s. Once therapists are 
able to differentiate their own issues from those of the client, they will often be able to 
see how the therapeutic process has been reenacting aspects of the client’s conflict (e.g., 
perhaps the therapist also grew up being a confidant and best friend to her parent and 
also felt they were too close and the same). In parallel, the multicultural literature is also 
instructive here in highlighting “zones of difference and similarity within and between 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   15
cultures” (Pedersen et al., 2008). This understanding that each therapeutic relationship 
involves a range of similarities and differences often enables therapists to change this 
reenactment (such as over-identifying with or over-reacting to the client) and establish 
instead a more resolving and differentiated interpersonal process.
Second, we have already seen that new therapists should expect to make many “mis-
takes” with their clients. For example, to become over-involved or under-involved with 
certain clients, to reenact the client’s maladaptive relational patterns at times, and so on. 
Such mistakes are an inevitable part of the therapeutic process for beginning and expe -
rienced therapists alike. Few clients are fragile, however, and therapeutic relationships 
are often remarkably resilient. Unfortunately, most student therapists do not know this 
and, as emphasized earlier, concern about making mistakes remains one of their biggest 
anxieties. New therapists will do better therapy— and enjoy this work so much more—as 
they discover that mistakes can be undone. Mistakes can be worked through or resolved 
with clients, and mistakes can provide important therapeutic opportunities, when thera -
pists are willing to work with the process dimension—that is, when therapists are willing 
to talk with clients about the misunderstandings or potential problems that may be occur-to talk with clients about the misunderstandings or potential problems that may be occur-to talk with clients about the misunderstandings or potential problems that may be occur
ring between them. For example,
THERAPIST:
 I’m wondering whether I might have misunderstood something you said. I’m 
asking 
about that because it seems as if you have become more distant from me in the last few 
minutes, and you’ve mentioned that other people often don’t understand you. What do you 
see happening between us here?
CLIENT:
 Yeah, I guess I do feel a little bit distant. But I don’t feel “misunderstood,” I just don’t 
really like it when you don’t say very much—you’re pretty quiet, you know.
THERAPIST:
 That’s helpful to hear—I appreciate your honesty. So, let’s change things—I’ll start 
speaking up more and sharing more of my thoughts with you. And let’s check back in on this 
later and see how it’s going. How’s that sound?
CLIENT:
 Thanks, that would be better for me.
THERAPIST:
 Good, I want to hear your concerns, and work together in ways that feel most help-
ful to you. Can you tell me a little more about what’s it like for you when I’m quiet or don’t 
say very much?
CLIENT:
 I get uncomfortable…I don’t feel like I’m getting enough direction or help, and maybe 
then therapy isn’t going to work for me and I’m just going to stay depressed. And I’m not 
really sure what a client is supposed to do. I’ve never been in therapy before, you know, so I 
worry about what I’m supposed to be talking about or what you expect me to be doing…
As their performance anxiety declines, new therapists will find that they are bet -
ter able to identify and work with the process dimension. The very best way to realign 
the therapeutic relationship when it has gone awry is for therapists to talk through and 
resolve potential misunderstandings or mistakes. Following Hill (2014), student thera -
pists are encouraged to be non-defensive and recognize their mistakes, apologize if neces-
sary, and talk through the event with the client. This restores the therapeutic relationship, 
and it provides clients with an effective model for how to deal with problems. We will 
return to process comments and this all-important topic of “rupture and repair” in the 
next chapter. For now, we turn to the third core concept: Client ResponseSpecificity.
C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc R/e.sc/s.sc/p.sc/o.sc/n.sc/s.sc/e.sc S/p.sc/e.sc/c.sc/i.sc/f.sc/i.sc/c.sc/i.sc/t.sc/y.sc
We have already begun to see that new therapists need a theoretical framework to guide 
their therapeutic interventions. Let’s look further at what a theory needs to provide if it is 
to be of help to therapists and their clients.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

16  CHAPTER /one.alt
One feature of an effective clinical theory is that it has the flexibility and breadth to 
encompass the diversity of clients who seek treatment. For many student therapists, clini-
cal training changes their fundamental worldviews in profound and enduring ways. For 
instance, new therapists begin to recognize—to a far greater extent than they had appre -
ciated before—that there are unifying patterns in personality and behavior (Levenson & 
Strupp, 1997). In parallel with this new organizing perspective, however, it also is clear 
that every client really is unique and different. Each client has been genetically endowed 
with a unique set of features and each has been raised with different values and beliefs 
in his or her familial and cultural context. Socialization is different for women and men, 
individuals growing up in varying cultures have vastly different political experiences and 
religious training, and economic class shapes opportunity and expectations. To be help -
ful, a clinical theory needs to help therapists work effectively with diverse clients—who 
also are entering treatment with different levels of motivation and differing readiness to 
change (Prochaska & Norcross, 2006). Moreover, each therapist is a different person. 
Like clients, therapists differ in age, gender, ethnicity, sexual orientation, and develop -
mental background. Therapists also bring diverse values, subjective worldviews, and per-mental background. Therapists also bring diverse values, subjective worldviews, and per-mental background. Therapists also bring diverse values, subjective worldviews, and per
sonal styles to their clinical work. How can any theory help such a diversity of therapists 
respond to the extraordinary range of human experience that clients present?
Our third core construct, Client Response Specificity , will be one of our best tools. 
With this construct, therapists need to tailor their responses to fit the specific needs of 
each individual client—one size does not fit all! There are no cookbook formulas or 
generic techniques for responding to the complex problems, diverse developmental expe -
riences, and multicultural backgrounds that clients present. In this regard, we are going to 
see that the same therapeutic response or intervention that helps one client make progress 
in treatment will only serve to hinder another (Bachelor, 1995; Silbererschatz, 2005). For 
example, some clients respond well to warmth in the counselor, whereas others do better 
with objectivity. More specifically, a warm and expressive therapist can put off a distrust-
ful or avoidant client; a businesslike therapist can fail to engage an anxious client in crisis. 
Clearly, this work is not easy. It’s complex—and it will be simply maddening if you must 
have rules and can’t tolerate ambiguity! The key point is that therapists need to have the 
flexibility to listen to the cues, assess clients’ responses, and search for the best way to 
respond to a particular client (Lazarus, 1993; Sampson, 2005). As we are going to see, 
however, therapists often fail to hear and accommodate to clients ’ feedback about what 
they want and don’t want from them (Waldin & Imel, 2013).
As we consider client response specificity, the operative word is flexibility . This 
approach requires therapists to respond on the basis of each client’s own personal his -
tory and ways of viewing the world. It is certainly helpful to be familiar with the experi -
ences of particular groups (e.g., to know that African Americans’ history includes almost 
375 years of slavery, and 150 years of subsequent racial discrimination) and the defining 
criteria and symptomatology for DSM disorders (e.g., to know that bipolar clients in a 
manic phase are at risk to act out with aggression toward others, sexual promiscuity, or 
suicide). Additionally, however, with client response specificity, our abiding intention is to 
attempt to understand and respond to each client as a unique individual. Thus we will not 
seek treatment rules or intervention guidelines that apply to all clients, or even to specific 
diagnostic categories or groups, such as men, Latinos, or Christians. Rather, we will be 
trying to find case-specific recommendations that help us understand what it means to 
this individual sitting in front of us, to be depressed, lesbian, or biracial. Let’s look more 
closely at what client response specificity means and see how it can help us be more effec-
tive therapists.
Interpersonal process therapy is a highly “idiographic ” approach; it emphasizes 
the personal experience or subjective worldview of each individual client. Diagnostic 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   17
categories will tell us something about the client, but they are global and lack specificity 
for a particular client. Personality typologies also highlight potential directions that ther -
apy might take, but the actual therapeutic process and issues covered will be client-specific. 
For example, the two clients on your caseload who both have generalized anxiety disor -
der, an avoidant personality disorder, or who are sexual assault survivors certainly will 
share some common ground, but the differences between the two—their uniqueness—is 
highly significant. Throughout each session, therefore, therapists are encouraged to join 
the client in a process of mutual exploration to try to find the subjective meaning that 
each particular experience holds for this client. For example,
THERAPIST:
 Let me check this out with you and make sure I’m understanding what you really 
mean here. When I hear you say that, it sounds more like you are feeling sadness, or maybe 
even grief, than depression. Am I getting that right—what are your thoughts?
From the first session through the last, the therapist is taking on the personal challenge 
to be accurately empathic or, in different terms, to have the cognitive flexibility and per -
spective-taking ability to de-center and enter the client’s subjective worldview. The meaning 
that a particular experience holds for the client often differs greatly from the meaning that 
this same experience holds for the therapist, or for other clients that the therapist might see. 
Therapists are encouraged to listen carefully to clients’ language and words choices, and to 
explore clients’ own metaphors collaboratively. For example,
THERAPIST:
 Help me understand what you mean, or what you might be saying about our 
relationship, when you tell me that you just want to “sail right out of here?”
By continuously reaching for this specificity, and not taking for granted that we know 
what the client really meant, we are not belaboring the obvious. When someone cares 
about you enough to listen seriously, and works hard to understand just exactly what it is 
that you are trying to say, meaning is created.
With client response specificity, there is no standardized treatment protocol. Each 
individual client’s developmental history, cultural context, and current life circumstances 
serve to guide the therapist’s treatment plans and intervention strategy. The interpersonal 
process approach does not advocate a particular therapeutic stance toward clients in gen-
eral, such as being directive or non-directive, problem-solving or exploratory, supportive 
or challenging, veiled or self-disclosing, and so forth. Each of these stances will be helpful 
with a particular client at times but ineffective with another. Thus, this approach asks 
something different and more challenging of therapists:
 /uni25CFTo conceptualize the specific relational experiences that this client needs in order to 
change (e.g., a client who grew up with intrusive caregivers, and now has a boyfriend 
who checks her cell phone and email, will benefit from a therapist who repeatedly 
supports her personal boundaries and privacy by saying things like, “Tell me as much 
or as little about that as you wish…” ; “We can address that at your pace… ”; “We 
are going to do things your way here—I don’t need to know anything about you that 
you don’t wish to tell me…”; etc.);
 /uni25CFTo be flexible and modify their interventions in the ways that this particular client 
requests or seems to utilize more productively.
This recommendation may sound obvious or easy to do but, unfortunately, research-
ers tell us that most therapists do not do this very well. Therapists continue to respond 
to clients in the same manner, based on their theoretical orientation— even when their 
preferred brand is not working! That is, psychotherapy process studies find that most 
therapists do not demonstrate flexibility in their technical approach to the client, or have 
the interpersonal range to modify their interventions, and provide the responses that each 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

18  CHAPTER /one.alt
client could utilize best (Najavits & Strupp, 1994; Sampson, 2005). With client response client could utilize best (Najavits & Strupp, 1994; Sampson, 2005). With client response client could utilize best
specificity, our aim is to assess—strive to discern—how clients are responding to our 
interventions in an ongoing way, and flexibly adapt. To help with this, the counseling 
literature on “intentions” suggests that therapists ask themselves the following questions:
Where am I right now and what do I want to accomplish? (E.g., recognize and respond 
to the feeling or concern that the client is expressing right now.)
OK, what is the best way to do that? (This might include validating or providing an 
empathic reflection of the client’s distress or concern.)
In this way, therapists are encouraged to think about their intentions— what they 
are trying to accomplish with each response or turn of the conversation (Ivey, Ivey & 
Zalaquett, 2014). Therapists will be better prepared to respond to the specific needs of 
this particular client, at this moment, when they are asking themselves in an ongoing way,
What is needed right now, and how can I provide that?
Let’s use an example to illustrate client response specificity more concretely, and then 
examine how therapists can assess clients’ positive or negative responses to the differ -
ent interventions and varying responses they provide. We’ll also look at how therapists 
can modify or tailor those responses, as necessary, to work better for clients. Consider 
an often debated question: Should therapists self-disclose to their clients? client response 
specificity emphasizes that self-disclosure (or any other intervention) will hold very dif -will hold very dif -will hold very dif
ferent meanings for different clients. That is, the same intervention or response may have 
the opposite effect on two different clients with contrasting developmental histories and 
cultural contexts. For example, if a client’s caregiver was distant or aloof, the therapist’s 
judicious self-disclosure may be helpful for that client. In contrast, the same self-disclo -
sure is likely to be anxiety-arousing for a client who grew up serving as the confidant or 
emotional caretaker for a depressed, anxious, or alcoholic parent. Greater self-disclosure 
from the therapist may help the first client learn that, contrary to her deeply held beliefs, 
she does matter and can be of interest to other people. In contrast, for the second cli -
ent, the same self-disclosure may inadvertently impose the unwanted needs of others and 
set this client back, as in her mind, she experiences herself in her unwanted caretaking 
role again—this time with the therapist. This problematic reenactment occurs because the 
therapeutic relationship is now paralleling the same maladaptive relational theme that 
this client struggled with while growing up. Considering client response specificity in this 
way, therapists working within every theoretical orientation will be more effective if they 
consider how the client’s cognitive schemas or developmental experiences are likely to 
shape the impact of their interventions on this particular client. 
Like the previous two core constructs, client response specificity is a complex and 
multifaceted clinical concept that will take time to learn and put into practice with cli -
ents. Let’s illustrate it further by posing another common question: Should therapists 
give opinions when clients ask for advice? As before, the therapist’s response is informed 
more by each client’s particular circumstances, than by the brand of therapy standardly 
employed by the therapist. For example, offering advice may be counterproductive for 
a compliant, intimidated female client who is trying to become more independent and 
assertive with her dominating and controlling husband who undermines her confidence 
and actively fosters her dependency on him. For such a client, it changes the relational 
pattern for the therapist to suggest, 
OK, why don’t we start with your thoughts about this, and then I’ll add mine. What do 
you think might work best for you here?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   19
In contrast, giving advice and directives may work well with a different client whose 
caregivers did not help him solve his problems, perhaps because the caregivers were too 
self-absorbed or preoccupied with their own lives to be very interested or responsive to 
him. To withhold suggestions or problem-solving advice from these clients may only 
reenact developmental deficits and impede their progress in treatment as, yet again, they 
do not get the help or guidance they need and want. Here, the same response from the 
therapist will have very different effects on different clients. From this meta-perspective, 
techniques or interventions from any theoretical approach may help or hinder the client; 
it depends on whether the response serves to reenact or resolve maladaptive schemas and 
relational patterns for this particular client.
Finally, let’s highlight another aspect of client response specificity— assessing clients’ 
responses to therapists’ interventions. Therapists can learn how to assess the effectiveness 
of their interventions by paying close attention to how the client utilizes or responds to 
what they have just done. For example, if the therapist observes that the client becomes 
burdened, irritated, or worried in response to the therapist’s self-disclosure, the therapist 
is learning how to respond more effectively to this client. It’s not that self-disclosure is 
always ill-advised, or an ineffective way to respond in general, but it would be problematic 
rather than helpful for this particular client. As noted earlier, when the therapist provides 
a corrective response, many clients will make progress right away by feeling safer and 
may act more boldly, bring forth relevant new material, become more engaged with the 
therapist, and so forth. In contrast, when the therapist responds in a way that repeats 
problematic old patterns or confirms maladaptive schemas, clients will behaviorally 
inform the therapist of this by acting “weaker” in the next few minutes—for example, by 
being more passive, indecisive, or compliant (Silberschatz, 2005). Thus, if therapists track 
clients’ immediate responses to the varying interventions they employ (e.g., providing 
interpersonal feedback or making process comments, suggesting thought records or self-
monitoring strategies as homework assignments, making interpretations or cognitive 
reframing, etc.), clients will behaviorally inform therapists how best to respond. However, 
as emphasized earlier, therapists then must be flexible enough to adjust their interventions 
when necessary and try out different ways of responding that this particular client might 
be able to utilize more effectively.
To sum up, working in this highly individualized way adds complexity to the thera -
peutic process and places more demands on the therapist. However, such an approach 
gives therapists the flexibility to respond to the specific needs and unique experiences 
of the diverse clients who seek help. Client response specificity is a core construct in 
the interpersonal process approach. Tools to assist with this construct include guidelines 
for keeping process notes (see Appendix A) and for writing case conceptualizations (see 
Appendix B). These will help therapists identify developmental experiences that are likely 
to have caused faulty beliefs and relational difficulties, which need to be addressed along 
the process dimension in a corrective way, with specificity for this particular client. The 
following case example illustrates these three core concepts.
TERESA: CASE ILLUSTRATION OF CORE CONCEPTS
The following vignette illustrates our three core concepts: the Process Dimension, 
Corrective Emotional Experience, and Client Response Specificity. In particular, the 
vignette highlights how the process dimension (the way the therapist and client interact) 
can contribute either to resolving or reenacting important aspects of the client’s problem. 
Usually, therapists do not literally reenact with clients the same hurtful or problematic 
responses they have received from others (in this case, the problem is sexual abuse). 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

20  CHAPTER /one.alt
Unintentionally, however, the way in which they interact often thematically evokes 
the same issues, feelings, or concerns that the client has been struggling with in other 
relationships (in this case, compliance and having to “go along” with the counselor and 
others). As you read this example, think about what you would do similarly or differently 
if Teresa were your client.***
A first-year practicum student is talking for the first time with her 17-year-old client, 
Teresa, about Teresa’s sexual contact with her alcoholic stepfather. Understandably, this 
new therapist is anxious. Her heart is breaking for this girl, and she wants to help Teresa 
so much, but the therapist has never in her life spoken directly with anyone about the 
experience of being violated sexually. The content of what Teresa and the therapist are 
beginning to talk about is sexual molestation. Depending on the interpersonal process 
they enact, however, the effectiveness of this discussion is going to vary greatly. On the 
one hand, suppose the counselor is initiating this discussion and pressing Teresa for 
further disclosure about what happened to her. The graduate student therapist is deeply 
concerned about Teresa’s safety. However, her “need to know” is intensified by her 
concerns about her legal responsibilities as a mandated reporter, and her concern that her 
supervisor will want to know more details or facts about Teresa’s molestation.
In response to the counselor’s continuing press for more information, Teresa complies 
with the counselor and reluctantly speaks further about what happened. Useful infor -
mation may be gained under these circumstances (i.e., content), but the opportunity for 
therapeutic progress is diminished or even lost because aspects of Teresa’s problem are 
being reenacted with the counselor in the way they are interacting (i.e., process). How is 
this a problematic reenactment along the process dimension? Teresa is again being pres -
sured to obey an adult, comply with authority, and do something she doesn’t want to do. 
Of course, being pressed to talk about something she doesn’t want to discuss in no way 
re-traumatizes her as the original abuse did. The new way of thinking student therapists 
want to start developing, however, is how the interpersonal process of Demand/Comply 
is awry, and painfully familiar to Teresa, and will evoke in Teresa similar types of feel -
ings and concerns that the abuse initially engendered. That is, her helplessness will lead 
to depression and her compliance (having to go along) to feelings of shame. Because the 
therapeutic process is thematically or metaphorically evoking aspects of her original mis-
treatment, her compliance with the therapist is likely to hinder her progress in treatment 
and actually slow the process of reempowerment.
This unwanted situation can be further complicated if Teresa belongs to an ethnic 
group where family loyalty is highly prized, or if she is a member of a religious com -
munity where obedience to authority and hierarchical relationships are emphasized. In 
this cultural context, Teresa is being asked to violate rules sanctioned by her family’s 
ethnic or religious group. Other family members and friends may strongly disapprove 
of the stepfather’s behavior. However, they may not provide Teresa with the validation 
and support she needs because she took this information to someone outside the fam -
ily (the therapist) or because she violated their religious proscriptions that emphasize 
obedience and forgiveness. Thus, although disclosure violates family rules and loyal -
ties for most victims, this may take on additional significance and add more distress 
for Teresa if she were a Hispanic adolescent who belonged to a conservative religious 
community.
What should the counselor in this example do instead? Wait non-directively for 
Teresa to volunteer this information—while she may continue to suffer ongoing abuse 
*** The clinical examples in this text are based on actual cases; however, identifying information, including the 
gender of the client or therapist, has been altered to preserve confidentiality.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   21
at home? Of course not. But by attending to the process dimension, the therapist may be 
able to begin providing Teresa a corrective experience while gathering the same informa-
tion. That is, instead of pressing for disclosure, what if the therapist honored Teresa’s 
reluctance or cultural prescriptions? For example, instead of pressing for more informa -
tion and trying to get Teresa to talk about things she doesn’t want to talk about, the 
therapist could “meta-communicate” and make a process comment by compassionately 
or supportively inquiring about Teresa’s reluctance to speak:
THERAPIST:
 All of this is so difficult right now. What’s the hardest thing about talking with me?
OR
THERAPIST:
 It seems hard for you to talk with me right now—maybe something doesn’t feel 
safe. I’m wondering what might happen if you share this and let me try to help you. What 
might go wrong?
OR
THERAPIST:
 Perhaps talking with me about this violates family rules, and you’re concerned what 
your mother or stepfather might think. Would you feel OK talking about your family’s rules 
and what’s OK or not OK to talk about outside your family?
OR
THERAPIST:
 Let’s work together and try to find a better way to talk about this. Can you tell me 
one thing that we might be able to change or do differently that might make this a little bit 
easier for you?
The purpose of process comments like these is to create a different and more repara -
tive interpersonal process—one that helps Teresa feel less that she has to comply with the 
therapist—as she has with her stepfather and others. In response to these invitations, Teresa 
is likely to present a number of reality-based concerns that make it harder for her to speak 
further. For example, Teresa might reply that:
 /uni25CFher mother won’t believe her;
 /uni25CFher stepfather will be sent away and she will blamed for breaking up the family; 
 /uni25CFshe will be told by some people that it is her fault;
 /uni25CFsome will tell her that she is being selfish and should stop causing problems;
 /uni25CFsome will tell her to be more forgiving, and not talk to anyone about this;
 /uni25CFshe will be ostracized or cut out for not keeping it in the family and trying to resolve 
it there;
 /uni25CFthe counselor may not believe her or may take her parents’ side;
 /uni25CFthe counselor may want to remove her from her home;
 /uni25CFthe counselor or others will regard her as “dirty,” “ruined,” or shame-worthy in some way;
 /uni25CFthe therapist may feel uncomfortable talking about this sensitive issue and will not 
want to do anything about it, and so forth.
If the therapist can help Teresa identify and resolve her concerns, then she can find 
it safe and empowering to begin talking about what happened—which does not occur if 
the therapist simply directs her to disclose what happened. Although this process differ -
ence may seem subtle, its effect is powerful and will have a defining impact on the course 
and outcome of treatment. Based on the way she shares her trauma with the therapist, 
Teresa either will begin the empowerment process or confirm her problematic expecta -
tion that she must always comply and go along with what others want. With the process 
comments and invitations suggested earlier, Teresa is able to participate in the decision 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

22  CHAPTER /one.alt
process with an authority figure, have her concerns expressed and taken seriously, and, 
to the extent possible, accommodated as best they can. For example:
THERAPIST:
 Yes, Teresa, you don’t have to do this “alone.” Your aunt Nora brought you to see 
us today, and she is waiting in the lobby. If you like, we can invite her to sit in with us while 
we talk.
In a way that is new and different, Teresa finds that she can at least have some shared 
control over what she says, and to whom, and still remain supported. She is not “alone” 
or disempowered  in her interaction with the therapist—as she had been while keeping 
this secret about her stepfather. This corrective interpersonal process  with the therapist 
will help Teresa to begin acting in similarly empowered and self-affirming ways in some 
of her other relationships as well. In this and subsequent sessions, the therapist can help 
Teresa discern other people in her life with whom it is safe to be similarly assertive (her 
aunt Nora, her minister, and certain friends and family members), and those who will 
punish or thwart this and demand that she merely comply again (her stepfather, her 
grandmother, and certain friends and family members).
But what if the therapist’s efforts to create a different interpersonal process don’t 
work so well and Teresa still does not want to speak or discuss the secret any further? The 
therapist is a mandated reporter and still will need to contact Child Protective Services. 
In some cases, the therapist’s attempts to empower the client by giving her more choice 
or participation in the reporting/treatment process clearly will have helped, and other 
times it may seem as if it hasn’t made much of a difference. Even if not, however, Teresa 
has found that the therapist is sincerely trying to find ways to include and empower her 
rather than merely demand that she comply again and do what the therapist wants. In 
this way, a small but significant difference is occurring in their relationship that will facili-
tate her recovery, as Teresa begins to see that the therapist’s intentions are different than 
what she has come to expect from others.
In sum, techniques from differing theoretical orientations all can be helpful, but they 
are not likely to be effective unless the interaction or process that transpires between the 
therapist and client is enacting a solution to the client’s problems. In the chapters ahead, a 
variety of therapeutic interventions will be used, including providing empathy and a sense 
of being understood, helping the client recognize thought processes or behavior patterns 
that are maladaptive, and role-playing new behaviors. Per client response specificity, how-
ever, the effectiveness of these interventions will depend on whether the client’s maladap-
tive schemas and problematic interpersonal patterns are reenacted or resolved along the 
process dimension.
THEORETICAL AND HISTORICAL CONTEXT
The interpersonal process model presented here is an Integrative approach (Ingram, 
2012). It highlights relational components from differing theories and synthesizes a com-
mon focus on the therapeutic relationship—which has emerged in the empirical literature 
as the most consistent predictor of successful treatment outcome (Baldwin, Wampold & 
Imel, 2009; Horvath & Bedi, 2002; Norcross, 2002; Norcross & Lambert, 2014). As we 
have begun to see, this treatment approach clarifies how therapists can use their current 
interaction—the interpersonal process they are enacting with their clients—to help clients 
change. Theorists and researchers from different theoretical orientations all have con -
tributed to our understanding of the therapeutic relationship and how therapists can use 
it to guide what we do with our clients. In this regard, varying theories have focused on 
different aspects of clients’ functioning and helped therapists respond to different aspects 
of people’s problems. In particular, the Interpersonal, Cognitive, and Familial/Cultural 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   23
domains have been emphasized in different treatment approaches. This text highlights the 
process dimension in each of these broad theoretical traditions, and links these concepts 
about the current interaction between the therapist and client to clinical practice. These 
three domains are introduced below and provide a theoretical context for the clinical 
approach presented in the chapters ahead.
T/h.sc/e.sc I/n.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/p.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc/o.sc/n.sc/a.sc/l.sc D/o.sc/m.sc/a.sc/i.sc/n.sc
Beginning with a historical perspective, the Interpersonal dimension was originally high -
lighted by Harry Stack Sullivan and has been articulated further by Hans Strupp, Irvin 
Yalom, and many others. Sullivan (1968) first brought the interpersonal focus to psycho-
therapy in the 1940s, and he remains an enormously influential but insufficiently recog -
nized figure. A maverick, Sullivan radically broke away from Freud’s biologically based 
libido theory and was one of the first major theorists to argue that the basic premises 
of Freud’s drive theory (e.g., sexual and aggressive instincts) were inaccurate. Sullivan 
emphasized clients’ current behavior and relationships with others rather than develop -
mental fixations or how clients were stuck in the past. He and other relational theorists 
pressed for a more behavioral or reality-based focus on the child’s actual experience with 
parents, or real-life interactions with caregivers, and stepped away from Freud’s emphasis 
on fantasy and intra-psychic processes. Sullivan focused on what people do to avoid or 
manage anxiety in close relationships and, prefiguring John Bowlby, was especially inter-manage anxiety in close relationships and, prefiguring John Bowlby, was especially inter-manage anxiety in close relationships and, prefiguring John Bowlby, was especially inter
ested in the hurtful or anxiety-rousing interactions that repeatedly occurred in formative 
parent–child interactions. Following from this, Sullivan conceptualized personality as the 
collection of interpersonal strategies that the individual employs to avoid or minimize 
anxiety, ward off disapproval, and maintain self-esteem. 
According to Sullivan, children develop their personality, or “self-system,” through 
repetitive interactions with their parents. For example, children may develop internal 
images of themselves as helpless or insignificant and expectations of parents and others as 
demanding or critical. Alternatively, more fortunate children who enjoyed better develop-
mental/familial experiences may evolve images of themselves as love-worthy and expecta-
tions that others can be trustworthy.
Having learned these self-other relational patterns, people systematically behave in 
ways that avoid or minimize the experience of anxiety. For example, suppose that par -
ticular aspects of the child, such as feeling sad or crying, consistently result in parental 
responses of irritability or indifference, or even more problematically, ridicule or overt 
rejection. The child learns that these parts of oneself, (including vulnerability or emo -
tional needs), are unacceptable and represent a “bad self.” These unacceptable, anxiety-
arousing aspects of the self are split off or disowned and the child develops interpersonal 
coping styles (e.g., a pleasing/placating manner, a macho/dominating style, or a rigidly 
self-reliant and distant stance in all or most relationships) that preclude being subjected 
to anxiety-arousing rejection or ridicule again. These coping styles are interpersonal 
defenses (as opposed to Freud’s intrapsychic defenses such as denial or projection) that 
originally were necessary to protect the self in early parent–child relationships . Unfortu-
nately, these interpersonal defenses are rigidly applied and overgeneralized to other rela -
tionships in adulthood and become habitual behavior patterns as the child, now grown 
to an adult, inaccurately expects that new experiences with others will repeat the same 
hurtful, anxiety-arousing patterns of the past. Sullivan’s early formulations have been 
greatly enhanced by attachment researchers (using the terms “internal working models ” 
and “relational templates ”) and by cognitive behavioral therapists (using terms such as 
“early maladaptive schemas,” “faulty expectations,” and “selective filters”). In a histori-
cal perspective, however, this was pioneering work.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

24  CHAPTER /one.alt
Sullivan influenced seminal thinkers in the interpersonal field, such as Carl Rogers, 
Eric Fromm, and Erik Erikson, and inspired nothing less than a new direction in psycho -
therapy. He even prefigured family systems theory—two of the founding pioneers in fam -
ily therapy, Don Jackson and Murray Bowen, trained with Sullivan. Finally, he also set the 
stage for a host of contemporary approaches to short-term treatment that were shaped by 
this interpersonal approach and its more active and engaging therapeutic stance toward 
the client. In sum, many of the basic concepts in the interpersonal process approach can 
be traced back in some form to Sullivan and other interpersonal/relational theorists.
T/h.sc/e.sc C/o.sc/g.sc/n.sc/i.sc/t.sc/i.sc/v.sc/e.sc D/o.sc/m.sc/a.sc/i.sc/n.sc
Approaches as seemingly diverse as object relations theory, Bowlby’s attachment theory, 
and cognitive behavioral therapy each help us understand and intervene with the faulty 
thinking that is central to clients’ symptoms and problems. Let’s begin with object rela -
tions theory—with its remote and alienating jargon, it is usually the most difficult theory 
for graduate student therapists to integrate. Following this overview, we will link the 
attachment theorists’ core concept of “internal working models” and the schema-oriented 
approaches of contemporary cognitive therapists—which are concerned with the client’s 
beliefs and expectations, and how they impact affect and interpersonal relationships.
Object Relations and Attachment Theory: Internal Working Models. In the 
present context, objects are people or, more precisely, internal representations of important 
caregivers. Object relations theory is about close interpersonal relationships—especially 
those between parents and young children, and how those important early relationships 
are internalized as enduring mental representations of parent–child relations or internal 
working models. In particular, object relations theorists try to account for the meaning of 
attachment and the human need for secure, enduring relationships with a few significant 
others who can respond to our emotional needs. Object relations theorists are interested 
in understanding how formative interactions between parents and children become inter-in understanding how formative interactions between parents and children become inter-in understanding how formative interactions between parents and children become inter
nalized by the child and, akin to cognitive schemas, serve as mental representations that 
shape or guide how children establish and carry out subsequent relationships with others. 
These representational models of self and other provide basic expectations or road maps 
for what will transpire in relationships (e.g., Others are dependent and needy—I must 
take care of them; Others are critical and overwhelming—I need to protect myself by 
withdrawing). Although these early Internal Working Models (IWMs) for relationships 
will become more complex and evolve over time, object relations theorists argue that 
these formative IWMs provide the basic structure for developing a sense of self, organiz -
ing the interpersonal world, and shaping subsequent relational patterns (Ogden, 2002).
Extending these constructs, attachment theorists further clarify the important role 
of early parent–child relationships, and the security or anxiety that children find in their 
parents’ responses to their attachment needs (see Cassidy & Shaver, 2008). When par -
ents accurately register and respond to their children’s emotional needs, children develop 
attachments that are labeled secure. In contrast, when parents do not accurately read 
the child’s emotional cues, or do not hear or respond to their young child’s distress or 
bids for engagement, the child’s attachment will be labeled insecure. Attachment research-
ers describe three types of insecure attachment in children: Avoidant, Ambivalent, and 
Disorganized.
When parents consistently ignore, dismiss, reject, or otherwise fail to console a dis -
tressed child, that child will be insecure and develop an Avoidant attachment style. The 
child learns early on to cope with the parent’s unresponsiveness by developing a pseudo 
or false form of “independence.” This counter-dependency conveys that the child has 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   25
absolutely no need of others, regardless of his or her actual experience or genuine emo -
tional need. As an adult, this child is likely to have difficulty accessing and expressing his/
her emotions and will run the risk of being isolated and emotionally disengaged from 
both him/herself and others.
 At the other end of the continuum are the children who develop an Ambivalent 
attachment style. This occurs when children have caretakers who are intrusive, respond 
inconsistently, and have difficulty supporting the child’s independence. Since caretakers 
are sometimes responsive and sometimes unresponsive because they are self-absorbed or 
preoccupied, the child is uncertain if the parent will be there when needed. Thus this 
Ambivalently attached child (and later, adult) is often clingy and needy, demonstrates sig-
nificant worry and anxiety, and expresses contradictory or mixed messages (come close/
go away) toward the parent and others. Relationships will be challenging for these chil -
dren as they enter adolescence and adulthood—partners will experience them as depen -
dent and needy, and reciprocity or mutuality will be lacking.
 Finally, children who develop the Disorganized attachment style have no organized 
attachment pattern or coping style to deal with their very troubled attachment figures. 
They have often experienced trauma or abuse, neglect, or other confusing dissociative or 
frightening behavior from their parents. Hesse and Main (2000) articulate the madden -
ing and unresolvable paradox that these children struggle with: the attachment figures 
who are their primary source of comfort but at other times, are hurtful and a realistic 
source of fear. These Disorganized children therefore have difficulty sustaining consistent 
relationships and are at high risk for more serious psychopathology, such as Borderline 
Personality Disorder. Often, because they have experienced so much invalidation and fre-
quently been traumatized, as adults they may engage in self-destructive behaviors (e.g., 
binge eating and purging, substance abuse, self-mutilation, etc.) and may also have disso-
ciative episodes. They may, in the relationships they establish, often have difficulty trust -
ing yet also be extremely vigilant for loyalty or commitment and be highly demanding of 
friends and partners. In sum, each of these differing attachment histories is going to shape 
expectations and behavior in subsequent relationships, which, as we will see, includes 
clients’ responses to the therapist and the therapeutic relationship.
Internalizing the Attachment Relationship. Object relations and attachment 
theorists believe that the child’s primary motivation is to establish and maintain emotional 
ties to parental caregivers—a very different approach from that used by psychoanalytic 
and behavioral theorists (Eagle & Wolitzky, 2009). Parental caregivers are important in 
that these attachment figures are a source of comfort and protection. From their point of 
view, the greatest conflicts in life are threats to, or disruptions of, these basic attachment 
ties (separation anxieties or abandonment fears). In this regard, anxiety is a signal that signal that signal
emotional ties to caregivers are being threatened. If parents are attuned and consistently 
responsive to the child’s distress, the child becomes secure in those attachment ties 
(parents don’t need to do this perfectly—they just have to be “good enough”).
What’s so interesting here is that through the course of development, these secure 
children increasingly “internalize” their parents’ emotional availability and responsive -
ness and come to hold the same constant or dependable loving feeling toward themselves 
that their parents originally held toward them. Said differently, cognitive development 
increasingly allows securely attached children to internally hold a mental representation 
of their emotionally responsive parents when the attachment figures are away and they 
can increasingly soothe themselves as their caregivers have done—facilitating the child’s 
own capacity for affect regulation and independent functioning. Thus, as these children 
mature cognitively and emotionally, they become increasingly able to soothe themselves 
when distressed, function for increasingly longer periods without emotional refueling, 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

26  CHAPTER /one.alt
effectively elicit appropriate help or support when necessary, and become the source of 
their own self-esteem. As adults, they are more likely to be able to recreate their inter -
nal working models in subsequent real-life relationships—such as successfully choosing 
similarly responsive and supportive partners and enjoying a better marriage (Hinnen, 
Sanderman & Sprangers, 2009).
But what if the child cannot maintain secure emotional ties to the primary caregivers? 
In some families, parents do not respond well to the child’s distress or attachment need 
because they are anxiously preoccupied, depressed or withdrawn, or even abusive and 
frightening. When attachment needs are compromised by caregivers who are unreliable 
or unresponsive, these children are trapped in an unsolvable dilemma. They are unable 
to elicit help from their caregivers when they are distressed. What do they do with the 
anguish this creates? Object relations theory tries to account for the different compro -
mise solutions and coping adaptations these children must make to this poignant human 
dilemma. They may, for example: 1) become anxious and overly preoccupied with their 
caregiver (Ambivalent Attachment); 2)distort the reality of their circumstances by denying 
certain needs and feelings of their own, or that reality-based problems with others really 
do exist, and idealize others in unrealistic, problem-free ways (Avoidant Attachment); or 
3) exhibit a confusing combination of both (Disorganized Attachment). Below, we illus -
trate how an Avoidantly Attached child is likely to present in treatment as an adult.
Alert and friendly, Bob entered treatment telling his therapist that he didn’t have any real 
problems—things were “great,” but his fiancée wasn’t ready to go forward with their 
wedding plans unless he talked with a therapist about his “short fuse” and a recent DUI. 
As the therapist explored these symptoms and tried to learn more about them, Bob gave 
very general explanations that minimized the significance of his alcohol-related problems 
and his temper outbursts—trying to convey that things really were OK by repeatedly using 
the phrase “No problem.” Looking for a way to move their dialogue beyond the surface, 
the therapist suggested that, because Bob was thinking about getting married and starting a 
family of his own, it would be helpful if they could talk about his own childhood and get a 
feel for his parents’ marriage and what it was like growing up in his family. Bob gradually 
unfolded a narrative that included a threatening and explosive father who yelled and hit his 
children when he drank, and a mother who provided little protection from this— or even 
acknowledged that these frightening and humiliating interactions were occurring. Typical 
of an Avoidant Attachment style (relabeled Dismissive in adulthood), Bob described these 
experiences without much feeling, and minimized these disturbing family interactions as 
insignificant. They were “no big deal” because he had a “close and loving family” and 
“everybody came out great anyway.”
Next, let’s describe and briefly illustrate the Disorganized or maltreated child. When 
caregivers are more severely unresponsive or abusive, some children resort to “splitting 
defenses” to maintain ties to the fear-provoking caregiver. The child internalizes the “bad” 
(threatening or rejecting) aspects of the parent in a sharply separate or split-off way from 
the “good” (loving or responsive) aspects of the parent. This preserves the necessary 
image of an idealized, “all good,” responsive caregiver with whom the child is internally 
connected or attached. However, the price is high in that reality is distorted, the self lacks 
coherence, and the child comes to believe that he or she is the one who is “bad.” The 
frightening or maltreating caregiver is no longer “bad,” allowing the child to cope by 
viewing the external world and the attachment figure as safe (Fonagy, 2000). The child 
is left believing that, if only he or she were different or better in some way, parental love 
would be forthcoming (Benjamin, 2003).
 This situation is illustrated most poignantly by the physically abused child who, 
though repeatedly hit and afraid, nevertheless continues to idealize and defend the 
maltreating parent. For example, a child does this by believing that he or she is bad and 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   27
maintaining that the punishment is actually justified (e.g., seven-year-old child: “My 
dad hit me because I wasn’t being nice to my brother.”). This self-blaming distortion 
enables the child to cope with the attachment dilemma (needing care from a hurtful or 
frightening person) and believe that he or she has some control over events and is not 
helpless. Early in their training, many new therapists will have clients in their caseloads 
who were physically mistreated, sexually violated, or rejected and held in contempt at 
times by attachment figures. New therapists will often be surprised to observe that these 
clients commonly blame themselves for their mistreatment and unrealistically assume 
responsibility for what went wrong.
Understanding that the child must find some way to maintain ties with a good, lov -
ing parent helps therapists appreciate why many clients persist in maladaptive behavior 
and self-defeating relationships. New therapists sometimes will observe that when clients 
resolve a symptom, succeed in achieving a personal goal, or make healthier choices for 
themselves, some will feel anxious or distressed and may undo their progress. Thus, loy -
alty and allegiance to symptoms—maladaptive behaviors originally developed to manage 
the “bad” or painfully frustrating aspects of parents—are not maladaptive to insecurely 
attached children. Such loyalty preserves “object ties,” or the connection to the good or 
loving aspects of the parent. Attachment fears of being left alone, helpless, or unwanted 
can be activated if clients disengage from the symptoms that represent these internalized 
“bad” objects (e.g., if the client resolves an eating disorder or terminates a problematic 
relationship with a controlling/jealous partner). The goal of the interpersonal process 
approach is to help clients modify these internal working models by providing them with 
experiential or in vivo  relearning (i.e., a corrective emotional experience). Through this 
real-life experience with the therapist, clients learn that, at least sometimes, some relation-
ships can be different and do not have to follow the same familiar but problematic lines 
they have come to expect.
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy: Early Maladaptive Schemas. In his early pioneering 
work, Beck (1967) emphasized the importance of schemas in depression. For Beck, schemas 
are the basic components of cognitive organization—the fixed or patterned ways we interpret, 
categorize, and evaluate our experiences. Put most simply, schemas can be thought of as 
broad organizing principles for making sense of one’s life or experience. Beck emphasized 
that repetitive themes occur in clients’ thinking through “schema bias”—a consistent and 
selective bias in organizing information and interpreting events that results in “the typical 
misconceptions, distorted attitudes, invalid premises, and unrealistic goals and expectations” 
that clients present (1967, p. 284). Cognitive behavioral therapy originally emphasized three 
aspects of cognition—automatic thoughts, cognitive distortions, and underlying assumptions.
 More recent theorists expand Beck’s groundbreaking work and further emphasize 
the child’s developmental experiences with caregivers in shaping affectively charged 
“Early Maladaptive Schemas” (Young et al., 2003).
In his rich and substantive approach, Jeffrey Young integrates cognitive behavioral 
therapy with object relations and psychodynamic approaches, and places more emphasis 
on the therapeutic relationship, affective experience, and early life experiences. Following 
Young (1999), Early Maladaptive Schemas (EMSs) are defined as stable and enduring 
themes that develop from ongoing patterns of parent–child interaction during childhood 
that are significantly dysfunctional, and which are elaborated and extend on into adult -
hood. These schemas serve as templates for the filtering of later experience, and are taken 
for granted by individuals as a priori truths. They feel familiar and are not questioned by 
the individual—they are just the givens of one’s existence and form the core of a client’s 
self-concept and conception of the environment. EMSs are self-perpetuating and, unfor -
tunately, resistant to change because the individual distorts information to maintain the 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

28  CHAPTER /one.alt
validity of these schemas. This occurs, for example, as the client magnifies information 
that confirms the schema and minimizes or negates information that is inconsistent with 
the schema.
 For example, a husband with a Rejection/Shame schema focuses on the one complaint 
that his wife expressed toward him but does not really hear the genuine appreciation she 
also voices. Clarifying further how EMSs selectively filter for corroborating experience, 
another client with a Rejection/Shame schema may instead select a mate or spouse who 
repeatedly confirms his or her self-perception as inadequate and shame- worthy. Strong 
feelings accompany these EMSs, and intense anxiety (or other feelings) will be activated 
when life situations trigger the client’s EMS. Similarly, imagine a graduate student with a 
Failure schema, which developed from repeated interactions with highly critical caregiv -
ers who were, in reality, very difficult to please. She is likely to worry and experience sig-
nificant anxiety as comprehensive exams, dissertation defense, applications/interviews for 
job or internship placements, and other evaluation/performance situations that activate 
her Failure schema loom on the horizon.
The cardinal issue for us here, which will be emphasized throughout the interper -
sonal process approach, is that it is important to discuss schemas or misperceptions in 
the moment, when they are being played out or experienced in response to the therapist , 
and are accompanied by strong affect. For example, Aaron grew up with drug-involved 
parents who often were away and, when they were home and physically present, were 
often altered and emotionally absent. At age eight, Aaron was placed in a series of three 
foster homes by Child Protective Services until he was finally adopted and settled into a 
stable, predictable life with a supportive family. At the core of many issues that Aaron is 
going to be struggling with in his life will be an Abandonment schema. Aaron is vulner -going to be struggling with in his life will be an Abandonment schema. Aaron is vulner -going to be struggling with in his life will be an Abandonment schema. Aaron is vulner
able or prone to feel anxious and depressed and struggle with other familiar symptoms 
that will disrupt his life, particularly at times when separation experiences are occurring, 
such as when his girlfriend suggests that she wants to date others or break up, or when 
his daughter heads off to the first grade or college.
 Similarly, feelings of emptiness, loneliness, and despair (“Abandonment feelings”) 
may be evoked toward the therapist at critical times, such as at the end of an especially 
powerful session, when the therapist is preoccupied about a personal problem in his own 
life, just before the therapist leaves for vacation, when they discuss termination, and so 
forth. The key refrain here and in the chapters ahead is this: The real opportunity to help 
clients change is when the problem they are struggling with is occurring between thera-
pist and client —not just being talked about in the abstract. This pist and client —not just being talked about in the abstract. This pist and client immediacy is anxiety-
arousing for new therapists, for sure, but also the potent place where we have the chance 
to make a real difference in the client’s life.
In sum, we can see that theoretical approaches as disparate as object relations, attach-
ment theory, and cognitive therapy can all teach us much about the schemas or internal 
working models that shape clients’ lives. As we go on, we will explore further how these 
faulty beliefs and problematic expectations, which once made sense and accurately fit 
what really occurred in formative family relationships, are overgeneralized now and no 
longer serve clients well in most current relationships.
T/h.sc/e.sc F/a.sc/m.sc/i.sc/l.sc/i.sc/a.sc/l.sc/C/u.sc/l.sc/t.sc/u.sc/r.sc/a.sc/l.sc D/o.sc/m.sc/a.sc/i.sc/n.sc
Children must adapt to their attachment figures, and they do so within a familial and cul-
tural context. Family systems theory offers therapists an invaluable way of understanding 
their clients’ strengths and problems—clarifying the familial rules, roles, myths, commu -
nication patterns, and boundary issues that defined their clients’ development. Cultural 
norms and values are imparted through daily family interaction and, in this and other 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   29
ways, we develop our identity or “self” and become who we are in our families of origin. 
In particular, family process researchers have learned much about family interaction and 
relationships by adopting a multigenerational perspective.
Family Systems Constructs. In the late 1950s, Gregory Bateson, Virginia Satir, 
Murray Bowen, and other pioneers began studying communication patterns in families 
(Goldenberg & Goldenberg, 2012). They found that communication patterns in families 
followed definitive but often unspoken rules that determined who spoke to whom, about 
what, and when. These covert or unspoken rules  also governed affective expression in 
the family, such that for certain family members, being sad or disappointed, irritated or 
angry, or even excited and happy, may not be allowed. Years later, these unspoken family 
rules about communication or expressing certain feelings are still in play for most clients 
and contribute to their problems in current adult relationships. For example, clients often 
continue faulty communication patterns they learned years before in their families of 
origin, as they:
 /uni25CFaddress conflicts through a third party rather than speaking directly to the person 
involved (e.g., Father: Tell your Mother that I’m sick and tired of…);
 /uni25CFallow others to speak for them and define what they are thinking or feeling (Parent: 
“No, that’s not what she really means…”); and 
 /uni25CFnever make “I” statements and communicate directly what they want (e.g., “You 
never give me a chance to say what I think” versus “I would like to complete my 
thought”).
Early family researchers also illuminated how children in dysfunctional families are 
scripted into narrow roles, such as the responsible or good child; the problem or bad 
child; and other common roles—including the family hero or star, the invisible or lost 
child, and the rescuer or peacemaker. Following object relations theory, the most com -
mon configuration is the good child–bad child role split that occurs in so many dys -
functional families. Some therapists were the “good child” in their families of origin and 
had a sibling who fulfilled the “bad child” role and seemingly couldn’t do anything right 
or was always viewed as the problem—independent of actual behavior. Especially apt 
for therapists-in-training, many therapists, and others who enter the helping professions 
such as nurses or ministers, were parentified. In this reversal of parent–child roles, they 
fulfilled a caretaking role for their parent. That is, they often were scripted to meet the 
emotional needs of their parent, rather than having their own age-appropriate needs met, 
by serving as a confidant or best friend to their parent. This might have included trying to 
protect their parent or shore up the emotional needs of an anxious, depressed, dependent, 
alcoholic, or otherwise vulnerable caregiver. For others who choose counseling careers, 
they may have been assigned to the role of mediator or go-between in family or parental 
conflicts.
Why is this family systems perspective so important to new trainees? Most clients are 
still fulfilling these limiting childhood roles, which deny many aspects of who they are 
and hold them back from becoming more of who and how they want to be in life. Thus, 
in the process of adapting in their families of origin, these children “internalized” these 
roles as self-schemas. These problematic familial roles have become their identity—who 
they are and what they do. And, even though their parents now may live far away or even 
be deceased, they continue to place their families’ original expectations on themselves 
and recreate these problematic roles and relational patterns with others in their current 
lives. For example, many clients who have played the good-child role in their families are 
still making perfectionistic demands of themselves, feeling guilty about doing things for 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

30  CHAPTER /one.alt
themselves, worrying excessively about others’ needs , fearing their appropriate assertive-
ness and anger, and being confused by their sad and empty feelings. The “bad child,” on 
the other hand, may be defiant and act out personal conflicts externally. He or she may, 
for example, abuse substances, be promiscuous, or behave in other rebellious ways. In 
contrast, the “good child” is more likely to seek treatment and enter therapy, often pre -
senting with vague complaints of guilt, anxiety, and an inability to make decisions or 
know one’s own mind.
There is cultural variation in the balance of “separateness/relatedness” or the degree of 
continuing responsibility that young adult offspring are expected to hold for their parents 
versus pursuing their own adult interests and needs. Within these varying cultural contexts, 
many families also have unspoken rules about how, in late adolescence, offspring can leave 
home or individuate and further establish their own beliefs and values, work and careers, 
and marriage and families. For example, the oldest daughter may not be allowed to grow 
up and leave home successfully on her own. She may seek emancipation through pregnancy, 
only to find herself even more dependent on her parents than before and forced to live at 
home again. A son may only be able to leave home through rejecting confrontations with 
parents, and then may live in another part of the country and have little or no continuing 
contact with his family. However, in better-functioning families, young adults find support 
and guidance for launching their own lives, while continuing to maintain strong family ties 
and connections. Additionally, family rules, roles, and faulty communication patterns often 
serve to maintain family myths that, in turn, function to avoid anxiety-arousing issues in 
the family (Satir & Bitter, 2000). For example, common family myths include:
 /uni25CFDad doesn’t have a drinking problem.
 /uni25CFWe are a happy family and nobody is ever sad.
 /uni25CFMom and Dad never fight, and are very happily married.
In sum, family myths and these other family characteristics are rule-bound homeostatic 
mechanisms that govern family relations and establish repetitive, predictable patterns of 
family interaction. They are homeostatic in the sense that they tend to maintain the stability 
of the family system—often making change uncomfortable or even threatening.
The Cultural Context. Salvadore Minuchin and other family researchers have also 
explored the alliances, coalitions, and subgroups that make up the structure of family 
relations (Minuchin & Nichols, 1998; Minuchin, Lee & Simon, 1996; Minuchin, Nichols & 
Lee, 2007). In some families, for example, the maternal grandmother, mother, and eldest 
daughter are allied together, and the father is the outsider. This structural road map for 
reading family relations becomes even more illuminating when these family dynamics are 
examined in a three-generational perspective (Bowen, 1993; Kerr & Bowen, 1988). It is 
fascinating—and sometimes disturbing—to draw and see how these same family rules, 
roles, myths, and structural relationships can be reenacted across three or four generations 
in a highly patterned, rule-governed system (McGoldrick, Gerson & Petry, 2008). Adding 
to the complexity of this tapestry, these family rules, roles, and communication patterns 
operate within a broader cultural context. For example, the oldest son in a traditional 
Chinese family or the oldest daughter in a traditional Latino family may be expected to 
assume significant, ongoing responsibilities for elders or other family members. It will be 
necessary for therapists to establish the extent to which these roles and behavior patterns 
are culturally sanctioned or determined. New therapists will see many clients in therapy 
who are struggling with balancing their own needs versus the needs of their families of 
origin. Therapists help by working with clients to identify healthy role models within 
their extended family or cultural context who have achieved a better balance between 
their own personal needs versus obligations and loyalty to the family.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   31
To help, Sue and Sue(2012) describe cultural competence in working with clients as 
including: 
(1) the therapist’s awareness of his/her assumptions, values, and biases;
(2) the therapist’s level of knowledge regarding the worldview of culturally different  
clients; and 
(3) the therapist’s skill in developing interventions that are culturally sensitive. 
Sue and Zane (2009) suggest that one key consideration in working with clients is 
“achieved credibility”—the skills exhibited by the therapist that garner the client’s sense 
of hope and confidence, which would include working collaboratively, actively engag -
ing the client, and having the ability to clarify what the client’s core concerns really are 
(Baldwin et al., 2007). Thus, knowledge of the client’s culture is used in the service of 
developing credibility; for example, using language that resonates with the client’s expe -
rience is associated with better treatment outcomes (Draguns, 2007). In this way, the 
client’s cultural features or cultural group do not define the client but alert the therapist 
to potential credibility issues that can arise. Pedersen et al.’s (2008) informative book, 
Inclusive Cultural Empathy, provides student therapists with helpful exercises to increase 
self-awareness and sensitivity to a range of cultural issues.
The interpersonal process approach draws on these basic family systems and inclusive 
cultural concepts, and considers the effects of familial experience and contextual factors on 
clients’ personality strengths and problems. Therapists want to help clients make realistic 
assessments of the resiliencies and vulnerabilities that coexisted in their families of origin. 
However, for many clients and for many therapists, it is culturally taboo to speak critically 
of parents or talk about problems with someone outside of the family. Alice Miller (1984) 
observes how, for some, this even breaks the Fourth Commandment: Honor thy parents. 
Herein, though, is one of the great strengths of family systems theory. The family systems 
therapist is trying to understand hurtful familial interactions, not to place blame or scape-
goat any family member. The family therapist is concerned about the well-being of every 
family member, parents as well as children. In parallel, only as clients realize that their indi-
vidual therapist wants to understand—rather than to blame their caregiver or make them 
bad in some way—do clients have the safety they need to explore threatening material and 
make significant gains in treatment. At times, however, therapists’ own splitting defenses or 
dichotomous thinking leads them to blame or reject parental figures. For example,
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 I can’t believe your mother did that to you, she’s awful! 
Out of guilt and threat to ties with their caregivers, it will be far more difficult for 
clients with this type of therapist to make progress in treatment. In contrast, it will be far 
more effective if therapists eschew blame and try only to understand and empathize with 
their clients’ experience. For example,
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 I’m sorry you were hurt so much when she did that.
There are some good things in almost every family, even in very troubled or abusive 
families, just as there are limitations and problems in the healthiest families. When clients 
continue to idealize parents and deny real problems that existed, as many do when they 
enter treatment, they are complying with binding family rules and protecting their parents 
at their own expense. On the other hand, however, clients cannot simply reject hurtful par-
ents and emotionally cut off from them, because they will simultaneously want to remain 
connected to the healthier aspects of their caregivers. This means that therapists need to 
help clients find ways to keep caregivers (or the healthier, more benevolent parts of them) 
alive inside themselves as “partial identifications.” How can clients accomplish this?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

32  CHAPTER /one.alt
In order to resolve problems and make progress in counseling, clients want to be able 
to come to terms with both the good news and the bad news in their families of origin. 
As already noted, however, clients cannot achieve this integration if the therapist also 
employs his or her own splitting defenses or dichotomous thinking. In other words, the 
therapist does not want to identify with or idealize the wounded child that exists within 
some clients and to reject the hurtful parent as “bad.” Neither does the therapist want 
to support clients’ continuing denial of familial problems and idealization of parents. 
Instead, the therapist’s appropriate role is to try to understand what actually occurred in 
clients’ development and help them realistically come to terms with both the good news 
and the bad in their experience.
Family systems concepts and other cultural sensibilities inform the interpersonal pro-
cess approach. In particular, they help us identify the problematic interaction patterns 
that clients are enacting with the therapist and others, and help both therapists and clients 
understand the familial and cultural context that shaped many current problems. This 
awareness empowers clients to stop reenacting problematic familial roles with others in 
their current lives without breaking off important, but conflicted, familial relationships.
Developmental Experience Helps Therapists Understand Clients. Let’s pause 
here for a moment to appreciate two reasons why familial experience has such a pro -
found, lifelong impact on the individual. First, the same types of affect-laden interchanges 
are reenacted thousands of times in daily family life. To illustrate, suppose a caregiver has 
difficulty responding positively to her child’s success experiences because of her own de-
pression, envy, or competitiveness. When the young child enthusiastically seeks this care-
giver’s approval for an accomplishment, the caregiver may ignore the child, change the 
topic, compare the child’s achievement unfavorably with a sibling’s greater accomplish-
ment, turn away and look vaguely sad or hurt, or take the success away from the child by 
making it her own. The same type of caregiver response usually occurs whenever the child 
enthusiastically shows the caregiver a drawing, makes a new friend, wins a race at school, 
or earns a star from her teacher. This transactional pattern becomes a powerful source of 
learning when it continues over a period of years or even decades. As an adult, this child 
is likely to feel conflicted when, for example, she completes her degree, takes pleasure in a 
promotion at work, or even enjoys her marriage or has good friends who are appreciating 
her. In this way, the most significant and enduring problems in people’s lives develop from 
these habitual response patterns. Contrary to popular belief and portrayals in movies, 
long-standing symptoms and problems are shaped far more by repetitive family transac -
tional patterns (strain trauma) than by isolated traumatic events (shock trauma) (Kerig/uni00A0& 
Wenar, 2005). This represents a paradigm shift for many therapists-in-training, who are 
beginning to learn to listen for patterns and themes in daily interaction, rather than key -
ing on crisis events. 
Second, the impact of these repetitive transactions is magnified because of the inten -
sity of the feelings involved. Attachment figures are the pillars of the child’s universe, and 
children depend on them with a life-and-death intensity. These repetitive transactional 
patterns have been reenacted in highly charged, affective relationships with the most 
important people in one’s life. The child in the preceding example may well feel a desper-
ate need to find some way to try and win the caregivers’ approval yet simultaneously feel 
increasing anxiety about trying to succeed or approaching the non-affirming caregiver. 
Thus, our sense of self in relation to others is learned in the family of origin and, in many 
ways, will carry over to adulthood.
In sum, family interaction patterns may be hurtful and frustrating, validating and 
encouraging, or, commonly, a mixture of the two. For better or worse, these repetitive 
patterns of family interaction, roles, and relationships are internalized and become the 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

THE INTERPERSONAL PROROR CESS APPROPPROPPR ACH   33
foundation of our sense of self and the social world. Of course, other factors are influen-
tial as well. Familial relationships are molded within a broader cultural context that can 
affirm or repudiate caregivers’ responses.
Familial experience provides our first, most long-lasting, and affectively charged 
model for what goes on in close relationships. It will figure significantly in the individu -
al’s choice of marital partner and career, in how adult offspring will, in turn, raise their 
own children, and in many of the other enduring problems and satisfactions of adult life. 
Although family-of-origin influences are profound, problematic rules, roles, and commu-
nication patterns can be relearned. Change is indeed possible, although often not easy, 
and it occurs in part through the relational process of experiential relearning , which we 
have begun to consider.
CLOSING
Student therapists reading this book need to have realistic expectations for themselves. 
New therapists who are seeing their first clients are going to find many practical guide -
lines to help them in their initial work with clients. However, more information is pre -
sented here than a new clinician can fully integrate and apply. The concepts presented in 
the interpersonal process approach are easy to say but challenging to master. New thera-
pists will be able to incorporate these concepts into their practice—but are encouraged to 
do so gradually, and at their own pace. Especially during their first year of seeing clients, 
some may begin to feel that the more they learn, the less they know. With more experience 
and confidence, however, second-year students often begin to find that they are effectively 
employing many of these concepts with their clients. Typically, trainees are able to make 
these process-oriented concepts their own and apply them easily and naturally with their 
clients, in two or three years. Because it is going to take some time to learn how to work 
in this way, the best approach is to be patient with yourself and enjoy the learning.
In closing, new therapists are encouraged to be themselves with clients rather than 
trying to fulfill the role of a therapist. Perhaps Kahn says it best:
When all is said and done, nothing in our work may be more important than our willingness 
to bring as much of ourselves as possible to the therapeutic session…. One of the great 
satisfactions of this work comes at the moment students realize that when they enter the 
consulting room, they don’t need to don a therapist mask, a therapist voice, a therapist 
posture, and a therapist vocabulary. They can discard those accouterments because they have 
much, much more than that to give their clients (1997, p. 163).
We turn next to beginning the initial session and using empathic understanding to 
establish a working alliance.
CHAPTER EXERCISE
We invite you to write out your response to the following Self-Reflection question: As 
you begin seeing clients, you may be concerned about your ability to help others (e.g., 
“I’m worried that I don’t know enough to help my clients”). At this point in your clini -
cal training, what is the primary source of anxiety evoked in you by seeing clients? Try to 
be specific about your concerns. Are you, for example, not sure how to proceed or what 
your role is in the counseling session? Are you concerned that your own unresolved issues 
may interfere with your ability to be helpful, you will “take your client’s problems home 
with you,” or be too affected by their feelings? Are you worried about somehow doing 
something wrong that will hurt your client or of making “mistakes” and disappointing 
your supervisor?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

34  CHAPTER /one.alt
SUGGESTED READING
Student therapists begin their clinical training with different levels of experience. Less 
experienced readers may wish to read Clara Hill’s (2014) text, Helping Skills: Facilitating 
Exploration, Insight and Action, 4/e. This practical text provides new therapists with 
the basic helping skills they need for responding to their clients, such as active listening, 
reflecting, exploration, reframing, communicating empathy and so forth. See especially 
Chapters 6–14.
Visit CengageBrain.com for a variety of study tools and useful resources such as interactive 
exercises, flashcards, and quizzes. Also included with this chapter is a video demonstration 
by the authors showing how therapists can make process comments effectively and role-
play a supervision session with a new therapist struggling with performance anxieties.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

35
PART
II
R/e.sc/s.sc/p.sc/o.sc/n.sc/d.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc /t.sc/o.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc
CHAPTER TWO
Establishing a Working Alliance
CHAPTER THREE
Honoring the Client’s Resistance
CHAPTER FOUR
An Internal Focus for Change
CHAPTER FIVE
Helping Clients with Their Feelings
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

37
CHAPTER 2
Establishing a Working 
Alliance
CONCEPTUAL OVERVIEW
Therapy is a profession based on trust. Clients enter treatment with a need: They are 
often in pain and asking for help with something they have not been able to resolve on 
their own. A trustworthy response is to respect clients’ requests for help by respond -
ing nonjudgmentally—with compassion and empathic understanding— to their concerns. 
Yet to be most effective, the therapist also wants to respond in a way that helps clients 
achieve a greater sense of their own agency or voice. That is, the goal is not only to 
resolve specific situational problems but to do so in a way that leaves clients empowered 
with a greater sense of their own ability to manage the situations and stressors that are 
likely to cause problems in the future. Following Erik Erikson (1968), crisis provides an 
opportunity for growth. The Interpersonal Process approach aims to help clients resolve 
their presenting problems in a way that also leaves them with a greater sense of their own 
personal power—reducing their vulnerability to anxiety and depression. 
Clients cannot attain these twin goals of resolving problems and achieving a greater 
sense of self-efficacy in a hierarchical or one-up/one-down therapeutic relationship. To 
become empowered, clients need to share ownership of the change process and be active 
participants who work collaboratively with the therapist, rather than being passively 
“cured” or told what to do. Clients need help from a responsive and actively engaged ally. 
Thus, this chapter presents a model for a collaborative relationship or Working Alliance
that accepts the client’s need for understanding and guidance while equally encouraging 
the client’s own initiative and responsibility. As highlighted by the work on Motivational 
Interviewing (see Miller & Rose, 2009) and the extensive research on the working alli -
ance (Baldwin et al., 2009), a collaborative engagement between therapist and client is an 
essential component of therapy—contributing to the client’s motivation and commitment 
to change and enhancing the overall effectiveness of treatment.
Let’s look at what researchers find predicts successful psychotherapy outcome. 
Although researchers have tried long and hard, they have not been able to find con -
sistent empirical support for the long-term superiority of any one treatment approach 
over another (Lambert & Barley, 2002; Norcross, 2010; Norcross & Lambert, 2014). In 
contrast, researchers consistently have found strong evidence of great variability in the 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

38  CHAPTER 2
effectiveness of individual therapists within each treatment approach (Wampold, 2011). 
That is, greater differences in treatment effectiveness are found between therapists of the 
same theoretical orientation (within-group differences) than between groups of differ -
ing orientation (e.g., interpersonal versus cognitive behavioral orientations). Arguably, 
the strongest finding in the psychotherapy outcome literature is that the most common 
feature of these effective therapists across differing theoretical approaches is the thera -
pist’s ability to establish a strong working allianceearly in treatment (Safran et al., 2009; 
Horvath & Bedi, 2002). Indeed, even when manual-based treatments are used and thera-
pists are supposedly doing the exact same things with their clients, therapist effects on 
outcome are large (Malik et al., 2003). Thus, this chapter explores how therapists can use 
empathic understanding to help establish a strong working alliance, and then use process 
comments to restore it when the misunderstandings and problems that inevitably occur 
rupture the alliance.
THE WORKING ALLIANCE
At each successive stage of treatment, therapists have a different overarching goal to 
guide their interventions. In the first stage, the therapist’s principal goal is to establish a 
working alliance with the client. A working alliance is established when clients perceive 
the therapist as a capable and trustworthy ally in their personal struggles—someone who 
is interested in, and capable of, helping them with their problems. To achieve this cred -
ibility with clients and become someone who matters to them, the therapist’s intention is 
to consistently communicate that he or she has empathy (Nienhus, 2014) and:
 /uni25CFgrasps their predicament and recognizes their distress;
 /uni25CFfeels with them and is empathic to their pain;
 /uni25CFis an ally on their side who has their best interests at heart;
 /uni25CFhas an abiding commitment to help them through this predicament.
The concept of the working alliance originally was developed by Ralph Greenson (1967). 
Subsequently, Bordin (1979) and others clarified that there are three separate but inter -
related components in all therapeutic relationships: the Real Relationship (Gelso, 2011); 
Transference and Countertransference ; and if that can be done easily. the Working Alli-
ance that impact outcome (Friedlander et al, 2011; Shirk & Carver, 2011).
Researchers have defined the working alliance as a collaborative process whereby 
both client and therapist:
(1) agree on what’s wrong—what the problem is, and share the same therapeutic goals;
(2) collaborate and agree about the ways to go about meeting these goals; and 
(3) develop a collaborative relationship based on trust, acceptance, and competence. 
Of these three components, Horvath (2006) reports that the relationship compo -
nent—connection or feeling between the therapist and client—is most important and 
accounts for most of the variance in treatment outcome. In addition to the working alli -
ance, researchers also find strong evidence for the impact of therapeutic presence and a 
collaborative relationship on treatment outcome (Fluckiger et al., 2012; Greenberg, 2014; 
Hersoug, Hoglend, Gabbard & Lorentzen, 2013; Horvarth et al., 2011). The therapist’s 
ability to establish a successful working alliance in the initial sessions has emerged as a 
strong predictor of effective treatment outcomes in both short- and longer-term treat -
ment. A robust ingredient common to all psychotherapies, the working alliance is cor -
related with successful outcomes across a wide range of clients’ symptoms and problems, 
and across differing approaches and theoretical orientations (Horvath & Bedi, 2002; 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  39
Horvath, Del Re, Fluckiger & Symonds, 2011). Although present in some form in almost 
every theoretical orientation, the working alliance is most closely linked to Carl Rogers’s 
core conditions of genuineness or congruence , positive regard or acceptance, and espe -
cially, accurate empathy (Rogers, 1957).
A strong working alliance that predicts successful treatment outcomes develops only 
when the client feels safe with, and understood by, the therapist. Clients develop this 
sense of security when therapists are emotionally present and empathically engaged, and 
respond genuinely to clients in non-judgmental and validating ways (Geller & Greenberg, 
2012). New therapists’ ability to develop and apply these relational skills with their cli -
ents will shape their effectiveness more than the theoretical orientation they eventually 
adopt (Wampold, 2011). In the next section, and throughout the chapters ahead, we will 
try to clarify and illustrate how therapists can apply these constructs in the hour with 
their clients. Let’s turn now to collaboration: long established as an important aspect of 
therapeutic relationships (Horvarth & Greenberg, 1994b).
C/o.sc/l.sc/l.sc/a.sc/b.sc/o.sc/r.sc/a.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc: A/n.sc A/l.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/n.sc/a.sc/t.sc/i.sc/v.sc/e.sc /t.sc/o.sc D/i.sc/r.sc/e.sc/c.sc/t.sc/i.sc/v.sc/e.sc  
/a.sc/n.sc/d.sc N/o.sc/n.sc-D/i.sc/r.sc/e.sc/c.sc/t.sc/i.sc/v.sc/e.sc S/t.sc/y.sc/l.sc/e.sc/s.sc
One of the best ways for therapists to establish a strong working alliance with clients is to 
collaborate with them. In the initial sessions, the therapist’s primary aim is to give clients the 
experience of working together in partnership. If a collaborative relationship is maintained 
throughout treatment, this interpersonal process will go a long way toward our twin goals 
of helping clients resolve their presenting problems and achieve a greater sense of their own 
self-efficacy. Thinking of the working alliance as a collaborative partnership, therapy is not 
something therapists “do” to clients, it is a shared interaction that requires the participation 
of both parties in order to succeed (Aron, 1996). In their Motivational Interviewing 
approach, Miller and Rollnick (2013) contrasted two counseling styles. Counselors 
who acted as experts focused on persuading clients to change, and actively confronted 
clients’ reluctance to change, actually increased clients’ resistance to change. In contrast, 
collaborative counselors who focused instead on understanding clients’ perspectives through 
empathy, drawing out and evoking the clients’ own concerns or motivations to change, and 
then joined clients in exploring actions they might want to take, had better outcomes.
How does a beginning therapist go about fostering this collaborative process? At 
the outset, the therapist can ask clients what they know about counseling, explore their 
expectations of the therapist and the treatment process, and invite their thoughts and sug-
gestions about how the therapist and client could best work together. When clients have 
been in treatment before, it is necessary to ask what was helpful and what wasn’t. This is 
especially important if clients previously dropped out of treatment prematurely, felt they 
didn’t change, or experienced problems or difficulties with the therapist that were not dis-
cussed or resolved. When therapists ask clients why they dropped out or what they didn’t 
like about previous treatment, they often respond in one of two ways:
CLI
E
N
T
:
 She was a nice person and I liked going to see her in the beginning. But she didn’t say 
very much—she was pretty quiet and I never really knew what she was thinking. I guess I 
needed more input or feedback because, after a while, I realized that not much was changing 
for me. I did feel kind of bad about stopping though.
OR
CLI
E
N
T
:
 The therapist didn’t listen to me very well. Sometimes it almost seemed like he wanted to 
start telling me what to do before he even really heard what was wrong. I just stopped feeling 
like going.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

40  CHAPTER 2
Let’s look at how both of these directive and non-directive styles often fail. A widely 
held misconception among clients is that the therapist is a doctor who will prescribe their 
route to mental health. Often, the therapist is perceived as simply telling the client what 
to do. Instead, it is the therapist’s job to help clients understand the therapy process and 
actively engage clients so they become partners or collaborators. The research supports 
this collaborative stance and finds better client outcomes when working with therapists 
who promote rapport, instill hope, and encourage change talk (i.e., who are collabora -
tive and are more active but not directive) (Miller & Rollnick 2013; Miller & Rose, 
2009; Moyers et al., 2007). Therapists can engage the client collaboratively by assessing 
together:
 /uni25CFthe issues and concerns that are most important—what’s most painful or distressing 
right now;
 /uni25CFwhat the client and others have done in the past that has been helpful and what has 
not been helpful;
 /uni25CFshared treatment goals—brainstorming and sorting through together what’s really 
wrong, what they would like to be able to change, and how they can best work 
toward those goals.
Therapists may also explain that, even though the client has not been able to change 
on his or her own, the therapist will be an active partner and the client’s willingness to 
work with the therapist to understand problems and explore solutions will be essential. 
Unless the therapist and client discuss how they will work together, a hierarchical doc -
tor-patient or teacher-student relationship is more likely to develop, which undermines 
the client’s self-efficacy and fosters dependency. As part of educating the client about the 
treatment process, especially for clients from a family or culture that is hierarchically 
structured, actively inviting partnership and collaboration becomes an even more impor -
tant treatment process. For example,
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Serena, tell me your thoughts and concerns about both sides of this choice. What is 
the good news and bad news if you decide to stay with him, and what are the advantages and 
disadvantages for you if you choose to leave?
A one-up/one-down relationship brings with it a number of problems. As we would 
expect from client response specificity, a doctor-patient relationship may work well with 
some clients in the short run. Based on early maladaptive schemas and developmental 
experiences, many clients who enter treatment believe they have to be compliant in close compliant in close compliant
relationships. Regardless of what the therapist says about collaborative relationships, 
these clients still believe that the therapist, like others in their lives (such as Serena’s cur-these clients still believe that the therapist, like others in their lives (such as Serena’s cur-these clients still believe that the therapist, like others in their lives (such as Serena’s cur
rent boyfriend), actually wants them to just “go along” and follow the therapist’s lead. 
Such clients will passively follow the therapist early in treatment and, commonly, even 
go so far as to actively seek direction from the therapist (e.g., Client : “What do you 
think I should do? ”). However, this compliance will ultimately evoke shame over being 
controlled and anger toward the therapist, just as it does in other relationships. Although 
most clients will not recognize or understand what is transpiring, this faulty interpersonal 
process will prevent them from utilizing the therapist’s help, making progress on their 
problems, or even remaining in treatment. Even if clients don’t have compliance issues , 
they remain dependent on the therapist if this hierarchical mode is enacted. They will not 
be able to gain a greater sense of their own personal power as long as they hold the dys -
functional belief that the source of adequacy or responsibility for success resides with the 
therapist, rather than in themselves. Let’s explore this further.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  41
So, if the interpersonal process approach isn’t directive, is it non-directive instead? 
No. Many clients bring cognitive schemas to the treatment setting that do not encom -
pass collaborative relationships or mutuality, and these clients may insist that the thera -
pist assume a directive or leadership role in the beginning. For example, if clients bring 
to therapy an authoritarian upbringing and hierarchical schemas for relationships, then 
it would be fruitless to insist that they go along with a more egalitarian process. They 
have not experienced this in the past, and many have been punished for acting stronger, 
speaking up and having their own mind, or being more assertive and independent. Thus 
the therapist can be flexible, meet the client on his or her terms, and accept the client’s 
request to provide more direction or advice—sometimes this is all the client can do in the 
beginning. At the same time, however, the therapist can start the change process by giving 
this client overtly spoken permission to initiate, and by enthusiastically joining this client 
whenever he or she does speak up or initiate. For example,
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 That sounds like an important issue for us to work with, Sue, I like what you’re 
bringing up. What’s the best way for us to go further with this—what comes to mind as you 
bring this up?
The therapist can also find others ways to actively engage the client in a more collab-
orative treatment process. For example,
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Tell me about your strengths and successes, John. When you’ve had this problem in 
the past, what have you done, or how have others responded, that was helpful?
In particular, the therapist can also change this unwanted, hierarchical relational pat-
tern that is causing problems with others by using process comments to begin talking 
with the client about how they are interacting together. For example, if the client seems 
to be rejecting the advice and direction he has just elicited from the therapist—as often 
occurs—the therapist can begin to talk with the client about their current interaction or 
interpersonal process:
THE
R
AP
R
AP
R
 IS
T
:
 I’m a little confused here, John, let’s try to figure this out together. You keep asking me 
what to do, but, whenever I suggest something, you say “Yes, but…” I’m wondering if one part 
of you feels like you are supposed to go along with what I say, but another healthier part of you 
doesn’t want to be told what to do. What do you think might be going on between us here?
Whereas a directive stance may work in the short run, a purely non-directive approach 
will often sputter right from the start. Understandably, most clients feel frustrated when 
their requests for help or direction are merely reflected back (the “hot potato” game). 
A negative cycle may ensue: The client becomes increasingly frustrated and seeks some 
direction from the therapist, who may further eschew this role and talk about inner direc-
tion and finding one’s own answers. This, in turn, further frustrates the client, who may 
not feel that he or she has the answer to anything at that moment, and only sees the 
therapist’s attempts to be non-directive as evasive.
Many clients drop out of therapy prematurely because therapists were too quiet, hesi-
tant to say what they were observing, share what they were thinking, ask further about 
what seemed important or didn’t quite make sense to them, and so forth. As we saw in 
Chapter 1, therapists’ concerns about making mistakes often inhibit them in this way 
and prevent them from becoming more actively involved and responsive—as most clients 
need and want. Therapists need to be an engaging presence in the relationship—so clients 
can feel they have a helpful collaborator with them in the room. If therapists want to 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

42  CHAPTER 2
adopt an active stance toward the client, and not be passive or inhibited in the therapeutic 
relationship, how can they do so without taking over and being directive? To illustrate 
this active but not directive stance, therapists can respond in these ways:
 /uni25CFProvide feedback about the relational or cognitive patterns they observe (for example: 
“As I listen to you, it often sounds as if you are working hard to take care of 
everybody else. That leaves me wondering who meets your needs?”);
 /uni25CFHelp clients consider alternative frames of reference and consider situations from new 
perspectives that expand their schemas (for example: “I can see why you didn’t like 
that—what do you think her intentions might have been when she said that to you?”);
 /uni25CFOffer empathic understanding of the client’s feelings and validate their experiences 
(for example: “I see why you felt so unimportant there—your feelings were being 
minimized. It’s painful to be told you are overreacting—when your needs actually 
are being dismissed as insignificant.”);
 /uni25CFProvide interpersonal feedback (for example: “James, you’re speaking to me in a 
really loud harsh voice right now. I’m wondering if others have ever given you this 
feedback before? How do others usually respond when you talk this way?”);
 /uni25CFUse process comments to make the current interaction overt and utilize the thera-
peutic relationship as a social learning laboratory (for example: “You just asked 
me a question, Tina, and then interrupted me as I was answering. That’s happened 
a couple of times, and I’m wondering what might be going on inside for you when 
that happens. Any ideas?”);
 /uni25CFCheck out the client’s reactions toward the therapist (for example: “You just took 
the risk of sharing some sensitive information with me, and I wonder if that could 
make it harder for you to come back to see me next week?”). 
We will further illustrate this balanced therapeutic stance that is active, responsive, 
and engaging—yet cannot accurately be characterized as directive or non-directive. This 
middle ground we are introducing contains both a following or reflective therapeutic 
mode, and at other times shifts to a guiding mode, where the therapist is actively helping 
the client move forward. This balance or integration of directive and non-directive styles 
is skillfully demonstrated in two exceptional books: Miller and Rollnick’s Motivational 
Interviewing (2013) and in Greenberg’s Emotion- focused Therapy (2002). Most begin-
ning counselors have not been exposed to this balanced approach.
New therapists often lose clients in their first practicum because of their own 
inactivity or lack of responsiveness, and report feeling afraid of “making a mistake” or 
feeling too worried or preoccupied about “what to do.” More subtly, new therapists’ self-
consciousness or inhibition may be prompted by their own concerns about acting more 
strongly and expressing their own thoughts and observations—in other words, having their 
own voice in the hour. Others hold themselves back because they feel apprehension about 
becoming someone important to the client and accepting the responsibility of trying to 
have an impact on the client’s life. For these and other reasons that we have already begun 
to explore, new therapists often are painfully concerned about doing something wrong 
and, as a result, become passive, quiet or emotionally distant and lose the opportunity to 
have an impact. This is unfortunate, because clients benefit from active engagement with 
their therapists. Further, clients are less likely to drop out if their therapist engages in role 
induction and provides education about the therapy process (Reis & Brown, 2006). For 
now, it is important to recognize clients do need direction at times—especially when they 
are in crisis (James & Guilliland, 2000). However, the therapist can provide guidelines for 
how to proceed without falling back on a hierarchical or one-up/one-down relationship. 
How can this best be accomplished? Beginning with the initial interview, the therapist 
can make an overt bid to establish a collaborative relationship in which the therapist and 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  43
client work together to resolve the client ’s problems . For example, this stance may be 
conveyed by the following overture: 
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Let’s work together and see if we can figure out what’s been going wrong. Tell me 
your thoughts about what the problem has been, and I’ll follow along and join in.
CLI
E
N
T
:
 I’m not sure where to begin with all of this.
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 It sounds like there’s been a lot going on. Out of all the things that have been hap-
pening, what’s been the hardest thing for you?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Well, I guess that would be my wife and I. We’re not getting along very well anymore, 
and I guess I’m worried about that.
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 “Worried.” Tell me more about that feeling…
The therapist is trying to communicate, in words and in actions, that he or she will be 
an active and responsive ally. The therapist needs to actively work to create a collabora -
tive partnership where clients are encouraged to shape the treatment agenda by articulat-
ing the concerns that are most important to them and contribute their own ideas about 
the problems. The therapist shows interest in the client’s perspective and input by saying 
things like:
“What was your intention when you responded that way?”
“What do you think she was thinking when she said that?”
“What do you understand her to mean by that?”
When actively invited to participate, clients will begin to experience that their input is 
listened to, valued, and incorporated—essential as so many clients enter treatment feeling 
disempowered and disconnected. Creating a working partnership is a treatment goal that 
establishes a new, middle ground of shared control in the therapist-client relationship. 
This balanced therapeutic stance is active, responsive, and engaging—but still collabora -
tive. There is a spacious middle ground here between the polarized positions of prescrip -
tively taking charge versus passively following the client’s lead.
For many clients, this collaborative partnership, in itself, provides a Corrective Emo-
tional Experience (Gostas, Wyberg, Neander & Kjellin, 2013; Wampold, 2010). This 
interpersonal process is a new way of interacting that many clients have not experienced 
in other important relationships. This will challenge and expand clients’ early maladap -
tive schemas, and provide a practical role model to help them see how they can begin 
to respond differently and more effectively in their relationships with others. Regardless 
of the therapist’s theoretical orientation or techniques, one of the most important deter -
minants of treatment outcome is whether the therapist and client can continue this pro -
cess of collaboration. Let’s look further at ways to work collaboratively so therapists can 
begin facilitating a strong working alliance right away—even in the initial session.
C/o.sc/l.sc/l.sc/a.sc/b.sc/o.sc/r.sc/a.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc B/e.sc/g.sc/i.sc/n.sc/s.sc /w.sc/i.sc/t.sc/h.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc I/n.sc/i.sc/t.sc/i.sc/a.sc/l.sc I/n.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/v.sc/i.sc/e.sc/w.sc
One of the most important concerns for new therapists is whether their clients will return 
after the first session and remain in treatment. Many clients do indeed drop out after the 
first session(s) (Garfield, 1994; Reis & Brown, 2006), and such experiences exacerbate 
new therapists’ concerns about their own adequacy and performance. One of the most 
helpful guidelines for conducting a successful first session is for therapists to initiate a 
collaborative relationship in their initial contact with the client. As we will illustrate, the 
therapist structures the session by providing the client with guidelines and direction for 
what is going to occur in the interview ( role induction) (Henderson 2010; Swift, 2013). 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

44  CHAPTER 2
However, it is essential that the client feels his or her distress and concerns have been 
understood and responded to in a collaborative manner. The therapist’s intention is to 
attend to the issues that the client views as most important. In other words, the therapist is 
actively trying to facilitate clients clarifying what is really wrong, and then joining clients 
in addressing their concerns. Certainly, there will be further ideas about what the problem 
is, but the focus for treatment and ideas about what most needs to change must remain 
closely connected to the client’s personal agenda—his or her subjective experience of what 
the problem is—or we will lose partnership with the client through this empathic failure. 
This process is best accomplished by cultivating an attitude and presence that is respectful, 
warm, open, and alert to all that the client is presenting (Ackerman & Hilsenroth, 2003; 
Greenberg, 2014). With this stance in mind, therapists can help clients begin by offering 
open-ended invitations to talk about the issues or concerns that matter most to them.
THE
R
AP
R
AP
R
 IS
T
:
 What’s the difficulty that brings you to treatment? Help me understand what’s wrong.
CLI
E
N
T
:
 There’s so much going on, it’s not easy to explain.
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Things are complicated. Maybe you can start by telling me about the concerns you 
feel are most pressing or important right now.
This type of inquiry communicates several important things to the client. It ends the 
opening phase of social interaction that occurs as the therapist and client are introduced 
and walk to the interview room. The client realistically knows that most people in life do 
not really want to hear about their problems in depth, so it is important to define this new 
relationship by saying, in effect, this is the right place—and I’m the right person to talk to 
about what’s really wrong, what you are feeling, and what you need. It also tells clients that 
the therapist is someone who is willing to talk directly about their personal problems as 
they experience or perceive them—and is ready to respond to their need for help by listen-
ing. However, it does so in a way that still gives clients the freedom to choose where they 
want to start and leaves them in charge of how much and what they want to disclose. From 
the outset, clients are sharing control of the interview by choosing what they want to talk 
about, yet the therapist is an active participant who has offered some direction for where 
they are heading. This type of collaborative interpersonal process does not occur if the ther-
apist gives the client a more directive cue and begins telling the client what to talk about:
IN
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 When we talked on the phone, you said you were having trouble 
with your partner. What is the problem there?
This type of opening bid may seem benign, but it is not. It is important to commu -
nicate that clients should talk about what they want to talk about and not feel that they 
have to follow the therapist’s agenda. From the start, that is, we want the client to take 
an active role in directing the course of treatment, while still feeling that the therapist is 
participating as a supportive ally. Enacting this interpersonal process in the initial session 
is more important than the content of what is discussed, and it will fundamentally shape 
the course and outcome of treatment.
In most cases, clients will readily accept the therapist’s open-ended invitation and 
begin to share their concerns. The therapist can then follow the client’s lead and begin to 
learn more about this person and his or her difficulties. Therapy is under way when this 
occurs. Before we go on to the next step, however, we need to examine three exceptions in 
which the client does not accept the therapist’s offer to begin:
1) when another therapist has conducted an initial screening interview, 
2) when the supervisor’s presence is felt, and 
3) when the client has conflicts over initiating.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  45
Previous Screening Interview.  If another therapist has previously conducted the 
intake interview, the client may not be so ready to begin.
CLI
E
N
T
:
 (
impatiently
) I’ve already been through all of this in the intake with Dr. Smith. Do I have 
to go over it all again just for you?
OR
CLI
E
N
T
:
 (
hesitantly
) I don’t know how much you already know about me. What has Dr. Smith 
told you about me?
Our initial goal is to develop a working alliance between the therapist and the client. 
In these two examples, the previous intake therapist is a third party who, psychologically, 
is still in the room with them. This is especially problematic for clients who have come 
from families in which a third person was repeatedly triangulated into the marital rela -
tionship, especially when too much conflict was occurring (Kerr & Bowen, 1988). For 
many clients, that is, when parents or other family members became uncomfortable with 
the level conflict or independence/separateness, a third family member would be drawn in 
to distract from the conflict or be a peacemaker (Haley, 1996; Minuchin, Nichols & Lee, 
2006). To keep therapy from reenacting this common but dysfunctional family pattern, 
the therapist and client want to begin their own relationship as a stable dyad. As the fam-
ily therapists teach us, it is important to maintain a dyadic therapeutic relationship that 
does not allow others to disrupt the therapeutic coalition—as so often occurred for many 
clients in their families of origin.
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 I know that you have already spoken with Dr. Smith, and I have learned a little bit 
about you from his intake notes. But just you and I are going to work together from now on, 
and I’d like to hear about you in your own words. It may be a little repetitious for you, but 
this way we can begin together at the same point.
Supervisor’s Presence Is Felt. Triangulation in the therapist-client dyad may also 
occur in the initial therapy sessions for practicum students because of the unseen but 
felt presence of their clinical supervisor. As we will see, this can occur from either the 
therapist’s concerns or from the client’s. Through insecurity, compliance issues, or other 
factors, new therapists may triangulate their supervisors into the therapeutic dyad. For 
example, the therapist might tell the client, “I’ll have to ask my supervisor about that.” 
More commonly, new therapists may silently invoke their supervisors—by wondering 
what they would say or do at a particular point in the session or how the supervisor 
would evaluate the therapist’s performance at that moment. This self-critical monitor -
ing does not facilitate treatment—and it takes the fun out of seeing clients! It diminishes 
both the therapists’ self-confidence and their ability to be emotionally present with the 
client. In particular, it disempowers new therapists by inhibiting them from being them -
selves in the session—from finding their own words, acting on their own ideas and uti -
lizing their own perceptions, listening to their own intuitions, and developing their own 
therapeutic styles. Thus, new therapists are encouraged to trust themselves enough to be 
a person who is simply sharing the life story of another. Supervisory feedback and guid -
ance, though necessary and helpful, usually will be more productive when it is processed 
outside of the therapy hour. 
Although we don’t want the therapist to triangulate the supervisor into the counsel -
ing dyad, clients may be curious or concerned about what the supervisor thinks of them 
or the progress they are making. This is a different situation and requires a therapeutic 
response. This is especially likely when a videotape or audiotape is being used during 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

46  CHAPTER 2
sessions. It can be informative for the therapist to explore clients’ concerns about the 
recording equipment or thoughts about the supervisor—such inquiries usually reveal the 
cognitive schemas or transference distortions they bring to relationships. For example, if 
the therapist asks clients what they imagine the supervisor might be thinking about them, 
clients often reveal key concerns:
 /uni25CFI’m worried that he might be talking about me to other people.
 /uni25CFHe probably thinks I’m a weak person because I’m so anxious about this, you know. 
He doesn’t respect me because I’m so worried about everything all the time.
 /uni25CFShe’s probably bored with me—like everybody else.
 /uni25CFI think she’s probably critical—you know, judging me.
By having the client reveal these problematic schemas or expectations in this way, the 
therapist has the opportunity to highlight, address, and resolve them in treatment. The 
first benefit of this is keeping some clients from dropping out of therapy prematurely. 
Second, it also helps the client begin to change by disconfirming the early maladaptive 
schema as it is playing out in their current interaction, thus providing a CEE. For example:
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 No, I don’t think she’s feeling “critical” or judging you at all. Actually, I think she 
probably feels compassion for what you’ve been coping with all of these years, and respects 
your willingness to come here every week and work so hard on your problems—as you’ve 
been doing.
Third, the therapist can make a process comment and begin making connections and 
working on how the client’s faulty schemas or problematic expectations may be contrib-
uting to problems with the therapist and others. For example:
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 You feel he’s judging you critically. Well, that sure wouldn’t feel very good. I’m 
wondering if there are others in your life right now who might be judging you, or maybe 
you’ve been concerned sometimes that I might be feeling critical of you as well? Can we check 
this out together for a minute? 
Additionally, some clients may be unsure about the trainee’s ability to help them, and 
provocatively challenge or test them. For example:
CLI
E
N
T
:
 So, does your supervisor tell you what to say, or do they let you say what you think sometimes?
THE
R
AP
R
AP
R
 IS
T
:
 I consult with a supervisor, but I have my own mind and will say what I think and believe.
Finally, many clients grew up parentified—taking care of the emotional needs of their 
caregiver at the expense of their own. Continuing to live out this familial role, these cli -
ents often will try to protect or take care of the student therapist as well. In order to make 
the therapist feel competent or look good to the supervisor, they may try extra hard to 
improve in treatment, talk about positive changes they are making and minimize areas 
that are not improving, express their appreciation for how helpful or understanding the 
therapist is being, and so forth. Following the primary theme of this text, this problematic 
but common reenactment, if not addressed and resolved in the therapeutic relationship, 
will prevent clients from changing this caretaking role with others in their everyday lives. 
In all of these ways, clients make progress in treatment when they can talk through with 
the therapist such concerns and ensure that the therapeutic relationship does not sub -
tly reenact long-standing but unwanted relational patterns. In sum, whenever therapists 
sense the psychological presence of a third party in the room, they are encouraged to 
make this presence overt, explore the impact this third-party may be having on their rela-
tionship, and reestablish the therapeutic relationship as a dyad.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  47
Conflicts Over Initiating. There is a second circumstance in which the client does 
not respond to the therapist’s initial open-ended request to begin. The problems that 
some clients bring to treatment involve conflicts over initiating. This client cannot begin 
at the therapist’s invitation to choose where he or she would like to begin. By asking these 
clients to begin talking about whatever is most pressing or important for them, the thera-
pist has inadvertently presented them with their central or core problem. It is difficult—
and often highly anxiety arousing—for this client to decide what to talk about, take the 
first step and initiate any activity, or to share responsibility for the course or direction of 
treatment. Recalling Client Response Specificity, a therapist—with the very best of inten -
tions—who non-directively waits for the client to lead places an immobilizing demand 
on this client.
On the other hand, a directive therapist who takes charge and begins the session 
by telling this client where to begin or what to talk about is often replaying the same 
unwanted scenario the client has experienced with others. Whether communicated in a 
genuinely friendly tone, or impatiently after waiting awkwardly for a while to get started, 
the therapist—like others in the client’s life—is again telling him or her what to do. Thus, 
treatment stalls right from the start if the client has problems with initiative and the ther-
apist responds in either a directive or non-directive manner. What can the therapist do 
instead with this inhibited client? One of the best ways to find this more effective middle 
ground between directive and non-directive extremes, and to establish a more collabora -
tive relationship, is to make a process comment, such as wondering aloud or asking about 
what may be occurring at that moment.
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 It seems like it’s hard for you to get started. Maybe we can begin together right 
there. Is it often hard for you to begin, or is there something about me or this situation in par
-
ticular that is difficult for you?
By first identifying this as a problem, and then encouraging the client to explore it, 
the therapist has offered the client a focus and assisted the client in moving forward. 
However, the therapist has provided this focus without taking over and telling the client 
what to do, which would only reenact the familiar but unwanted relational pattern. The 
therapist’s open-ended inquiry is supportive, in that it responds to the client’s immediate 
concern. However, the client can take this issue of initiating wherever he or she wants, 
and is sharing responsibility for the direction of treatment. This type of response pro -
vides a new opportunity for clients to explore their problems in a supportive relational 
context. Our first goal is met as the client experiences a collaborative interaction with 
the therapist, rather than merely discussing the need to work together—which usually 
doesn’t take the client very far. In contrast, such a new, collaborative experience from 
the outset often engenders hope about the therapist, the therapeutic relationship, and the 
possibility of change.
In keeping with Client Response Specificity, it will be more challenging for some cul-
tural groups to engage initially because family structure or culture endorses a more hier -
archical teacher-student (therapist-directed) interaction. Age, race, economic class, gender, 
religion, and other issues of diversity need to be considered. For some, it may be seen as 
disrespectful to presume to lead with one’s elders, an educated person, or an authority 
figure such as a therapist. Therapists can best respond to such concerns by acknowledg -
ing differences and inviting clients to express or explore the concerns together. While it is 
always important to ask clients, “What is it like for you to be here?” this question can be 
especially important for clients who come from different cultural backgrounds, especially 
backgrounds where family information is closely guarded and talking about family issues 
with others will often feel disloyal (Sue & Sue, 2012; Vasquez, 2007).
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

48  CHAPTER 2
To illustrate, one 20-year-old Korean client came to treatment—as it turned out, to 
get help for her 12-year-old brother. Her parents had been divorced for two years but 
no one in the family actually knew about the divorce because they went to family events 
“as a family.” However, her father had a separate residence with another woman and her 
brother was acting out both at home and at school. It took her most of the session to 
state her real reason for coming to counseling:
CLI
E
N
T
:
 There are problems in my family but no one knows about them.
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 It is hard to talk about your family to someone you don’t know.
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Yes…
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 What are you most concerned about if you talk to me?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 I’ll be telling a family secret.
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 OK, it doesn’t feel right to talk about a family secret. I’m wondering if there may be 
another side to this: what might be helpful about telling this family secret? 
CLI
E
N
T
:
 I wouldn’t be alone with the secret anymore.
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Yes, family secrets can be a heavy burden, a big load to carry alone. You can decide 
as you get to know me better if you want to share this secret with me. For now, is there any-
thing about your family that feels safe, that doesn’t feel like a secret, that you feel OK talking 
to me about?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Yes, can I just describe them? Like how old they are and where they were born?
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Absolutely. That sounds like a great place to start. I’d like that.
As the client began talking about her family, safety in the therapeutic relationship 
developed. This helped her realize that she also had another safe relationship in her 
family: an aunt. She was then able to use the therapist’s help to reach out to her aunt and 
get this family member to join her to help her brother.
EMPATHIC UNDERSTANDING: THE FOUNDATION FOR 
A WORKING ALLIANCE
As previously discussed, the therapist begins the session by giving the client an open-ended 
invitation to talk about whatever feels most important. Responding to this bid, most 
clients begin to share their concerns with the therapist and clarify the background and 
context of their problems. The therapist’s intention now is to find the subjective meaning 
that each successive vignette holds for the client and grasp what is most significant to the 
client from the client’s point of view. Here, the therapist is striving to have the flexibility 
to de-center, enter into the client’s subjective experience, and capture the core meaning
that this particular issue holds for the client (McClure & Teyber, 2003). The client will 
feel deeply understood when:
1. the therapist repeatedly captures and reflects the most basic feeling, key concern, or 
central meaning in what the client just said; and
2. the therapist can identify a common theme or pattern that links the client’s varying 
concerns into a more coherent narrative—helping the client better make sense of this 
particular issue in the broader context of his or her life, and now that it is recog-
nized or “named,” begin to change it.
These themes are often informed by developmental experiences with early caregiv -
ers and attachment figures and have come to shape the client’s worldview (Levenson, 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  49
1995). As the therapist and client together explore these themes and developmental 
experiences, the Empathic Understanding  that ensues earns credibility with the client. 
Perhaps more than any other component, such Empathic Understanding is the basis for 
establishing the working alliance: Clients feel seen and understood and become more 
engaged with the therapist, invest further in the treatment process, and risk exploring 
their problems more fully (Angus & Kagan, 2007). Let’s explore this pivotal sequence 
more closely.
As used here, empathic understanding connotes a genuine feeling of warmth and con-
cern for the client—and that the client’s distress matters to the therapist (Raskin, 2005). 
It is not a technique but rather a respectful attitude and nonjudgmental stance toward 
the client. This has nothing to do with being friendly or nice. In sharp contrast, empathic 
understanding behaviorally demonstrates to clients that the therapist “gets it” or sees 
them in a way that others generally do not. Like many important concepts we are going 
to explore, the attachment people often capture it best. When therapists can accurately 
discern and grasp their dilemma and articulate or express this understanding, they are 
providing the attuned responsiveness  to contain or soothe the client’s distress (Bowlby, 
1988). Although this is not sufficient to resolve clients’ problems, such empathic under -1988). Although this is not sufficient to resolve clients’ problems, such empathic under -1988). Although this is not sufficient to resolve clients’ problems, such empathic under
standing will often ease clients’ initial distress and, for some, their presenting symptoms 
may even abate. A secure attachment configuration is established, and the therapist’s 
attuned responsiveness helps create the Safe Haven that often begins to relieve the entire 
family of attachment affects:
 /uni25CFAnxiety may diminish from this reassuring emotional contact, where the client no 
longer feels alone.
 /uni25CFDepression may lessen; the experience of being seen and accepted, rather than dis-
missed or judged, engenders hope in the client.
 /uni25CFAnger from frustration over not being seen or feeling invalidated by others may be 
assuaged by the therapist’s attuned responsiveness.
 /uni25CFShame over having emotional needs revealed by entering therapy and asking for help 
may be lessened by the therapist’s empathic, respectful response.
Empathic understanding is the basis for establishing a successful working alliance, 
and a key concept for change in the Interpersonal Process approach. However, researchers 
consistently find that some therapists are significantly more effective than others in pro -
viding the therapeutic skill of empathic understanding (Catley et al., 2006). To illustrate 
some of these studies, Lafferty, Beutler, and Crago (1991) summed results across groups of 
more and less effective therapists from 11 different studies based on the extent of clients’ 
symptom change. They found that clients of less effective therapists felt less understood 
by their therapists, whereas more effective therapists were seen as more empathic by their 
clients. Similarly, Miller and Rollnick (2013) report that the same manualized treatment 
program for Motivational Interviewing had very different treatment outcomes—based on 
therapists who were rated as more or less empathic. 
Empathic understanding is highly challenging for therapists to provide consistently or 
reliably. Again, we are not talking about being nice or friendly—those are good things but 
not at all what we are getting at here. Empathic understanding goes beyond the surface 
and reaches the client’s hidden, needy, or unacceptable self. It is a highly discriminating 
response that requires the therapist to discern closely the key concern or central meaning 
in what the client just said. Here, the therapist accurately:
(1) discerns the client’s thoughts and feelings, and 
(2) effectively communicates his or her understanding of this to the client, engendering 
in the client the feeling, “My therapist really gets me!”
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

50  CHAPTER 2
Many clients cannot enter their own experience deeply—cannot tolerate exploring 
and sharing painful feelings and experiences, without the safety that this deep under -
standing provides. Let’s illustrate what this looks like:
Yolanda was drifting through community college without purpose or direction, and was 
working in a “nowhere” job. She had as beautiful a face as a girl could have but weighed 
nearly 300 pounds. Sometimes a cutter during stressful phases in her life, she would 
“scrape” herself on her arms. Developmentally, Yolanda had been molested by her godfa-
ther as a young girl. When she told her mother about what was occurring, her mother said 
she “didn’t want to hear this.” She made six-year-old Yolanda feel guilty about voicing this 
problem—telling her that it would “cause a lot of problems in the family” if she talked any 
more or to anyone else about it. Confused why her mother wouldn’t help her, and feeling 
painfully alone and “bad” about herself, Yolanda complied and continued to suffer her 
violation silently. Two years later, when now her mother’s boyfriend began “touching” her, 
Yolanda knew it was useless to try and speak up.
Striving to make a connection with this endearing but vulnerable young person, the 
therapist soon felt that she had heard enough to grasp Yolanda’s dilemma and tried to offer 
her empathic understanding:
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Yolanda, you have kept so many painful experiences to yourself—you have been 
so alone with them. I hear you talk about how much you hate how you look, especially your 
weight. Is there anything about being heavy that makes sense to you now?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 What do you mean?
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 What happens when you begin to lose weight?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Guys begin to make remarks, pay attention; I hate that. They’re just gross…
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 So, when you are heavy, what happens to that attention from guys?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 It stops.
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 So I’m wondering, does being heavy make sense to you?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 (
crying
) Ya, I know, it protects me. I guess I always sorta knew but never quite talked 
about it. After my godfather, I got chubby, then my mother’s boyfriend, I got really…(
cries 
harder
), Ya, I guess I gotta deal with this first before I can lose the weight…I did try to tell my 
mom the first time but she just…(
 trails off
)
trails off
)
trails off
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Yes Yolanda, I can see how alone you’ve been with so much. You didn’t cause the 
violation in any way. You were a precious little girl who deserved to be protected. I’m so glad 
you are bringing me in on it.
Therapists wish to treat clients with respect, restrain their rush to judgment, and 
look instead for the life story or context that helps clients make sense of their symptoms 
and problems. As we have just seen with Yolanda, new therapists’ ability to help clients 
will largely depend on their ability to use empathic understanding to establish a strong 
working alliance. The four sections that follow examine different aspects of this key 
concept.
W /a.sc/y.sc/s.sc /i.sc/n.sc W/h.sc/i.sc/c.sc/h.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc D/o.sc N/o.sc/t.sc F/e.sc/e.sc/l.sc U/n.sc/d.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc/t.sc/o.sc/o.sc/d.sc
Many clients are concerned that others do not really listen to them, take them seriously, 
or understand what they are saying. Clients often describe themselves as feeling alone, 
unseen, different, unimportant, or dismissed. Many clients feel this way because their 
subjective experience was not validated in their family of origin. While growing up, most 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  51
clients with significant and enduring problems repeatedly received messages from caregiv-
ers that denied their feelings and invalidated their experience:
 /uni25CFYou shouldn’t feel that way.
 /uni25CFWhy would a silly thing like that make you mad?
 /uni25CFYou can’t possibly be hungry now.
 /uni25CFI’m cold. Put your sweater on.
 /uni25CFHow can you be tired? You’ve hardly done anything.
 /uni25CFYou shouldn’t be upset at your mother. She loves you very much.
 /uni25CFYou don’t really want to do that.
 /uni25CFWe don’t talk about those things.
 /uni25CFWhat’s the matter with you—how could you feel that way!
Or, sometimes, family members simply changed the topic or did not respond when 
the client expressed a certain feeling or concern. As Carl Rogers, Virginia Satir, and Irvin 
Yalom model so effectively, one of the most effective ways therapists can help their clients 
change is to affirm their subjective experience. The pioneering family therapist R. D. Laing 
goes so far as to suggest that people stop feeling “crazy” when their subjective experience 
is validated (Laing & Esterson, 1970).
Consistent invalidation in the client’s family of origin, or misattunement  in attach -
ment terms, has profound, long-lasting consequences. In its severe forms, some authors 
describe it as “soul murder” because clients lose themselves—their sense of self or 
their own voice—when they lose the validity of their own perceptions or experience 
(Schatzman, 1973). Whereas invalidation occurs to some extent in most families, it is per-
vasive in most symptomatic families. For example, in alcoholic, eating disordered, highly 
authoritarian, and abusive families, children repeatedly have experienced invalidation of 
most important experiences in their daily lives (e.g., Caregiver: “Of course he didn’t do 
that. Don’t you ever say anything like that again!” or poignantly, simply change the topic 
or continue as if nothing was said). One of the most serious consequences of such sys -
tematic invalidation is inefficacy or disempowerment. When reality-based feelings and 
perceptions are repeatedly denied, children become incapable of setting limits, saying 
“no,” and refusing to go along with what does not feel right to them. More significantly, 
consistent denial of their experience leaves clients unsure of what has actually happened 
to them and of the subjective meaning that events hold. That is, they lose the ability to 
“have their own mind”—to trust their own intuition, to listen to their own gut feeling 
and know what they know. They no longer trust their own perceptions of what may be 
occurring or making them uncomfortable. Typically, they won’t register that something 
someone said or did bothered them until well after the problematic interaction is over, 
if at all. Denying the validity of their own experience, these clients characteristically say 
to themselves, “Oh, nothing really happened”; “It wasn’t that bad”; or “It doesn’t really 
matter,” when it actually was significant to them. Routinely, they cannot find words to 
communicate their own experience or point of view with any clarity or specificity and, 
even if they can, do not expect others to understand or be interested in what they say 
(Linehan, 1997).
When their subjective experience has been denied repeatedly, clients live confused, 
vulnerable, and anxious—not knowing what they are feeling, what they really like or 
value, or what they want to do. In many dysfunctional families, such invalidation is a per-
vasive, everyday experience that continues throughout childhood and adolescence, and 
often still characterizes how they continue to live. In place of clear feelings and confident 
perceptions, a vague, painful feeling of internal dissonance results. Fortunately, this global 
feeling state can be replaced with clarity and a stronger sense of voice or personal identity 
if the therapist consistently listens to clients with respect, captures what is most central or 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

52  CHAPTER 2
key in what they just said, and validates their experience. When therapists provide such 
reflection and affirmation throughout the course of treatment, they will provide these 
clients with a powerful CEE. Therapists will be better able to grasp the core meaning 
in what the client just said when they relinquish the need for the session to proceed in a 
particular way and, instead, enter the client’s subjective worldview and, together with the 
client, explore and clarify the issues presented. 
Helping clients understand the themes presented within the context of their devel -
opmental life experiences will make the current concerns and issues make sense. Clients 
feel affirmed and empowered when they are listened to intently, taken seriously, and have 
their concerns understood and reflected back with specificity (Miers & White, 2010). 
Although such simple empathy and validation may sound like common or ordinary 
human responses, they are not. Many clients have not had their most important feel -
ings and perceptions validated in their significant relationships—and in turn, they do not 
expect to be seen or understood by the therapist either (Linehan, 1997). Thus, the thera -
pist’s intention is to try to provide this validation consistently. To illustrate, in the follow-
ing reflections, the therapist is not agreeing or disagreeing with the client, but trying to 
capture the emotional meaning or distill the key issue in what the client has just said.
 /uni25CFIt didn’t seem fair to you.
 /uni25CFI’m wondering if you were frightened when he did that?
 /uni25CFIt’s been too much for you, more than you can stand, sometimes.
 /uni25CFIt felt great to be so effective and in charge!
 /uni25CFIt was disappointing; you wanted more than that.
 /uni25CFHere again, are you having to take care of everyone else?
 /uni25CFYes, I hear the quandary you are struggling with there—you are damned if you do 
and damned if you don’t.
Stepping back from unrealistic performance demands, the therapist does not have to 
be an exceptionally perceptive person to understand the client’s experience, and new ther-
apists are reassured that, of course, they will not be accurate all the time. For example, in 
discussing parenting, Winnicott (1965)has a wonderfully reassuring phrase to diminish 
our performance anxieties: Children need only “good enough mothering,” just as clients, 
too, need their therapists only to be “good enough.” What clients need is that therapists 
convey their sincere striving to better understand them and “get” what this experience 
means to them. The therapist’s empathy, genuine concern, and effort to foster a working 
alliance mean more to the client than being “right.” Thus, when therapists feel they do 
not quite understand what the client is saying, they should not feign understanding by 
saying “Yes,” “OK,” or “I know what you mean” when they really don’t. Instead, they 
can acknowledge the uncertainty and ask the client to try to clarify or restate something. 
This will convey that the therapist is not just going through the motions but is trying hard 
to really understand what the client means. This furthers a partnership and becomes an 
opportunity to get more connected to the client. By inviting this clarification, the therapist 
is intervening with a more collaborative approach to empathy. Here is an example of how 
this might sound with a client:
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 That sounded important, Susie, but I didn’t understand it as well as I wanted. Can 
you say that again, or put it differently?
OR
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 As I listen, it sounds as if you feel so discouraged that you just want to give up. Am 
I saying that right—or can you help me say it more accurately?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  53
In both of these examples, the therapist is giving the client an invitation for a dia -
logue and trying to jointly clarify the client ’s meaning with this back-and-forth interac -
tion. This collaborative approach to empathy takes the performance pressure of having 
to be “right” off the therapist, diminishes unwanted concerns about making mistakes or 
being “wrong,” and strengthens the working alliance.
Carl Rogers and other pioneers in client-centered therapy originally highlighted 
the cardinal role of accurate empathy in the change process (Truax & Carkhuff, 1967). 
Unfortunately, empathy came to be regarded as if it were a stable or enduring personal -
ity characteristic of the therapist. Instead of thinking about empathy as a relatively fixed 
personality trait, researchers have found that effective empathy comes from attempts to 
collaboratively understand the client’s experience within an emerging, shared frame of 
reference (Barkham & Shapiro, 1986). That is, measuring across client-centered, cogni -
tive, and dynamic therapists, the therapeutic mode of mutual exploration— characterized 
by active negotiation between therapist and client— is crucial to the client’s experience of 
being understood (Allen, Fonagy & Bateman, 2008). For example,
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 What did he do when you took the risk to say that?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 He just went on talking, as if I hadn’t said anything at all.
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 I’m sorry he wasn’t able to listen better—where did that leave you inside?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 I don’t know…(
pause
)…I hated it.
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Uh-huh, you “hated” it. I can sure see why…like you were invisible or didn’t count?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Yeah, something like that.
THE
R
AP
R
AP
R
 IS
T
:
 Hmm, it sounds like “invisible” doesn’t quite capture it. What would be a better word?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 I’m not sure…(
 pause
) maybe just erased. Yeah, like my whole existence was being erased 
by him!
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 “Erased.” That captures it much better—you say that with a lot of feeling. Tell me 
more about being erased—help me understand what that’s like for you.
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Oh, I hate that feeling more than anything, and it happens over and over again…
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Help me understand why being erased is so significant for you.
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Well, being an African-American woman, you know…I’ve worked so hard to be where I 
am, to earn my place…and…have some dignity…
In this collaborative exploration, the therapist and client work as partners to clarify 
the specific meaning this experience held for her. In this way, accurate empathy is less a 
personality trait or characteristic of the therapist than an interpersonal process character-
ized by mutual exploration and collaboration.
To sum up, therapists intervene by validating their clients’ experience, grasping the 
core messages, and affirming the central meaning in what they relay. Being accurately 
empathic is sometimes misunderstood as merely being nice, friendly, or reassuring. These 
are benevolent, well-intended responses, yet they do not help most clients change. Instead, 
with accurate empathy, we are looking for something more specific and far more potent—
the ability to repeatedly identify what is central and discern what is most important—in 
what the client just said to us. Almost universally, an accurate, empathic understanding 
of clients’ experience and validation of their feelings leaves them with both the feeling of 
being seen or understood, and with the sense of being accepted and not judged.
To reiterate, providing validation  is especially important when working with 
minorities, LBGT clients, physically challenged individuals, those who are economically 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

54  CHAPTER 2
disadvantaged , and others who feel they do not identify with a majority group. These 
clients will bring issues of oppression, prejudice, and injustice into the therapeutic process 
because their personal experiences have often been invalidated by the dominant culture. 
These clients, in particular, will not expect to be heard or understood by the therapist. The 
first step in working with all people is to enter their subjective worldview, listen empathi-
cally, and hear what is important to them—from their point of view (Pedersen et al., 2008). 
C/o.sc/m.sc/m.sc/u.sc/n.sc/i.sc/c.sc/a.sc/t.sc/e.sc U/n.sc/d.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc/t.sc/a.sc/n.sc/d.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc O/v.sc/e.sc/r.sc/t.sc/l.sc/y.sc /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc S/p.sc/e.sc/c.sc/i.sc/f.sc/i.sc/c.sc/a.sc/l.sc/l.sc/y.sc
To engage a client in a working alliance, the therapist listens to the client’s experience, 
finds the feeling and meaning that each successive vignette holds for this client, and accu-
rately reflects back or captures what is most significant or key in the client’s experience. 
Clearly, this is not just a rote parroting of what the client has said (simple reflection). An 
effective reflection is more akin to an accurate interpretation or creative reframing. It 
demonstrates behaviorally that the therapist understands the core message, registers the 
emotional meaning, or distills what is most important from the client’s frame of reference 
(complex reflection). For example, an Asian student, age 19, comes to the student health 
center feeling suicidal because he got an A- on his mid-term. One therapist may respond 
by saying, “You are catastrophizing…the reality of an A- is not that awful .” Alternatively, 
a different therapist would, upon taking into account the client’s life context  (e.g., the 
importance of education in his culture, being seen as a failure if he has a grade below an 
A, etc.), might enter more gently and wonder aloud:
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 So, in your family, anything less than perfection is unacceptable? Am I saying that 
accurately? 
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Yes, my failure brings shame on me and my entire family.
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 I can see what a big problem you are struggling with here—you are telling me you 
want to be a good son and keep your parents’ respect and approval. What goes on, inside of 
you, right now as I try to join you so you are not alone in this painful experience?
Trying to understand the client’s broader developmental/life context makes this seem-
ingly smaller issue hold greater personal weight. Rogers (1975) believed that communi -
cating such understanding in a nonjudgmental way provides a deep acceptance that is a 
prerequisite for meaningful change. New therapists will find that they achieve credibility 
with their clients—that is, prove their competence or ability to help, and strengthen the 
working alliance when they can articulate or demonstrate their understanding in this tan-
gible way.
According to one unfortunate stereotype, a therapist is someone who remains on the 
surface and says superficially, “I hear you,” “I know what you mean,” or “I understand.” 
However, this type of global, undifferentiated response is not effective and, paradoxically, 
often furthers the client’s sense of not being seen or heard. The therapist does not sim -
ply say, “I understand,” but demonstrates that understanding by articulating the central 
meaning of what the client has said. Twenty-four-year-old Susan, with a history of child 
abuse (perpetrated by her maternal grandfather and minimized or denied by family mem-
bers who continued with regular “family gatherings”), struggled with the approaching 
Thanksgiving get-together:
CLI
E
N
T
:
 I wish someone would just tell me what to do…give me guidelines…
THE
R
AP
R
AP
R
 IS
T
:
 Do you have thoughts and feelings about what you would like to do but feel reluctant 
to act on your own wishes?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  55
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Yes…Because I’m not always sure what’s real…I can be convinced that what I think and 
know is wrong…
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 From what you have told me about your family, I can see why this is a struggle…
you have described how they repeatedly invalidated what you experienced and said…it makes 
sense that sorting through what is real and what you know is difficult.
CLI
E
N
T
:
 That’s it! I know what I feel, what has gone on…then, on the outside, it all seems so 
perfect, like this perfect, together family…yet my cousin was also molested. But then they go 
on as though all is OK…I start to feel as though I’m the crazy one, especially when they have 
these family gatherings and Grandpa is treated like this special person…
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 I can see how confusing that would be…
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Yes, like, what’s real?
As we see in this dialogue, therapists show the client they can be helpful when they 
capture and express the specific meaning and validate the client’s experience, rather than 
offering well-intended but vague reassurances. And by checking with the client to see 
if that understanding is accurate, therapists are working collaboratively, which in turn 
strengthens the working alliance. For example, to illustrate this differently:
IN
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Yeah, I know just what you mean—that’s happened to me too.
VERSUS
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Let’s check this out together and see if I’m getting what you’re really 
saying. As soon as you realize that others at work are taking you seriously—listening to your 
ideas and suggestions, you become anxious—worried that you’re going to be dismissed or 
put down. That’s when you get quiet, go along with others’ ideas and stop putting out your 
own, and end up just hating yourself when you leave that meeting. Am I getting that sequence 
right—can you help me say it better?
Let’s look more closely at how trainees can start to put these ideas into practice. In 
the following illustration, we explore a brief case study of a client who initially had the 
unwanted experience of not feeling heard by her therapist, but subsequently felt under -
stood with a second therapist.
While growing up, Marsha did not feel heard or seen by her parents. Her father 
was distant—uncomfortable talking with his adolescent daughter, and believing his wife 
should “handle the children.” Struggling with her own ongoing anxiety and dysthymia, 
her mother too often was critical, angrily demanding, and intrusive. In particular, when -
ever her mother felt or believed something, she expected her children to see it the same 
way—differing points of view were not permitted. For example, if Marsha felt some -
thing that her mother did not feel, her mother would chide her, “That’s ridiculous. What’s 
wrong with you?” By the time she was an adolescent, Marsha was painfully self-con -
scious and insecure. However, growing up with so much invalidation left her confused 
and uncertain about her own subjective experience, such that she didn’t really understand 
why she felt so badly about herself. Sadly, Marsha often thought to herself, “There’s just 
something wrong with me.” Marsha frequently cried alone in her room without really 
understanding what she was so distressed about.
Marsha always thought that everything would get better and be OK when she 
went away to college. To her dismay, though, she found herself becoming even more 
depressed during her first semester away. Frequently, she had to fight back tears over 
seemingly nothing, found it hard to reach out or talk to others, and started gaining 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

56  CHAPTER 2
weight. More insecure and confused about herself than ever, Marsha began seeing a 
counselor at the Student Counseling Center. Although she did not really have words for 
what was wrong, Marsha tried to be a good client and help her therapist understand 
her problems:
MA
RS
HA
:
 I’m not sure what’s wrong with me. Maybe I’m just lonely…but I’ve always had this 
sort of empty feeling inside.
IN
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Do you have any friends? What are your classmates like?
MA
RS
HA
:
 I guess I sort of have friends. My roommate in the dorm is nice.
IN
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 What do you do with your friends—go to the movies, shopping?
MA
RS
HA
:
 Yeah, I do those things. I belong to a foreign language club, too.
IN
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Do you like your friends? You’re new to the university; maybe you 
need some new friends here at school. There are lots of ways to meet new people here…
MA
RS
HA
:
 Well, I’ve had friends, but it’s just hard being with people sometimes. So, maybe I‘m 
lonely, but I don’t know what’s wrong with me. I just keep crying—like a big baby all the time.
IN
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 But you’ve just left your family and come to college. You must miss 
your family and feel lonely. It’s natural to feel lonely when you move away from home. Most 
of the other kids in the dorm feel that way, too. I sure did when I moved away to college.
MA
RS
HA
:
 Oh.
IN
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 This is not unusual at all. You’re going to be just fine once you get 
through this transition.
MA
RS
HA
:
 I hope so. Maybe my family is different, though. In high school, I always thought that 
my family had more problems than my friends’ did. And it seemed like my mom was always 
mad at me for doing something wrong.
IN
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Yeah, but like I said, it’s normal for you to be kind of emotional at 
this time in your life.
MA
RS
HA
:
 It is? But I still feel different from everybody else—like there’s something wrong with me…
IN
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Sure, it’s natural for you to feel different from everybody else. Late 
adolescence, moving away to college—it’s a tough time. You’re going to be just fine. Do you 
have a boyfriend?
MA
RS
HA
:
 Yeah, sort of. I try to tell him what’s wrong, but that never works. And then he gets 
frustrated with me because nothing he suggests helps. I don’t know why I get so depressed a lot 
(
pauses
)…maybe my mother used to yell at me too much…or maybe I’m just “too sensitive”—
that’s what my family always said.
IN
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Do you have trouble eating or sleeping?
MA
RS
HA
:
 No trouble eating, as anybody can see, I’ve gained 12 pounds and look like a pig. I 
wake up at night sometimes—worrying about things that don’t really matter, trying not to 
start crying, wondering what’s wrong with me…
IN
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Are you eating alone? Maybe you should be eating with friends.
MA
RS
HA
:
 (
with resignation
) Maybe that would help.
Marsha could not say exactly why, but she did not like seeing the therapist and, after 
canceling and then missing a few sessions, she did not go back. However, as the semester 
went on, she became more depressed, continued to wonder what was wrong with her, and 
began to struggle in her classes as well. During advising for second semester, a concerned 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  57
professor saw her distress, listened to her disappointing experience in her previous ther -
apy, and encouraged her to go back and try again with another therapist. Reluctantly, 
Marsha agreed to try it when the professor suggested that she could go back, for just one 
session, and if she didn’t like it again, just stop.
Therapy began more slowly this time. Marsha found herself feeling impatient and 
testy with the therapist and was reluctant to share much. She alternately acted blasé and 
then distressed but would never allow the therapist to remain joined with her on the 
same topic for very long. The therapist was not frustrated by her mixed message of come 
closer–go away, however, and was effective at communicating his continuing interest in 
her. After a few weeks, Marsha sensed that this therapist might be different than before 
and began disclosing her feelings again.
MA
RS
HA
:
 I’m just a mess—I don’t know what I’m feeling—or why I keep crying all the time.
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 There are a lot of difficult feelings there, and you can’t sort them out 
yet. Let’s just sit together for a minute, and see if one of them comes to you.
MA
RS
HA
:
 OK, uh, well, I guess I feel sort of anxious and sad and who knows what else.
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Uh huh, several difficult feelings there. Which one is strongest or most 
important for you right now? Can you tell me a little bit about that one?
MA
RS
HA
:
 I don’t know…I just feel anxious…jittery inside—I always have.
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 This anxious and jittery feeling is important—it sounds like it’s been 
hurting you for a long time. Let’s work together and try to get closer to it. Bring me in a little 
more on this— I don’t want you to be alone with it anymore.
MA
RS
HA
:
 (
long pause
) I don’t know what to say…how to begin.
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Sure, it’s hard to get started. Maybe you can just pick an adjective, 
or make some gesture, that will help me see this anxious jitteriness. Or maybe you’ve noticed 
when you start to feel it—who you are with or what’s going on?
MA
RS
HA
:
 I’m just anxious that I’m always doing something wrong and people don’t really like 
or want to be around me. 
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 You feel anxious because you’re doing something wrong, and it feels 
like nobody wants you. This is so painful. As if people don’t like you—and it’s somehow your 
own fault?
MA
RS
HA
:
 (
doesn’t speak; nods and becomes teary; looks at therapist
)
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 (
holding her gaze kindly
) I can see how much you are hurting right 
now as you share this with me. It’s sad that things have happened to make you feel this anx-
ious and unwanted, but I’m honored that you are willing to risk sharing all of this with me.
MA
RS
HA
:
 (
cries harder
) There’s just something wrong with me; there always has been.
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Uh-huh. It’s sad for me to hear you say that—that there’s always been 
“something wrong” with you. Tell me more about what’s been wrong…what’s felt so wrong.
Marsha was heard and felt understood this time. Breaking the old relational pattern, 
she was not crying alone in her room anymore. In subsequent sessions, the therapist con-
tinued to listen well and kept responding to what Marsha thought was most important. 
There were ups and downs, of course, but this empathic understanding forged a work -
ing alliance between them that ultimately allowed Marsha to begin clarifying her own 
thoughts and feelings. As she increasingly found her own voice in this relationship, she 
started to become more assertive, felt more confident and relaxed with others, and her 
lifelong dysthymia diminished.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

58  CHAPTER 2
The concept of understanding the client sounds simple enough—as in, sure, can we 
move on to the next topic now.? After all, the therapist just has to listen carefully, grasp 
the central feelings or core message, and find a way to articulate or reflect this under -
standing to the client. In actual practice, however, demonstrating our understanding in 
this way is not so easy to do. Most of us have been strongly socialized to “hear” in a lim-
ited, superficial way that minimizes the emotional meaning and avoids the interpersonal 
messages embedded in clients’ remarks.
Marsha’s first therapist could not hear what she was really saying and repeatedly 
steered her away from the conflicted feelings and personal concerns she was trying to for-
mulate and communicate. Reflecting her resiliency, however, Marsha kept trying to come 
back to her core message—something’s wrong. By keeping things on the surface and reas-
suring her, in effect trying to talk her out of her feelings and orienting her toward superfi-
cial problem-solving before he really knew what was wrong, the first therapist’s interper-
sonal process reenacted Marsha’s developmental history of not being seen or heard.
Most new therapists are aware that they possess a “third ear”—an ability to hear the 
key issue or core meaning in what people say. However, they usually feel they must avoid 
acknowledging the true meaning of these underlying, and often nonverbal, messages because 
of their emotional content. Therapists can downplay or avoid the emotional message or 
relational statement about you-and-me that’s embedded in the subtext for many reasons:
 /uni25CFFeeling awkward themselves or concerned that they might embarrass the client
 /uni25CFFeeling inadequate or unsure of how to respond if they do go beyond the surface and 
respond to the bigger feeling or issue
 /uni25CFFeeling reluctant to violate cultural norms or familial rules against forthright or 
more direct communication
 /uni25CFFeeling a need to protect or take care of others by shielding them from their own 
pain or distress
 /uni25CFBeing afraid of potential boundary violations or feeling too close to the client if they 
risk real personal engagement
 /uni25CFHaving their own problems or issues activated by entering the client’s pain or distress
As a result, many therapists are adept at switching automatically to a more superficial, 
social level of interaction to avoid the client’s (and sometimes their own) vulnerability. 
This also occurs when clients convey embedded messages about the therapist–client 
relationship that therapists may not want to hear or approach. That is, clients are often 
making covert statements about the therapeutic relationship or indirect references to what 
is going on between them — especially about problems or concerns they are experiencing 
right now in their current interaction with the therapist. Let’s provide an example of both 
an ineffective and an effective response for therapists faced with embedded messages 
about problems in the therapist–client relationship:
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Do therapists who work with clients ever see their own therapists for their own personal 
problems?
IN
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Yeah, they probably do, but let’s get back to what you were just 
saying about…
VERSUS
E
FF
E
C
T
IV
E
 THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Yes, most therapists seek help with their own issues at times. But I’m 
wondering if you may be having a question about me as well, or about something related to 
our work together, that we might talk about? If so, I welcome talking about that—it would 
help our work.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  59
In contrast to her first therapist, Marsha’s second therapist broke the social rules and 
responded directly to her core affective message, “I feel anxious.” As a result, Marsha 
felt understood and responded to. In a small yet significant way, this was a corrective 
emotional experience. The therapist was willing to join meaningfully with her in her 
experience—demonstrating his genuine interest and concern for what was really going 
on for her—which significant others had not been able to do as she was growing up. 
Disconfirming her problematic relational expectations, he did not move away from her 
feelings or try to talk her out of them; in sharp contrast, he genuinely welcomed them and 
actively encouraged her to enter them more fully. When the therapist is able to provide 
such corrective experiences consistently, trust builds as clients learn that their previous, 
early maladaptive schemas do not fit in this relationship—and perhaps this will be true 
for some other relationships as well. Specifically, behavior change begins first as clients 
become more confident in the expectation that the therapist will see and hear them. Then, 
with the therapist actively scaffolding, this new, expanded schema and more flexible way 
of relating is extended to others in clients’ everyday lives. New therapists are encouraged 
to try responding in this more direct, empathic way; use the ability they already possess to 
hear what is most important to the client; and while still being respectful and diplomatic, 
judiciously take the risk of saying what they see and hear . Most student therapists are 
overly inhibited—they hold themselves back too much. We can tentatively wonder 
aloud with the client and share what we are hearing and observing, or what we want to 
ask further about, in this active way without taking over, giving advice, or telling clients 
what to do.
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Gina, you just told me three stories about your boyfriend Robert and I wonder if 
you find anything in common in them. He wants you to stop working and let him take care of 
you. Later, he flirts with another girl in your presence and when you get upset, tells you that 
you are “stupid” and overreacting. Then when you try to remove yourself from this escalating 
argument, he physically blocks your way. Any thoughts about this?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 I feel disrespected and pushed to get angry…
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Disrespected…that makes sense. You have asked him not to flirt and he is doing 
that and calling you “stupid” when you try to address it.
CLI
E
N
T
:
 I hate it when he calls me stupid; it makes me feel like he is better than me.
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 Better than you—can you say more about that?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Like he knows more, or is stronger. You know has more power…
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 More power…that’s a huge word…
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Yes, like when he won’t let me leave when I get mad. I feel so powerless, I just want to 
scream and hit at him but I don’t want to give him a reason to hit me or say, “See why I flirt 
with other girls, they are nicer than you.”
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 You are unable to go someplace else to calm down, but, it also sounds as though 
speaking up for yourself has been difficult—and perhaps not felt safe?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Yes, he starts to yell, calls me names, it can feel a little scary, I don’t want him to lose his 
temper and blame me for it…
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 So you have felt disrespected, and scared, and yet he wants you to quit your job and  So you have felt disrespected, and scared, and yet he wants you to quit your job and 
become financially dependent on him. How does that sound to you as you hear me say it?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Wow, you know, as we talk about it, I start to wonder why I keep going back to him—
why I stay with him? Because he’ll eventually say, “Babe, I’m sorry I called you a bitch,” but it 
will happen again after a while…
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

60  CHAPTER 2
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 There’s a lot going on here that has been hurtful. And I’m also feeling some concern 
for your safety. It has been hard in the past to leave…
CLI
E
N
T
:
 Yes, it has been hard…it helps to talk about it without having to hide it. When I try to 
talk to my mom, she immediately says, “Leave that asshole,” but doesn’t let me sort out what 
I want to do. Yet she’s still with my dad, who uses drugs and has never worked…
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 I’d like to hear all your thoughts…on both sides of this complicated problem. What 
has kept you with him and what might make you not want to be with him? Together, we can 
work out what you want and what’s in your best interest.
CLI
E
N
T
:
 I like that…
 At its best, therapy offers clients an opportunity to be understood more fully than 
they have been in other relationships. When this understanding is offered in the initial 
sessions, clients feel that they are no longer invisible or alone, different or defective, dis -
missed or unimportant, and so forth. At that moment, clients begin to perceive the thera-
pist as someone who is different from many others in their lives, and possibly as someone 
who can help. In other words, hope is engendered when the therapist understands and 
articulates the personal meaning that each successive vignette holds for clients. With this 
goal in mind, let’s look at guidelines to help therapists clarify the central meaning in what 
clients present and learn how to be more accurately empathic.
I/d.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/i.sc/f.sc/y.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc R/e.sc/c.sc/u.sc/r.sc/r.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc T/h.sc/e.sc/m.sc/e.sc/s.sc F/a.sc/c.sc/i.sc/l.sc/i.sc/t.sc/a.sc/t.sc/e.sc/s.sc E/m.sc/p.sc/a.sc/t.sc/h.sc/i.sc/c.sc U/n.sc/d.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc/t.sc/a.sc/n.sc/d.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc
Most clients will not share deeply or risk exploring their vulnerabilities with a therapist 
who does not provide the security that comes from feeling that the therapist understands 
them. One of the best ways to help therapists understand their clients better is to identify 
recurrent patterns and themes in the narratives they relate (Daly & Mallinckrodt, 2009; 
Levenson, 1995; Levenson & Strupp, 1997). Let’s explore pattern recognition closely—it 
will also help us develop a more useful treatment focus.
The therapist’s goals at the beginning of treatment are to:
 /uni25CFSupport clients’ initiative and help them take ownership of the treatment process by 
encouraging them to lead and choose what they feel is most important to discuss
 /uni25CFActively join clients in exploring the concerns they bring up and help them tell their 
story
 /uni25CFIdentify the core message or discern the central meaning in what clients are 
communicating
 /uni25CFDemonstrate this by accurately capturing and reflecting this empathic understanding 
to the client
 /uni25CFBegin identifying the common patterns or themes in the issues presented
Although these basic intervention goals may sound simple, they are not. What’s so 
hard about it? It requires the therapist to give up a great deal of control over the direction 
of therapy and over the timing and content of what the client brings up.  The “letting go” 
of what the client discusses—not knowing what the client is going to say or do next—is 
anxiety-arousing for many. Most student therapists are interpersonally skilled in their 
everyday lives and readily able to subtly take charge and, with good intentions, quietly 
shape or direct many of their social interactions. As student therapists try to cope with 
the anxiety and ambiguity of doing therapy they often fall back on the familiar role of 
“friendship”—which they often have learned to provide easily and successfully. However, 
being a friend is not a good model for how to be with clients. The same social skills that 
may facilitate friendships and other relationships outside of therapy do not work well 
with clients. Subtly leading or shaping where the conversation is going, filling awkward 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  61
moments, keeping the conversation moving or staying on comfortable topics, and having 
our own emotional needs met in a reciprocal manner help friendships but usually limit 
clients’ progress. For example, in treatment the novice therapist is placed in the new and 
far more demanding position of responding to the diverse and unpredictable material that 
the client produces. A therapeutic stance that encourages the client’s initiative and owner-
ship of the treatment process fosters greater agency and self-efficacy in clients. However, 
it also requires the therapist to have the flexibility to be able to:
 /uni25CFRelinquish control over what will occur next in the therapeutic relationship;
 /uni25CFTolerate the ambiguity of not knowing what clients will produce or where the current 
topic will lead; and
 /uni25CFMake sense of the varied and unpredictable material that clients present.
No doubt, this is a tall order. There are two important dimensions to working in this 
way. First, on a personal level, therapists need to “know themselves” (Bromberg, 2006). 
This self-awareness, also emphasized in the multicultural literature (e.g., Sue & Sue, 
2012; Pedersen et al., 2008) will allow them to recognize more fully, when their reactivity 
is evoked, if it is something in their own life or if it is grounded in the client’s experience. 
Supervisors help when they assist therapists differentiate their own experience from that 
of the client. Secondly, one of the best ways to help is to begin tracking recurrent themes 
in the client’s vignettes or stories. Learning to identify patterns will help therapists make 
sense of the client’s experience and better understand what is most important or central 
in the wide-ranging material the client presents. This empathic understanding, in turn, 
provides therapists with the only legitimate control they can have in therapeutic relation-
ships—over their own responding—as opposed to ineffective attempts to subtly direct 
or control the material that clients produce. Additionally, the appropriate or legitimate 
internal controls that come from this understanding will allow therapists to tolerate the 
ambiguity inherent in this work. Thus, our challenge is less to shape or subtly lead where 
clients are going, as occurs so commonly, than it is to follow wherever they lead, and be 
able to collaboratively make sense of whatever concerns they bring to us.
Patterns and Themes Help Us Understand. To illustrate, suppose the client tells 
the therapist about his or her reasons for coming to therapy. As the therapist follows the 
different recollections and descriptions the client chooses to relay, the therapist’s goal is to 
discern an integrating focus for the wide diversity of material the client presents. The best 
way to do this is by identifying the patterns or unifying themes that recur throughout. Typi-
cally, these integrating themes occur in three interrelated domains—let’s take a look at each:
1. Repetitive relational themes or interpersonal patterns.
Terminology varies, but the bedrock of interpersonal and contemporary relational treat -
ment approaches is to identify the interpersonal scenarios that keep reoccurring for the 
client and working with the repetitive relational patterns that weave throughout clients’ 
symptoms and problems. Therapists-in-training are working to develop their pattern recog-
nition abilities—that is, to develop the eyes and ears to recognize the interpersonal themes 
that keep reoccurring throughout the varying narratives the client relates. For example,
They expect so much from me, but no matter how hard I try, it’s never enough. I always 
have to give up what I want in order to be close. It’s a lose-lose situation; go along and do 
what others want—or be alone.
The therapist provides deep and reassuring understanding, and begins the change pro-
cess, by highlighting or naming these relational patterns. This helps clients begin to recog-
nize and anticipate when they are coming into play, and explore new and better ways to 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

62  CHAPTER 2
respond that could change the usual but unwanted scenario. The client’s relational pattern, 
for example, might be to feel controlled by others, let down, or abandoned. Or, perhaps 
the client readily feels criticized and put down, ignored or dismissed as unimportant, or 
even idealized by others. It is compelling for clients when the therapist understands and 
can identify the same interpersonal themes occurring in three different spheres:
In current interactions with others in their daily lives;
In developmental relationships with family members; and
In the current, here-and-now interaction with the therapist.
The therapist’s observations are shared in a tentative manner—so the client can easily 
modify, refine, or even reject them. Exploring them collaboratively in this way, clients feel 
understood in a way they have not in other relationships. As a result they,
1) often develop a more specific awareness of just how these problematic patterns 
typically go; 
2) often begin observing when these familiar but unwanted situations are coming into 
play with others; and 
3) often begin to recognize their participation in or contribution to this interaction 
sequence. For example (client to herself):client to herself):client to herself
“Here I am again. I’m starting to feel that he really doesn’t want to be with me, and I’m 
trying soo hard to figure out what he wants and how to please him. I need to change what 
I’m doing here, and instead start focusing more on what I need.”
For now, let’s go on to identify themes in the cognitive and affective domains—all 
three are equally important and inextricably entwined.
2. Pathogenic beliefs, automatic thoughts, faulty expectations, and schema distortions.
Just as the therapist can better provide empathic understanding by identifying unifying 
themes in interpersonal relations, cognitive patterns and thought processes also provide 
an essential component for accurate understanding and effective intervention (Beck, 
1995; Bjorgunsson & Hart, 2006; Lazarus, Lazarus & Fey, 1993). For example, clients’ 
maladaptive relational patterns are closely associated with their problematic beliefs about 
themselves, inaccurate perceptions of others, and faulty expectations for what is going to 
occur in relationships and in the future. Ellis (1999) suggests that two of the most com -
mon dysfunctional beliefs concern being liked and loved (I must always be loved and 
approved of by the significant people in my life) and being competent (I must always, 
in all situations, demonstrate competence). Working in an integrative cognitive-psycho -
dynamic approach, Weiss (1993) and Silberschatz (2005) highlight pathogenic beliefs
that help to create and sustain the maladaptive relational patterns introduced above. For 
example, regarding clients who feel excessive or unrealistic guilt, the client’s pathogenic 
belief might be:
I am being selfish whenever I say no or do what I want.
Others are hurt by my independence.
I must not enjoy my own success or surpass important others.
Similarly, a pathogenic belief for clients who are prone to feeling shame, or that 
others will ignore or reject them, might be:
I am unimportant and do not matter.
I am inadequate, and if others really know me, they will see that I am lacking or weak.
Others would ignore me if I asked for anything, or resent my needs as selfish and 
demanding.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  63
Therapists-in-training are encouraged to begin listening for faulty beliefs such as 
these. If we attend closely, familiar motifs can be heard across the widely varying vignettes 
that clients relay. When therapists can capture these themes, and collaboratively engage 
the client in identifying and clarifying them, clients will feel understood and find that this 
therapist can help them.
3. Recurrent affective themes or central feelings.
Therapists also can identify unifying themes in clients’ emotional reactions. Recognizing 
and responding to these recurrent feelings can be nothing less than a Gift that thera -
pists offer to their clients (Sue & Zane, 2009). Often, a primary or core affect comes up 
again and again for the client in many different situations (Greenberg, 2002; Greenberg 
& Goldman, 2008). As the therapist listens to the client, an overriding feeling such as sor-
row, bitterness, distrust, or shame may pervade the client’s mood or characterize different 
experiences the client relates. To capture this theme, for example, the therapist might then 
reflect:
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 As I listen to you, it sounds as if you have lived your life with the feeling of being 
hopelessly burdened. Am I capturing something here?
OR
THE
R
AP
IS
T
:
 This doesn’t quite sound like worry or anxiety that keeps coming up, it seems much 
bigger than that! Am I hearing more of a sickening feeling of dread?
When the therapist can identify and accurately name  this characterological affect —the 
central or core feeling that some clients may experience as nothing less than the defining 
aspect of their existence—it has a profound impact. Clients feel that the therapist 
understands who they really are and is seeing them and what their life is like in a way 
that others have not done. A key in establishing the therapist’s credibility and fostering 
the working alliance is the therapist’s ability to identify these central or core feelings 
that keep coming up, and accurately reflect the far-reaching meaning it holds in the 
client’s life.
Responding to these primary feelings and capturing the recurrent emotional themes 
that keep coming up in the client’s life is one of the most significant interventions thera -
pists can provide (Diener & Hilsenroth, 2009; Markowitz & Milrod, 2011). Unfortu -
nately, new and experienced therapists often feel insecure about responding to strong 
feelings in their clients (Williams et al., 1997). Trainees need their supervisors to help 
them recognize and respond to these affective themes, especially by role-playing or oth -
erwise demonstrating what trainees might say or do when these primary feelings emerge. 
Because this topic is so important, and often receives too little attention in clinical train -
ing, specific guidelines for responding to clients’ feelings will be provided in Chapter 5. 
Completing the process notes provided in Appendix A will also help therapists identify 
recurrent patterns in the affective domain.
Identifying unifying patterns in these three domains, which will be present in most 
clients ’ narratives, helps therapists understand their clients ’ problems and provide 
empathic understanding . The disparate material that clients present may initially seem 
unrelated and disconnected, and it can evoke in the therapist the unwanted feeling of being 
lost, confused, or even overwhelmed. With practice and the sustained intention to develop 
this skill, however, new therapists will improve their ability to listen for and recognize the 
synthesizing themes that commonly are present in all three domains. As we see in the case 
illustration below, attending to developmental and familial experiences (contextualizing) 
is often key to understanding the patterns and themes that clients present.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

64  CHAPTER 2
Sarah, age 28, was referred to treatment by her physician. She was the oldest of 
three children and her mother was chronically depressed and hypochondriacal. By the 
time Sarah was 10, she often made the family dinner and school lunches for herself and 
her siblings. She was “reinforced” for this by her father for being “such a great helper” 
and throughout her adult life she gravitated toward jobs where the demands were high 
and she excelled. Although she was appreciated and praised, her financial compen -
sation was not commensurate with the time and energy she invested. She also often 
chose partners who, while initially attentive, soon demanded extensive caretaking from 
her. By the time she was 28, she was having severe migraines and had developed high 
blood pressure. Her boss had just given her a “promotion”—a title change with addi -
tional responsibilities, but again no additional staff/assistance and no increase in pay. 
The boss’s familiar statement had been, “You are absolutely my best worker. Don’t 
worry, in time we’ll give you a raise and more help. Be patient, at least you have a better 
title now.”
Consistent with her developmental story, Sarah felt conflicted. The praise was remi -
niscent of what she had experienced with her father and she felt she should be apprecia -
tive, yet she felt used and resentful. She had just been asked to take on more of her boss’s 
responsibilities but with no help to complete the work and no financial compensation for 
it. Amplifying her dilemma, her personal life was becoming “overwhelming.” Her boy -
friend expected her to be the primary provider in their relationship, yet he resented all the 
hours she devoted to her work.
THE
R
AP
R
AP
R
 IS
T
:
 It’s sounding to me as if, here again, you have to be the responsible one who takes 
care of everything—and wind up feeling tired and resentful in the end. I’m wondering if this 
sounds like a familiar pattern in your life—does something like this “used” scenario go on a lot?
CLI
E
N
T
:
 (crying but angry) It doesn’t sound like “something” in my life—that is my life! My 
work, my personal life, my childhood! That’s been my role my whole life—take care of every-
body—as if that’s just my job in life. But if I don’t stop doing this, it’s going to kill me—I’m 
exhausted! And it’s not fair—no one ever responds to me.
In this example, the therapist “gets” her and provides empathic understanding. 
Sarah’s developmental experiences provide an illuminating context for grasping the 
patterns and themes that are leading to the poignant life circumstance she currently 
is in. Further, the therapist’s empathic understanding created safety and allowed Sarah 
to explore more deeply her own needs and the consequences of the choices she was 
making. Therapists can help clients make sense of their long-standing problems by lis -
tening for and highlighting integrating patterns in their thoughts, feelings, and behav -
ior. This linking helps to locate current symptoms in a broader context—which helps 
clients change by developing a more coherent life story or narrative for who they are 
and where they have come from. When developmental life experiences are taken into 
account and symptom presentation and repetitive patterns are clarified, therapists can 
then integrate the themes and share these tentatively, as hunches or possibilities, to pro -
vide empathic understanding and to help formulate a shared treatment focus (Curtis 
et/uni00A0al., 1988; Smith, 2006). 
How can new therapists begin to develop this essential skill of recognizing patterns 
and understanding presenting symptoms in a lifespan perspective? Writing process notes 
after each session is one way that student therapists can learn to identify patterns and rec-
ognize integrative themes in their clients’ narratives and in the therapeutic relationship. 
Guidelines for doing this are provided in Appendix A, and we will develop these concepts 
further in succeeding chapters. To sum up, if the therapist can identify the maladaptive 
interpersonal patterns, pathogenic beliefs, and primary feelings that recur throughout 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  65
clients’ lives, and link experiences with problems, clients can better make sense of things. 
In this way clients are reassured to know that the therapist understands them in a way 
that others do not. Providing this highly differentiated or specific empathy that “hits the 
nail on the head” can be profoundly helpful for clients. This is not an isolated intervention 
or technique, but a consistent stance that characterizes the therapist ’s way of being with 
the client—throughout each session—over the course of treatment .
PERFORMANCE ANXIETIES MAKE IT HARDER 
TO/uni00A0ESTABLISH A WORKING ALLIANCE
Let’s let therapists be human, too. They cannot always hear or fully assimilate what their 
clients have just told them or be accurately empathic. Understandably, all therapists will 
miss the feeling and meaning in the client’s experience at times, but this takes on greater 
salience for therapists-in-training. Thus, this section returns to performance anxieties and 
new therapists’ worries about mistakes, which make therapists too self-conscious to be 
able to listen well and be present with their clients.
As we saw in Chapter 1, new therapists will not be as effective with clients when 
they are burdened by their own excessive performance demands—which can be ampli -
fied by reading about all the conflicting ideas and differing ways of responding. We have 
already seen that beginning therapists often are trying too hard (e.g., to be helpful, to win 
approval from a supervisor, to prove their own adequacy to themselves, to be liked by the 
client, to avoid making a mistake and hurting the client or being criticized, etc.). When 
therapists are trying too hard in one of these ways, it is almost impossible to de-center, 
enter the client’s subjective worldview with accurate empathy, and be emotionally present 
(Skovholt & Rennestad, 2003).
Too often, novice therapists are also preoccupied about where the interview should 
be going, wondering how best to phrase what they are going to say next, trying to for -
mulate alternatives or suggestions for the client, or worrying about what their supervisors 
would expect them to do at this point in the interview. Such self-critical monitoring com-
monly immobilizes student therapists, blocks their own creativity, and keeps them from 
enjoying this rewarding work. Moreover, it prevents therapists from stopping their own 
inner chatter, listening receptively to their clients, recognizing patterns and making con -
nections, and understanding as fully as they could. Thus, new therapists are encouraged 
to slow down their self-monitoring process and focus more on the moment—on the client 
rather than themselves and their own anxiety, on their current interaction with the client, 
and on grasping the meaning that this particular experience seems to hold for this client 
right now. That’s how we begin to establish this all-important alliance.
Finally, student therapists feel anxious about their helping abilities. New therapists 
often experience an unwanted, internal press to do something to make the client change. 
They frequently believe they are supposed to make the client think, feel, or act differently 
within the initial therapy session(s). As a result, they often change the topic abruptly (at 
least from the client’s point of view) and pull clients away from their own concerns to 
what the therapist thinks is most important—losing any sense of collaboration or shared 
exploration. The most appropriate way for therapists to manage their realistic concerns 
about their performance is to discuss them openly with a trusted supervisor and to nor -
malize them as common and expectable. Therapists do not need to labor under the bur -
den of always knowing the right thing to do or what is going on with the client. They 
need only to foster a collaborative dialogue with clients in order to explore and under -
stand better what is going wrong in their life and what actions to consider which will 
clarify what they wish to try to change.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

66  CHAPTER 2
EMPATHIC UNDERSTANDING AS A PRECONDITION  
OF CHANGE
The therapist does need to help the client change, of course, but change is most likely to 
occur if the client first experiences the therapist as someone who sees and understands 
him, and treats him with respect. As previously stated, in the initial sessions, the thera -
pist’s primary goal is to establish a working alliance by repeatedly providing empathic 
understanding and emotional presence and communicating a genuine interest in the cli -
ent’s safety and well-being. This understanding of the client’s experience is done in a way 
that also communicates compassion and nonjudgmental concern. The ability to articulate 
the client’s experience in an accurate and caring way is illustrated elegantly in a classic 
article, “Ghosts in the Nursery,” by Selma Fraiberg and her colleagues (Fraiberg, Adelson 
& Shapiro, 1975). The therapist in this case study is working with a depressed young 
mother whom social services has judged to be at risk for physically abusing her infant 
daughter. Early in treatment, the therapist is disconcerted as she observes the mother 
holding her crying baby in her arms for five minutes without making any attempt to try 
to soothe her. The mother does not murmur comforting things in the baby’s ear or rock 
her; she just looks away absently from the crying baby. Trying to formulate a case con -
ceptualization and treatment plan, the therapist asks herself, “Why can’t this mother hear 
her baby’s cries?”
As the young mother’s own neglectful and abusive history began to come out in treat-
ment, the therapist realized that no one had ever heard or responded to the mother’s own 
profound cries as a child. The therapist hypothesized that the mother “had closed the 
door on the weeping child within herself as surely as she had closed the door upon her 
own crying baby” (p. 392). This conceptual understanding led the therapist to a basic 
treatment plan: When this mother’s own cries are heard, she will hear her child’s cries.
The therapist set about trying to hear and articulate compassionately the mother’s 
own childhood experience. When the mother was five years old, her own mother had 
died; when she was 11, her custodial aunt “went away.” Responding to these profound 
losses and the mother’s resultant feeling that “nobody wanted me,” the therapist listened 
and put into words the feelings of the mother as a child:
How hard this must have been…. This must have hurt deeply…. Of course you needed 
your mother. There was no one to turn to…. Yes. Sometimes grown-ups don’t understand 
what all this means to a child. You must have needed to cry…. There was no one to hear 
you. (p. 396)
At different well-timed points in treatment, the therapist accurately captured the 
mother’s experience in a way that gave her permission to have her feelings. As a result, 
the mother’s grief and anguish for herself as a cast-off and abused child began to emerge. 
The mother sobbed; the affirming therapist understood and comforted. In just a few 
more sessions, something remarkable happened. For the first time, when the baby cried, 
the mother gathered the baby in her arms, held her close, and crooned in her ear. The 
therapist’s hypothesis had been correct: When the mother’s own cries were heard, she 
could hear her baby’s cries. The risk for abuse abated as this beginning attachment 
flourished.
This poignant case study illustrates how the therapist can use empathic understand -
ing to resolve the client’s symptoms and, in this case, stop the intergenerational transmis-
sion of abuse. A corrective emotional experience occurred when the therapist responded 
to the mother’s pain with compassion and understanding—something she desperately 
needed as a child but did not receive. This case study illustrates how powerful it is when 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

ESTABLISHING A WORKING ALLIANCE  67
therapists can articulate their understanding of the client’s experience, and do so in a way 
that also communicates their compassion for the client.
Using role models such as this, therapists-in-training are encouraged to explore their 
own ways of communicating that they are touched by the client’s pain and are concerned 
about the client’s well-being. Clients’ inability to care about themselves is central to many 
of their problems, and most clients cannot care about themselves until they feel someone’s 
caring for them (Gilligan, 1982). Therapists provide this care when they recognize what 
is important to the client, express their genuine concern about the client’s distress, and 
communicate that the client is someone of worth and will be treated with dignity in this 
relationship. These are the therapist’s goals in the initial stage of therapy.
CLOSING
The Interpersonal Process approach is integrative and draws on concepts and techniques 
from differing theoretical traditions. The basic concept in this chapter—establishing a 
working alliance through empathic understanding, is grounded in Rogers’s client-centered 
approach and, especially, accurate empathy.
The Interpersonal Process approach tries to resolve problems in a way that leaves cli-
ents with a greater sense of their own self-efficacy. This independence-fostering approach 
to therapy can best be achieved through a collaborative partnership (Myers & White, 
2010). The client needs to be an active participant throughout each phase of treatment—
not a good patient who waits to be cured or told what to do by the doctor. This process 
dimension of how the therapist and client work together is more important than the con-
tent of what they discuss or the theoretical orientation of the therapist.
In this chapter we also have explored the profound therapeutic impact of listening 
with presence and working collaboratively to discern what is most important to the cli -
ent. Offering the deep understanding described here is a Gift to clients—one of the most 
important interventions that therapists of every theoretical orientation can provide. Per -
haps because they are so simple, these basic human responses are too easily overlooked. 
They are the foundation of every helping relationship, however, and the basis for estab -
lishing a working alliance.
CHAPTER EXERCISE
When significant others in your personal life are distressed or in crisis, how have you 
typically responded? Would you characterize your responses more as attempts to provide 
reassurance or problem-solving, or as offering validation and empathic understanding? 
Looking back, do you think your response was helpful? 
In parallel, recall a signi/f_icant crisis in your own life that occurred in recent years. 
Looking back, what kinds of responses from others were helpful to you, and which were 
not? What might validation or empathic understanding have offered you during that 
stressful time?
SUGGESTED READING
Egan, G. (2014). The skilled helper. Belmont, CA: Brooks-Cole. Chapters 3 and 4 provide 
helpful guidelines for listening with empathic presence and responding with empathy.
Beginning therapists need to observe role models demonstrating the concepts they are 
reading about. Readers are encouraged to watch a training DVD that illustrates powerfully 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

68  CHAPTER 2
the concepts presented here. Readers can observe Hanna Levenson providing empathic 
understanding to a client dealing with domestic violence. This skillful therapist will help 
readers understand a relational approach to treatment in this DVD series produced by the 
American Psychological Association.
Visit CengageBrain.com for a variety of study tools and useful resources such as interac-
tive exercises, flashcards, and quizzes. Also included with this chapter is a video demon-
stration by the authors illustrating empathic understanding and working collaboratively 
with clients.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

69
CHAPTER 3
Honoring the Client’s 
Resistance
Joan was nervous about seeing her first client, but the initial session seemed to have gone well. 
The client talked at length about his concerns and, to her relief, she found it was easy to talk 
with him. The client shared some difficult feelings and Joan felt that she understood what 
was going on for him. She was thinking they had begun a good therapeutic alliance; the client 
seemed so friendly and appreciative when he left. One week later, however, Joan received a 
brief telephone message from the client saying only that he was “unable to continue therapy 
at this time.” Confused and dismayed, Joan sat alone in her office wondering what had gone 
wrong.
CONCEPTUAL OVERVIEW
Just when the therapist feels that something important is getting started, some clients put 
their feet on the brakes. The client cancels or doesn’t show up for the next second appoint-
ment, shows up 25 minutes late, or asks to reschedule for Sunday at 7:00 /a.sc./m.sc. This resis-
tance is puzzling and frustrating for the novice therapist: “Why didn’t she return?! We 
had such a great first session—she shared so much….” Although most clients will not be 
resistant in this particular way, other forms of resistance will occur regularly throughout 
therapy— even for motivated, responsible clients who are trying hard to change. Although 
most new therapists do not anticipate this as they begin their training, working with 
resistance is an expectable component of the treatment process. Thus, the purpose of this 
chapter is to help new therapists learn how to recognize and respond effectively to resis -
tance so more clients can remain in and benefit from treatment.
Most clients have both positive and negative feelings about entering therapy, although 
the positive feelings are more apparent at first for most clients. Clients seek therapy in order 
to gain relief from their distress. However, we want to look further into the complexity of 
clients’ feelings. Often, as clients seek help and genuinely try to change, they may simulta-
neously resist or work against the very change they are trying to attain, or have difficulty 
returning to sessions—even though they like and find the therapist helpful. From the earli-
est beginnings of psychotherapy (Breuer & Freud, 1893, reprinted in 1955) and continuing 
throughout with contemporary integrative treatments such as Motivational Interviewing 
(Arkowitz, Miller & Rollnick, 2015; Miller & Rose, 2009), clinicians have been trying to 
understand and address this paradoxical, shadow side of the change process. It occurs for 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

70  CHAPTER 3
many reasons. For many clients, shame is associated with asking for help or with having an 
emotional problem they cannot solve on their own. In some cultures, revealing problems 
to people outside one’s family meets with strong disapproval or is seen as disloyal. Other 
clients feel guilt about asking for help for themselves or doing something to meet their own 
needs. Still other clients, acting out of their schema distortions, have anxiety evoked by the 
expectation that the therapist, like significant others in their lives, will respond in familiar 
but unwanted or hurtful ways. Thus, if clients have a problem or need to ask for help, then 
shame, guilt, anxiety, and other difficult or threatening feelings are often evoked, especially 
the deeply held belief that the therapist, too, will ultimately respond in the same problem-
atic ways that others have in the past. In addition to difficulties in entering treatment, we 
will see that ambivalent feelings can also be evoked when clients feel better, improve in 
treatment, and make successful changes in their lives (Miller & Rollnick, 2013).
 Therapists are trying to identify and work with the specific issues that make it diffi -
cult for this particular client to enter treatment, and then to sustain behavior change later 
in treatment. In many instances, the resistance is a coping strategy that once was adaptive 
for a client . For example, being completely self-reliant as a child and never needing or 
asking for anything from a caregiver, kept the child from being abandoned, ridiculed, hit, 
or in some way hurt, but is no longer needed in adult life. The therapist’s aim is to find a 
way to honor this coping strategy. For example, acknowledge its developmental adaptive 
value with a statement such as: It makes sense that asking for help was not safe because 
you were ridiculed as being ‘too needy’ and derided as ‘demanding’ when you showed vul-
nerability. Thus therapists help clients see that this coping strategy is no longer functional 
(it is now actually impeding healthy relationships). Following client response specificity, 
specific concerns about entering therapy and asking for help, talking to the therapist or 
someone outside the family, or making changes and feeling better about themselves must 
be clarified for each individual client. However, common themes include:
 /uni25CFIf I let myself trust or depend on the therapist, he might criticize or judge me, try to 
control me, start to depend on me or need me, or in some unwanted way take advan-
tage of me— just as others have done when I needed them.— just as others have done when I needed them.—
 /uni25CFI cannot ask for help because I must be independent and in control all the time.
 /uni25CFI don’t deserve to be helped by anyone; I don’t really matter very much.
 /uni25CFI cannot need anything from others— if I’m not perfect I will bring shame to my 
family.
 /uni25CFAsking for help is admitting that there really is a problem, and that proves there really 
is something wrong with me.
 /uni25CFI am afraid of what I will see or what a perceptive therapist will learn about me if I 
stop and look inside myself.
 /uni25CFIf I cannot handle this by myself, it means that I really am needy and too sensitive, 
just as they always said.
 /uni25CFI’m a therapist. I can’t have problems— I’m supposed to have the answers.
 /uni25CFI’ll start crying and won’t be able to stop— it will be humiliating.
 /uni25CFIf I ask for help, strings will be attached and I’ll lose my independence.
In these and a thousand other ways, difficult or resistant feelings will be activated for 
many clients by the simple act of calling the therapist and coming in for the initial session 
(Young et al., 2001). Although reasons will vary greatly for each client, clients’ resistance and 
defenses are driven most frequently by shame, as seen in many of the examples above. To help 
us gain some understanding for this resistance, and therein find more compassion for what 
it’s about, pause now for a moment and think about your own life during a time of real crisis. 
Ask yourself, “What has it been like for me to have a personal or emotional problem and need 
to ask someone for help?” For many, sadly, it’s not easy. For some, it’s simply unthinkable to 
even imagine talking to a caretaker or others about a significant problem (Egan, 2014).
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  71
This profound issue of how someone copes with vulnerability leads many places 
but, in particular, it takes us to the heart of the Attachment story. What do we really 
mean when we say that children are securely attached? It’s this simple: Securely attached 
children are secure in the expectation that, when they are in distress, their caregivers will 
consistently register or hear their distress and reliably orient to try and help them with it. 
In other words, they are not alone with their problems—they have a trustworthy partner 
or ally who genuinely wants to know when something is wrong and who dependably 
wants to help them with whatever problem they are having (Bowlby, 1988; Cassidy 
& Shaver, 2008). With resistance, in contrast, we are usually working with insecure 
attachment histories. These clients lacked both components of a secure attachment: a 
Safe Haven—someone to whom they could come to for comfort in distress, and a Secure 
Base—someone from whom they could find support to venture out, explore, and become 
more independent. That is, based on their real-life experience, many clients have learned 
realistically to expect that the therapist and others will not really be very interested in, 
or be capable of, responding to them when they are distressed or in need; nor will their 
growth and independence be encouraged if/when it conflicts with the other person’s need. 
This belief, originally learned in repeated real-life experiences with primary caregivers, 
and often confirmed in subsequent important relationships, is going to come in play with 
the therapist at different points—especially as treatment begins (Gold, 2011).
It is easy to respond to the approach side of clients’ feelings—the fear or pain that 
motivates them to seek help and enter treatment. If you just scratch the surface, it is usu -
ally plain to see. One part of the client wants you to respond to it but, commonly, another 
part doesn’t. This shadow side—the contradictory or ambivalent feelings that arise from 
the unwanted responses the client has received from others in the past for having a prob-
lem and needing help—acts as a countervailing force. If unaddressed, this resistance will 
keep some motivated and highly workable clients from being able to engage successfully 
in treatment, as in our opening vignette.
RELUCTANCE TO ADDRESS RESISTANCE
Imagine your client has missed, come very late for, or twice rescheduled the second 
appointment. Perhaps this has no significant psychological meaning at all. Cars break 
down; traffic jams occur; children get sick; employees get called for work at the last min-
ute. However, if this behavior reflects the client’s ambivalence about some aspect of being 
in treatment, and not just reality-based constraints, the therapist needs to find an effective 
way to address this or the client is far more likely to terminate prematurely. Initially, ther-
apists usually do not know whether the client’s behavior is reality-based, psychologically 
motivated, or both. As we will see, however, by finding non-threatening or non-blaming 
ways to explore this behavior with the client, therapists can greatly increase the chances 
of the client’s continued participation. In these explorations, therapists’ curious, nonjudg-
mental manner is as important as what they say. Otherwise, the client may misunderstand 
the therapist’s observations as blame or criticism, which never help and only serve to 
exacerbate client resistance.
To be more specific, let’s follow a two-step sequence for working with resistance. 
First, the therapist can enter supportively into clients’ frame of reference, affirm or vali-
date the reality-based constraints they perceive, and respond flexibly by doing whatever is 
reasonable to accommodate or help resolve the problem:
CLIENT:
 My child gets out of school at 2:30 and...
THERAPIST:
 Well, I can’t meet at a different time on Wednesdays but I could meet on Thursdays 
at 4:30. Would that give you the shuttling time you need?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

72  CHAPTER 3
Second, only after taking seriously clients’ reality-based concerns, as they see them, 
can therapists begin to inquire about other conflicted feelings that entering treatment may 
hold. The therapist can begin this joint exploration by wondering aloud, in a tentative 
manner, whether entering treatment may be evoking other psychological concerns as well.
THERAPIST:
 I’m wondering how it is for you to call and come in to see me. What’s it like for you 
to have this problem and come here to see if I can help?
OR
THERAPIST:
 What’s the biggest fear or concern that coming here and talking to me brings up for you?
If therapists approach resistance without following this two-step sequence, most cli -
ents will feel misunderstood or blamed, impeding their ability to engage in treatment. For 
example, an accusing therapist might say, “You didn’t show up for our last session. Why 
not?” At the other extreme, an avoidant therapist might say, “Oh, you’re late again, but 
I’m so glad you still came. Great, let’s get to work, where should we begin?” Let’s look 
now at both the therapist’s and the client’s shared reluctance to talk about potential resis-
tance—and how this leads to losing clients.
T/h.sc/e.sc T/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc/a.sc/p.sc/i.sc/s.sc/t.sc’/s.sc R/e.sc/l.sc/u.sc/c.sc/t.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc /t.sc/o.sc W/o.sc/r.sc/k.sc /w.sc/i.sc/t.sc/h.sc R/e.sc/s.sc/i.sc/s.sc/t.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc
For several reasons, resistance is not a welcome concept to most new therapists. It can feel 
uncomfortable or be misunderstood as confrontational, but it is a necessary skill and we 
can start learning sensitive ways to work with it right now. To a greater or lesser degree, 
every client will be ambivalent, defensive, or resistant at times. Resisting clients are simul-
taneously struggling with a conflict between their genuine wish to change and need to 
maintain the status quo (Gabbard, 2007). This push-pull may occur at the beginning of 
treatment and it can continue to wax and wane throughout treatment. In their informa -
tive work on stages of change, Prochaska et al. (1992, 2006) report that most clients 
who terminate prematurely can be described as “precontemplators.” Precontemplators do 
not “own” their problems, and usually enter treatment because of pressure from others. 
That is, they feel coerced to change by a spouse who threatens to leave, an employer who 
threatens to dismiss them, judges who threaten to punish them, or a parent who threatens 
to withdraw support.
Resistance become an even bigger issue when courts mandate clients to attend treat -
ment. Although mandated clients can be helped by working collaboratively to find some 
aspect of the problem they genuinely wish to change, they are generally far more chal -
lenging and not well suited for new therapists. With every client seeking treatment, how -
ever, therapists want to approach or address potential signs of client resistance — and not 
avoid or deny them. Researchers find that clients progress in treatment and have better 
outcomes when therapists recognize resistance and respond to it in ways that restore cli -
ents’ active collaboration in the treatment process (see Beutler et al., 2002; Orlinsky et al., 
2004). Let’s examine three reasons why many beginning — and experienced — therapists 
often find it difficult to approach and explore the resistance, ambivalence, and defense 
that is part of the treatment process.
First, many new therapists — especially if they have never been in therapy them -
selves— are not so aware of the conflicted feelings associated with the decision to enter 
treatment. These therapists are often surprised to find that, in the initial sessions, some 
clients actually resist the help they are overtly seeking. Commonly, therapists are reluc -
tant to explore and work with resistance because they fear it can only be addressed in a 
blaming or critical way that will anger clients or make them feel guilty. They may also 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  73
believe that resistance has to be addressed in a manner that puts therapists in a superior 
position and denies the validity of the client’s own experience — which we never want 
to do. This occurs, for example, when a therapist ineffectively says to a working, single 
mother of three:
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 Hmm, I notice that you are five minutes late for our appointment 
today.
Problematically, this therapist is ignoring the first step of our sequence: validating 
the reality-based constraints of this client’s life-context. Resistance does not have to be 
associated with this unwanted type of hierarchical therapist–client relationship. Thera -
pists can work with resistance and still be sensitive to the social context or reality-based 
constraints of the client’s life (Egan, 2014). For example, clients who use public transpor-
tation will not be able to arrive on time consistently. Clients from cultures with varying 
views of time may not think that being five minutes late for a 50-minute appointment 
is of any significance. For some, it may even be impolite to come on time; arriving late 
allows the host extra time to prepare for the visit. Therapists can educate clients about 
the procedures of therapy and, as we will see, respond to resistance in collaborative, non-
blaming ways that strengthen the client’s commitment to therapy, enhance the therapeutic 
alliance, and empower rather than invalidate the client.
A second reason why therapists are reluctant to address their clients’ resistance is 
more personal. Most new therapists have strong needs for their clients to like them. 
Understandably, student therapists want very much for their new clients to find them 
helpful and to keep coming to counseling. If the client does not show up or comes late, 
new therapists often struggle with feelings of failure. If this occurs with other clients as 
well, new therapists often become painfully insecure about their ability to help, place 
even more performance demands on themselves, and become overly invested in pleasing 
or performing adequately for the next client. This is not a good spot for new therapists to 
find themselves in.
Third, therapists often do not inquire about signs of potential resistance in order 
to ward off unwanted criticism. Not wanting to hear what they may be doing wrong, 
it becomes especially hard for new therapists to make process comments and invite the 
(seemingly) bad news. The examples below, and throughout this text, are intended to 
give new therapists a language to use with clients that is forthright and direct but never 
confrontational in any way (Kiesler, 1988; Wachtel, 2011):confrontational in any way (Kiesler, 1988; Wachtel, 2011):confrontational
THERAPIST:
 What’s it been like for you to talk with me today? What’s felt good, and what hasn’t?
OR
THERAPIST:
 Is there anything about our work together that doesn’t feel quite right to you? If so, 
I would welcome hearing about it. You know, so we could make any changes we needed to 
have this work better for you.
Like their clients, most therapists are not eager to approach issues that arouse their 
own anxiety— such as bringing up potential conflict with others and talking it through 
forthrightly. Thus, new therapists may be hesitant to invite clients to express any negative 
reactions they may be having toward the therapist’s response, the concerns evoked for 
them by having to ask for help, or their ambivalent feelings about needing to be in treat -
ment. It is difficult for most people to invite critical feedback or approach interpersonal 
conflict, but it is so very helpful when the therapist can be non-defensive enough to do so. 
Many clients have not found this in any other relationship.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

74  CHAPTER 3
Exploring potential resistance or ruptures becomes far more important if the cli -
ent makes an embedded message about the therapist or some aspect of the therapeutic 
relationship and alludes to some conflict with the therapist or difficulty about being in 
treatment:
CLIENT:
 Where I grew up, we don’t talk about problems outside the family.
THERAPIST:
 Thanks for telling me that. So, I guess you’re saying it’s hard to come and talk to 
me also. Let’s talk about that.
OR
CLIENT:
 My family really values self-reliance. You’re not supposed to have any problems—ever. 
And if you do, you just handle them on your own. You’d never tell anyone about them or see 
a therapist.
THERAPIST:
 OK, so you’re telling me that it’s not so easy to come here and do this—it violates 
a family value. I appreciate your willingness to risk doing it differently with me. How has 
it been so far for you to tell me about this problem when your family has always said that’s 
unacceptable?
CLIENT:
 Kind of mixed. I like talking to you because you seem to understand me, but I guess 
I/uni00A0feel kind of guilty, too.
THERAPIST:
 I appreciate both sides of your feelings. I’m glad that you feel understood by me, 
and think that will help you. But I also appreciate that you want to honor your family and 
not be disloyal to them. I’m wondering if you can decide to do some things differently than 
your family does, you know, that work better for you, but still find other ways to continue to 
honor and respect them.
Continuing further, it becomes even more important for the therapist to address 
potential problems or misunderstandings when the client implies there is some problem 
or personal concern with the therapist. For example:
CLIENT:
 So, how old are you anyway
—
 have you been practicing long?
For many new therapists, learning to address interpersonal conflict in this straightfor-learning to address interpersonal conflict in this straightfor-learning to address interpersonal conflict in this straightfor
ward, non-defensive way—rather than avoid it as if nothing meaningful has been stated—
is one of the biggest challenges in their clinical training. Such a challenging or provocative 
comment from the client is highly anxiety-arousing for most new therapists. However, we 
need to anticipate it, and prepare to respond therapeutically. Most new therapists did not 
expect that being forthright and addressing interpersonal conflict straightforwardly was 
part of the job description when they signed on for this career! The paradox is, if thera-
pists allow their own anxiety to keep them from asking clients about such potential signs 
of resistance, ambivalence, or rupture, their clients will be far more likely to act on these 
concerns and drop out of treatment prematurely.  New therapists need to take a breath, 
gather themselves to respond non-defensively, and take the risk to meet this concern head-
on. They do this effectively by simply inviting the client to discuss this concern more fully:
THERAPIST:
 I’m happy to respond
—
 but I’m wondering if you are asking because you have con-
cerns about whether I have enough experience to help you, or if there is something in particu-
lar that happened between us that brought that question to mind?
An effective approach is to make a process comment that suggests the possibility 
that something about entering treatment or talking to the therapist may be difficult for 
the client, and invites the therapist and client to explore this possibility together. If the 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  75
client is much older and is just focused on age, being forthright is often what is needed 
and responding to the question directly is appropriate. Usually, however, the question 
is really about competence. Before long, new therapists will find that they can do this 
in an affirming way that does not make the client feel accused or blamed, and that 
their non-defensiveness and willingness to engage so honestly enhances the working 
alliance.
THERAPIST:
 You seem discouraged today, and you’ve had some trouble getting here. I’m won-
dering if something isn’t going right between us. Any ideas?
CLIENT:
 I’m not sure what you mean.
THERAPIST:
 I’m wondering if something about our relationship—or being in treatment—isn’t 
working very well right now. We seem to be missing each other in some way. Any thoughts 
about what could be going on between us, or what I could do differently to make this work 
better?
CLIENT:
 Well, maybe you could talk a little more or give me some more feedback. You’re pretty 
quiet, and I don’t really know what you’re thinking most of the time.
THERAPIST:
 I’m glad you’re telling me this—thanks for your honesty. Sure, I’ll be happy to start 
sharing more of my thoughts with you—that’ll be easy to change. I’m wondering what it’s like 
for you when you don’t know what I’m thinking?
CLIENT:
 Well, maybe when you’re quiet it’s like you’re kind of judging me or something.
THERAPIST:
 “Judging you.” That sure wouldn’t feel very good. Let me clarify that no part of 
me has felt judgmental toward anything you’ve said, and if I ever was, it would certainly be 
my limitation or problem. And, maybe you’re also telling me that others have judged you too 
much in your life?
CLIENT:
 Oh yeah, my husband is so critical. And I guess my mother disapproved of just about 
everything I ever did...
In this way, taking the risk to explore the client’s resistance will often “uncover” or 
reveal key concerns (e.g., “judging”) that (1) impede the client’s participation in treat -
ment, and (2) are central to his/her problems and clarify the treatment focus.
T/h.sc/e.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc’/s.sc R/e.sc/l.sc/u.sc/c.sc/t.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc /t.sc/o.sc W/o.sc/r.sc/k.sc /w.sc/i.sc/t.sc/h.sc R/e.sc/s.sc/i.sc/s.sc/t.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc
Unfortunately, the client usually shares the therapist’s reluctance to address resistance. 
Clients often are unaware of their resistance and externalize it to others or outside events. 
For example, the client may say,
CLIENT:
 Yeah, I’m late for our sessions, but the traffic is always so bad.
Although there usually is some truth to this statement, if this is a consistent behavior consistent behavior consistent
pattern, it begs the need for further exploration. To acknowledge both the reality-based 
constraints that are possibly contributing, and the more personal or psychologically based 
resistance that is often in play as well, the therapist can ask whether leaving earlier for the 
appointment is possible or if an alternative session time needs to be negotiated. In tan -
dem, the therapist also begins to explore any concerns or other thoughts the client might 
be having about treatment or the therapist:
THERAPIST:
 Can you recall what you might have been thinking about our session last week as 
you walked out to your car or as you drove home afterwards?
OR
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

76  CHAPTER 3
THERAPIST:
 I’m wondering if you had any thoughts about me, or concerns about our work to-
gether, during the week?
OR
THERAPIST:
 I’m wondering what people in your family, or friends at church, might think about 
you coming to counseling and talking about personal problems?
There is no criticism or blame here. And, even if the client is not ready to recognize or 
talk about whatever psychologically based resistance may be operating, the therapist has 
invited the client to consider the possibility of psychological factors and laid the ground -
work for further discussions. This is part of educating the client about the treatment pro-
cess and changing the social rules that define their interaction. That is, the therapist is 
making it “normal” to talk about their relationship and explore what goes on between 
them— setting new expectations that are different from what goes on in most other rela -
tionships in the client’s life. To illustrate:
THERAPIST:
 I know other people don’t usually talk this directly, but one of the best ways I can 
help you is if we can talk together about any concerns you might have about our relationship 
or the way we’re working together.
Sometimes clients recognize that it is hard for them to engage in treatment, and they 
usually feel frustrated and confused by their own contradictory behavior. For example, 
clients may exclaim with dismay:
 /uni25CFWhy do I go to all the trouble and expense of coming here to see you, then I can’t 
think of anything to say as soon as I walk in the door?
 /uni25CFWhy would I forget our next appointment after we had such a great session last 
week? It doesn’t make sense!
 /uni25CFWhy do I keep asking you for advice, and then say, “Yes, but...” to whatever you 
suggest? What’s wrong with me?
If it becomes clear to clients that they are resisting in some way and sabotaging their 
own efforts, they typically evaluate themselves harshly — as being bad or failing in some 
way— and assume that the therapist shares this critical judgment. Thus, when the thera -
pist begins to inquire about resistance, most clients want to avoid the topic because they 
are afraid the therapist is going to blame them— for not trying hard enough, failing as 
a client, being unmotivated, and so on. Because it is never helpful for the client to feel 
blamed or criticized, the therapist tries to make this self-critical attitude overt and helps 
clients reframe their critical attitude toward their own resistance. How do we do this? 
First, the therapist wants to help clients learn how to honor their resistance as an out -
dated coping strategy that originally served a self-preservative and adaptive function for 
them— and actually was the best possible response they had available at an earlier time 
in their development. Second, the therapist helps clients realize that they no longer need 
this coping strategy in most current relationships, such as the present relationship with 
the therapist. Instead, they can work with the therapist to learn more flexible ways of 
responding, first with the therapist and then with others in their everyday lives. Refram -
ing clients’ resistance with this contextual or developmental understanding helps in many 
ways, especially by inviting self-acceptance and understanding rather than self-criticism 
and shame (Neff, 2011). This is a complex and far-reaching intervention. Addressing the 
resistance or coping style with compassion and providing understanding for why it devel-
oped is essential — it provides clients with an opportunity to have compassion for them -
selves and thereby begin the process of change.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  77
Often, clients’ resistance, and even the symptoms that bring them in for treatment, 
once served as a survival mechanism that was necessary, adaptive, and even creative. For 
example, anxiety signals danger — perhaps not a current threat but a past or develop -
mental problem that really did exist. Similarly, depressive symptoms may reflect clients’ 
attempts to cope with painfully unfulfilled longing for protection or love from a caregiver. 
It may also be a way to cope with the exploitation or derision that they experienced and 
continue to expect from others (e.g., shut down, avoid and withdraw, and stop feeling). 
In other words, formative experiences with caretakers and current interactions with sig -
nificant others have given clients very good reasons for not wanting to ask for help, share 
a vulnerable feeling, or risk trusting someone. If the therapist and client explore patterns 
in how significant others are responding now, and have responded in the past, the client’s 
resistance will make sense. It’s not “irrational” — it’s understandable developmentally , 
which is enormously validating and empowering for the client.
To illustrate, suppose a client is having trouble entering therapy. The therapist is 
encouraged to use process comments and work in the moment to highlight or clarify 
these unwanted but expected relational patterns:
 /uni25CFIf you and I begin to work together on your problems, what could go wrong 
between us?
 /uni25CFWhat could I do that might hurt you, or make things worse, if you take the risk to 
let me try and help you?
 /uni25CFHow could our religious, ethnic, or gender differences get in the way and be a 
problem for you and me— for our work together— for our work together— — here in therapy?
Routinely, questions like these reveal the most meaningful issues in clients’ lives. In 
particular, they highlight what the client is afraid of or doesn’t want, yet expects, because 
that is how significant others have indeed responded in the past. In other words, these 
process questions serve an assessment function and help shape the treatment focus. They 
clarify the key issues in the client’s life, making clear to therapist and client alike what’s 
really wrong.
Such process-oriented questions help the therapist and the client identify the aversive 
consequences that followed when the client asked for help in the past. Routinely, clients 
will have very specific answers to these questions and describe in detail the interpersonal 
scenarios that typically transpired in the past. When they asked for help in their family, for 
example, they were ignored and felt powerless, were made fun of and felt ashamed, or were 
told that they were selfish or too demanding. Some have been invalidated and told that 
they didn’t really need or want what they asked for—and they should just stop whining 
or complaining about this. Others may have learned that anything they received brought 
unwanted obligations or that the nonverbal communication they received was that any -
thing they needed or asked for burdened their caregiver and induced guilt. In this way, 
therapists and clients together can clarify together the very good reasons why clients origi-
nally learned to respond in these ways that once made sense but now have outlived their 
usefulness and become maladaptive (Tsai, Yard & Kohlenberg, 2014; Wei & Ku, 2007).
Marjorie, a 45-year-old schoolteacher, came in because of increasing depression that now 
involved long periods of isolation, crying bouts, and worrying about how long she could 
“keep up appearances.” During the first session she described a long history of emotional 
deprivation and neglect: her mother, who was probably suffering from a Major Depression, 
drank herself to sleep most days by mid-afternoon. By the time Marjorie was 10 years old, 
she generally made her own dinner, ate alone front of the TV, and put herself to bed. Des-
perate for connection with others, Marjorie found herself helping many of the neighbors 
with their chores and errands as she became the “neighborhood helper.” Some saw this 
young girl’s dilemma and were kind, at times inviting her to dinner. The reality, though, 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

78  CHAPTER 3
was that whenever someone was kind to her, Marjorie overextended herself—was that whenever someone was kind to her, Marjorie overextended herself—was that whenever someone was kind to her, Marjorie overextended herself to use her 
own word, she “enslaved” herself in gratitude for their attention. By age 45, Marjorie was 
“depleted” by her “enslavement.” As the session ended, the therapist, aware that Marjorie 
had seemed relieved to tell her story, wondered how Marjorie would later feel after being 
responded to with such validation and compassion. Might this support raise concerns for 
her about having to give back and respond to yet another person?
THERAPIST:
 Marjorie, our time is almost over. How was it for you to be here today, and how 
will it be for you to come back and see me next week?
CLIENT:
 You listened and I felt understood.
THERAPIST:
 Good. I’m glad you felt that way.
CLIENT:
 Yes, it was good to talk with you. I’ve been isolated for a long time, afraid to get close to 
people again…
THERAPIST:
 Given what we have been talking about today, I’m wondering if it might be hard to 
come back next week, if you might be afraid that you’re going to have to take care of me, too?
CLIENT:
 Hmm, that’s a thought...I do like talking to you—I feel so alone. But that’s right—I 
could get worried. How would I ever repay you? I know this is your job, but I shouldn’t be 
leaning on you so much, I’d owe you too much...(
tearful
)
THERAPIST:
 Yes, and then you are “enslaved” again—but this time with your therapist. I’m so 
glad we are talking about this so we can make sure it doesn’t happen here between us. You 
and I can change this old pattern that has depleted you so much. That pattern helped you as 
a child—it gave you connection to some caring neighbors, so it makes sense. But—you don’t 
need it anymore, not with me at least. You and I can be connected without depleting yourself 
and without having to “enslave” yourself to me.
CLIENT:
 I’d like that—I want to come back, but I am scared. How will I know if this will be 
different?
THERAPIST:
 Let’s keep checking in to make sure you’re not feeling like you “owe” me, or that  
I am doing anything that makes you feel like you have to take care of me—like you’ve had to 
with others.
In this way, exploring the client’s resistance commonly reveals an outdated coping 
strategy— not a lack of motivation (Wei & Ku, 2007). Marjorie continued in treatment 
and made significant progress. But without exploring what could go wrong for her with 
the therapist, Marjorie may have been challenged to return to the next session, even 
though she liked her therapist very much. To begin learning how the therapist can start to 
change this outdated or maladaptive coping strategy, we introduce a four-step sequence 
therapists can follow: Identify, Validate, Track, and Generalize.
First, the therapist is trying to help clients Identify their outdated coping strategies 
with others (such as being perfect, withdrawing, intimidating, complying, etc.). As we have 
just seen with Marjorie, for example, the client who always takes care of everyone else, 
at the expense of her own needs, and feels burned out and “used” at work and resentful 
at home. As part of this sequence, the therapist also helps clients understand why they 
originally needed to cope or protect themselves in these ways . For example, the client’s 
caregiver was anxious, drug-involved, or depressed, and she grew up taking care of her 
parent rather than being taken care of. Another aspect of identifying this outdated coping 
strategy is to clarify how clients may be continuing to do this now in their current inter -strategy is to clarify how clients may be continuing to do this now in their current inter -strategy is to clarify how clients may be continuing to do this now in their current inter
actions with others — including the therapist. For example, such clients commonly don’t 
share difficult feelings because they don’t want to “bother” or “burden” the therapist.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  79
Second, the therapist Validates the protection this interpersonal coping strategy once 
provided. This strategy (always taking care of others, not meeting one’s own needs), is 
now causing problems in the therapeutic relationship— as it is with others. However, once 
it was a strong and adaptive response to a reality-based problem. For example, Marjorie 
taking care of others preserved something of an attachment to her unresponsive caregiver, 
and it became the basis of her identity and the source of what little self-esteem she could 
garner through her ability to meet the needs of others. Affirming the validity and origi -
nal need for this coping strategy is often an empowering liberation to clients as this new 
understanding leads them to feel more self-acceptance rather than self-blame (e.g., Client: 
“So, I guess I’m not just stupid and hopeless. I learned to sabotage my successes for very 
good reasons”).
Third, the therapist holds a steady intention to Track the process dimension and 
ensure that the therapeutic relationship does not repeat this problematic pattern that has 
transpired so often with important others. The therapist can provide a corrective emo -
tional experience— rather than an unwanted reenactment— by checking this out with the 
client and asking:
THERAPIST:
 At work you take care of everybody and everything, at home you do the same
—
 and 
understandably feel resentful and exhausted. So, as we begin to clarify this unwanted life-script 
of yours, it makes me wonder if it ever feels like you are taking care of me in some way, too?
Therapists often sit in disbelief as many clients respond “yes” to process questions 
like this and go on to explain how aspects of the old coping strategy they are describing 
with others are indeed being reenacted between them in ways the therapist never dreamed 
were possibilities. For example:
CLIENT:
 Well, I guess sometimes I worry that I’m burdening you with my problems. I can see 
from the picture on your desk that you’re a mother, so I know that you go home to a lot of 
needs yourself...
Fourth, the therapist’s ultimate goal is to help clients Generalize or transfer this new 
experience or relearning with the therapist and apply it with others in their lives. For 
example, this caretaking client could also respond differently and say “no,” the pattern 
isn’t repeating with the therapist:
CLIENT:
 No, you’re different than my boss and husband and daughter
—
 I don’t have to take care 
of you. It’s nice, I can be responded to.
THERAPIST:
 Good, I’m glad this is one place where you can let that depleting role go and allow 
yourself to be responded to. Who else in your life can you break this pattern with—you know, 
respond to your needs mutually?
CLIENT:
 Well, I could probably do more of this with my sister, and one of my coworkers is pretty 
responsive.
THERAPIST:
 Let’s try to build on those relationships, and start looking actively for others where 
things could be more balanced.
By following this four-step sequence, over and over again, therapists provide clients 
with the real-life experience that, at least here, they no longer need to keep using the 
outdated coping strategy. More precisely, therapists can help them learn to discriminate 
between when they still need to respond in this old way (for instance, at work with their 
rigid and demanding supervisor) and when they don’t (such as with their supportive 
friend or cooperative coworker).
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

80  CHAPTER 3
There is a great deal of complex but important information here— we’ll return to this 
pivotal topic of outdated interpersonal coping strategies and work further with this four-
step sequence of change. To sum up for now, we have seen that clients are far more likely 
to become stalled in therapy, or to drop out prematurely, if their resistance, ambivalence, or 
rupture is not addressed in a supportive and collaborative manner (see Bender, 2005; Knox, 
Adrians, Everson et al., 2013; Ogrodniczuk et al., 2005). One of the most important ways 
to engage clients in a successful therapeutic alliance, and to identify the key conflicts in their 
lives that need to be worked on in treatment, is to invite clients to discuss any concerns they 
may have about any aspect of being in treatment or problems with anything the therapist 
does. In this regard, Rhodes et al. (1994) asked clients who were satisfied with treatment 
what their therapists had done to resolve misunderstanding between them. More satisfied 
clients reported that therapists asked them how they were feeling about what was going 
on in their relationship, listened non-defensively and were willing to hear what the clients 
thought they were doing wrong, and apologized if they made a mistake or hurt clients’ feel-
ings. In sum, the guiding principle is that if we make it easy and safe for clients to talk about 
their fear, ambivalence, or concerns about entering treatment, they will be less likely to act on 
them and drop out prematurely (Cartwright, 2004). Before going on to illustrate further how 
to do this, we first need to learn more about recognizing when resistance may be in play for 
our clients, and how to distinguish it from reality-based constraints that need to be affirmed.
IDENTIFYING RESISTANCE
Especially as they begin their training, it is common for new therapists to have clients who 
drop out of treatment within the first few sessions. This doesn’t feel very good, of course, 
but as we have begun to see, there is much we can do to prevent these unwanted premature 
terminations. Too often, therapists do not consider whether they have been effective in 
providing empathic understanding, or invited clients to speak forthrightly about any 
questions or concerns they may have about entering treatment or the therapist (Kegel & 
Fluckiger, 2015). Instead therapists may just blame clients and conclude that they weren’t 
really motivated or ready to look at their problems (which usually isn’t the case, unless clients 
are entering treatment at someone else’s behest). Or, therapists may blame themselves and 
think that they unwittingly made some irrevocable mistake in the previous session— which is 
usually untrue as well. Often, something else is going on with these premature terminations. 
Researchers have interviewed clients after treatment and found that clients often report having 
some negative or conflicted feelings toward the therapist, which they hid from the therapist 
(Hill et al., 1992, 1993). All of us need to remember and learn from this. More specifically, 
clients report that it often doesn’t feel safe to bring up these negative feelings on their own 
and, generally, therapists do not want to talk about “you and me” and ask about potential 
problems or misunderstandings between them. As a result, many clients terminate prematurely 
because they are acting on, rather than talking about, their conflicted feelings about entering 
therapy, or unspoken misunderstandings or difficulties with the therapist that were not talked 
through and resolved. This unfortunate but common outcome is not necessary. There is so 
much therapists can easily do to help clients successfully engage in treatmentand resolve the 
misunderstandings and difficulties that commonly arise. For example, the therapist can:
 /uni25CFhelp clients identify when resistance may be occurring,
 /uni25CFapproach this issue in a noncritical, welcoming manner that actively encourages clients to 
express fully any concerns they may have about the therapist or the treatment process, and
 /uni25CFhelp clients resolve these concerns by listening in an accepting and non-defensive 
manner, expressing appreciation for clients’ willingness to talk about problems, and 
communicating a willingness to be flexible, take their concerns seriously, and work 
out mutually agreeable solutions.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  81
Beginning with the first bullet item, how does the therapist identify or know when 
resistance is occurring? Therapists never really know what any behavior means for a par-
ticular client, but resistance may be operating when clients consistently have difficulty 
participating in treatment. For example, after reality-based constraints have been consid-
ered (such as scheduling conflicts or fees), psychologically based resistance  (e.g., getting 
help is inconsistent with familial or cultural norms, or the client is afraid of being judged 
or controlled by the therapist—as they have been in other significant relationships) is 
probably occurring when any of the following happen repeatedly or in combination:
 /uni25CFThe client misses multiple appointments or repeatedly comes late.
 /uni25CFThe client has very limited hours available for therapy.
 /uni25CFThe client asks to reschedule frequently or often cancels appointments.
 /uni25CFThe client does not want to make a firm commitment to attend the next session  
(“I’ll probably be seeing you next week”).
 /uni25CFThe client attends but remains vague or elusive about problems.
 /uni25CFThe client becomes reluctant to talk freely (“I don’t feel much like talking
 /uni25CFabout anything today”).
 /uni25CFThe client avoids certain topics that have come up in treatment and have been im-
portant, or brings up highly significant topics only at the end of the session.
 /uni25CFThe client has been working productively but abruptly suggests stopping and 
terminating before change has occurred.
It is important to stress that the same behavior often means very different things to 
different clients. However, when clients have trouble attending or participating fully in 
sessions in one of these ways, some form of resistance is usually at work (Callahan, 2000; 
Meissner, 2007). In such cases, the therapist can begin to generate working hypotheses 
about the possible meaning this resistance holds.
FORMULATE WORKING HYPOTHESES TO CLARIFY 
RESISTANCE
What is the threat or danger? On the basis of information the therapist has started to 
gather about the client’s current and past relationships, the therapist can begin specu -
lating about the different ways that entering treatment could be aversive for the client. 
Therapists can formulate working hypotheses such as the following about the issues or 
concerns that are likely to make it difficult for this particular client to enter treatment.
 /uni25CFDoes this Christian client believe that her inability to resolve her problems through 
prayer means that she has failed in her faith?
 /uni25CFIs it guilt-inducing for this highly responsible parent, who grew up taking care of her 
own anxious and dependent mother, to ask for something for herself?
 /uni25CFIs it awkward or embarrassing for this older Latino male to seek help from this 
younger female therapist?
 /uni25CFIs it shameful evidence of his own weakness or inadequacy if this blue-collar worker 
has an emotional problem that he cannot solve by himself?
 /uni25CFIs it disloyal for this Asian client to discuss personal problems with someone outside 
of the family?
Therapists may also keep in mind that resistance and defense are attempts to manage 
unwanted feelings of shame, guilt, disempowerment, and anxiety. Although clients may 
be unaware of it, they often struggle with the worry that, if they continue in treatment 
or engage more fully with the therapist, the therapist will hurt them as others have in 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

82  CHAPTER 3
the past. This schema-driven concern won’t come up in everyday interactions, but it will 
be activated when clients are upset, vulnerable, or in distress (when “hot cognitions” are
activated during crisis). We will see how therapists can use process comments to: (1) help 
clients clarify and better understand these concerns about their psychological safety with 
the therapist; (2) learn how to assess whether the therapist, unwittingly, may indeed be 
responding in a familiar but unwanted way that the client has learned to expect in close 
relationships (reenacting); or (3) make overt how they are co-creating a new and different 
type of relationship than the client has come to expect (corrective or resolving). Thinking 
in this way is one of the most significant learning curves for new therapists. As they begin 
seeing clients, most trainees do not realize that many of the clients’ strong perceptions and 
reactions to them are not based on the reality of what they have said and done with the 
client, but often is shaped by the clients’ internal working models and what has transpired 
in their attachment relationships.
Next, let’s consider one of the bigger meanings conveyed in the key question: “What is 
the threat or danger if you talked with me about that— what could go wrong between us?”
Therapists don’t want to “play it safe” with clients and keep things on the surface. 
Instead, therapists are trying to be someone who is willing to go beyond everyday social 
conversation. Being friendly and nice is appreciated, especially in the beginning, but it 
doesn’t carry us very far and won’t be enough to help most clients make progress with 
enduring or serious problems. Thus we hold a steady intention to be looking for oppor -
tunities to engage clients more significantly. We do this by reflecting the deeper meaning, 
inviting the stronger feeling, and approaching the central concern implied or alluded to 
in what the client just said. Therapists need to be willing to risk personally engaging with 
what is most important in the client’s life. Exploring the client’s resistance, and asking the 
here-and-now, immediacy questions suggested throughout this text, is not for the faint of 
heart. These questions may include:
 /uni25CFWhat’s the threat here? What’s going to go wrong between us if you disagree with me?
 /uni25CFWhat might I say or do that could make things worse for you if you risked sharing 
that with me?
 /uni25CFIs there a way I might respond to what you will share that you might expect but 
don’t want?
This way of responding will highlight clients’ core concerns and put them on the 
table for discussion. It will also strengthen the working alliance by bringing real engage -
ment, shared meaning, and greater intensity to the therapeutic relationship—which we 
have seen is the key to positive treatment outcome (Horvath & Bedi, 2002). Further, 
Ackerman and Hilsenroth (2003), clarify the association between being active, inter -
ested, and engaged with clients and establishing strong alliances. Thus, new therapists are 
encouraged to take the risk of responding to clients in this stronger, more forthright man-
ner from the start to the end of treatment—even though it may go beyond their familial 
and cultural norms. If the therapist has held a consistently empathic and nonjudgmental 
attitude toward the client, and has been willing to break the social rules and check out 
with the client how it is to talk together in this more straightforward way, most clients 
will welcome such honest communication. In fact, most clients find it reassuring because 
the therapist is behaviorally demonstrating that they aren’t alone with their problems 
anymore but have found someone who is ready and willing to join them and address 
what’s really wrong. Like all of the ideas suggested here, watching a supervisor dem -
onstrate this, and then role-playing and practicing with a classmate is usually necessary 
before trainees can put this into practice.
Therapists also can formulate hypotheses that anticipate how clients are most likely 
to play out or enact their concerns about treatment and/or the therapist. For example, 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  83
suppose a therapist has observed that her depressed client feels guilty and believes he 
is selfish whenever he does something for himself or someone does something for him. 
The therapist doesn’t know but is tentatively hypothesizing that this client may withdraw 
from treatment as soon as he starts to improve and feel better, or distance himself by 
disengaging when he realizes that the therapist genuinely cares about his well-being and 
their work together.
The therapist knows that these initial hypotheses may not be accurate and is ready to 
revise or discard them as more is learned about the client. However, the therapist will be 
able to respond more effectively if she can try to anticipate the concerns that might cause 
each client to drop out of treatment and the way each client is likely to express these con-
cerns. Prepared with working hypotheses such as these, student therapists will be able to 
“get it” more quickly and be able to recognize better in the moment what is happening 
between them— not two hours or two days later when they are reviewing tapes of their 
sessions. They are then able to respond more effectively by helping clients explore their 
own resistance before they act on it and leave treatment prematurely.
Extending this further, as the therapist identifies the repetitive issues that keep arising 
throughout the client’s life, the therapist is also better prepared to center treatment on 
these recurrent themes. Again, the therapist does this by highlighting them tentatively —
observing or wondering about them aloud to the client as they occur. These patterns, 
tentatively suggested so the client is invited to modify or discard them, readily become 
useful and of interest to most clients when offered collaboratively — creating a shared 
treatment focus and providing a compass for the ongoing course of therapy (Binder, 
2004; Levenson, 2004). This is part of the ongoing process of formulating and refining 
case conceptualizations (that is, what’s really wrong) that will guide treatment plans (i.e., 
what the therapist wants to do to help with this problem) (Persons, Beckner & Tompkins, 
2013). We are going to return to this related topic of treatment focus. However, let’s turn 
now to applying these concepts about resistance in sessions with our clients.
RESPONDING TO RESISTANCE
We need defenses in our lives; they often are adaptive and necessary to cope. Most clients 
we see in treatment certainly needed certain coping strategies to lessen anxiety, sustain 
attachment ties, and to defend or protect themselves from real threats and dangers, when 
they first learned them as children. And, in a reality-based way, clients often need them 
now in some situations and relationships as adults. A primary treatment goal for thera -
pists with almost all clients is to help clients learn to discriminate between when certain 
defensive coping strategies are needed and when they are outdated and no longer serve 
us well. Most clients do not do this well— contributing strongly to most of the symptoms 
and problems they present in treatment. Throughout this text, we are going to illustrate 
how the therapist can help clients assess when their coping strategies are still necessary 
and helpful, and when they are no longer useful or needed. For example, becoming quiet 
and developing the chameleon-like ability to make oneself almost invisible in a room full 
of people— in order to go unnoticed and stay out of the line of fire — once was an effec -
tive coping strategy. It was necessary and adaptive while growing up with a hot-tempered 
parent and still is useful at the office for the same client who now is working for a critical, 
demanding, and volatile supervisor (at least until we can help this client find a different 
job or supervisor and stop this reenactment of a childhood dilemma). In contrast, how -
ever, being invisible and going unseen in this way is no longer adaptive or needed in the 
client’s current relationship with the therapist, and will almost certainly cause problems 
in other personal relationships.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

84  CHAPTER 3
In this section, we learn how therapists can respond effectively to common expres -
sions of resistance. Sample therapist–client dialogues illustrate effective and ineffective 
responses at three critical points: during a telephone conversation in which the client has 
difficulty scheduling the initial appointment; at the end of the first session; and during 
subsequent sessions with a client who has difficulty keeping appointments. As before, stu-
dent therapists should find their own words to express the principles embodied in these 
dialogues.
P/a.sc/r.sc/t.sc I: A/d.sc/d.sc/r.sc/e.sc/s.sc/s.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc R/e.sc/s.sc/i.sc/s.sc/t.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc D/u.sc/r.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc I/n.sc/i.sc/t.sc/i.sc/a.sc/l.sc  
T/e.sc/l.sc/e.sc/p.sc/h.sc/o.sc/n.sc/e.sc C/o.sc/n.sc/t.sc/a.sc/c.sc/t.sc
While scheduling the initial appointment, the therapist wishes to obtain a definitive com-
mitment to attend from the client. The client, however, may be ambivalent about entering 
therapy and, overtly or implicitly, express this during the initial telephone contact. The 
therapist’s aim is to attend to potential signs of resistance and find noncritical and non-
blaming ways to broach this with the client if some aspect of resistance seems to be in 
play. If not, there will be a higher rate of no-shows for the first session.
An Uncertain Commitment. In the first example, the client expresses only minimal 
uncertainty about attending the first session.
THERAPIST:
 It’s been good talking with you, and I’ll plan on meeting with you on Tuesday at 
4:00 /p.sc./m.sc.
CLIENT:
 OK, I guess I’ll see you then.
THERAPIST:
 I’m wondering if you feel a bit uncertain as you say, 
“
I guess.” Maybe there’s nothing 
“
I guess.” Maybe there’s nothing 
“
to it, but I’m wondering if we should talk together for a minute about how it feels to come in? 
Do you have any questions or concerns I can try to answer for you?
CLIENT:
 Well, maybe I’m a bit cautious about most new things I try, but I do want to come and 
will be there on Tuesday.
THERAPIST:
 Good, I’m looking forward to meeting with you. We can talk then about that little 
bit of cautiousness, if you’d like, and any questions you may have about me or treatment. See 
you next Tuesday at 4:00 /p.sc./m.sc.
An effective response to the client’s ambiguity (“I guess...”) is modeled in this dia -
logue. The therapist hears potential indecision in the client’s vague commitment, and 
approaches it directly but sensitively by asking about it in an exploratory, non-blaming 
manner. An ineffective response would be for the therapist to let it pass by on the assump-
tion that it probably doesn’t mean much. Perhaps it doesn’t, and chances are that most 
clients will still arrive at the appointment time. However, the chances of the client not 
showing up for the first appointment are far greater if the therapist does not acknowl -
edge these signs of uncertain commitment and invite a non-defensive dialogue about this 
potential resistance. Furthermore, although this ambiguous comment may seem too sub -
tle or small to be significant, it is a statement about the counseling relationship — about 
you and me. Treatment benefits when therapists track clients’ comments about the thera-
peutic relationship and offer open-ended bids to explore them further, even though this is 
not how most new therapists have been socialized.
In addition, the therapist can mentally note this indecision as a possible sign of resis -
tance— that something about beginning may not feel quite right. This is an instance where 
the therapist can begin to generate working hypotheses, derived from our three orienting 
questions, about the possible meaning of this “cautiousness.” As therapists meets this type 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  85
of client and listen to the narratives of his or her life, they can begin to consider tentative 
working hypotheses about other material related to “uncertainty” — or discard it if they 
don’t hear this theme in other arenas of the client’s life.
A More Ambivalent Client. Now imagine a similar telephone conversation, but with 
a different and more resistant client this time.
CLIENT:
 OK, I guess I’ll see you then.
THERAPIST:
 I’m wondering if there’s a bit of uncertainty when you say, “I guess.” Can we talk 
for a minute about how it feels for you to come in and see me?
CLIENT:
 Well, in my family, we don’t really talk to others about family problems.
THERAPIST:
 I respect your concern about being loyal to your family
—
 I can see they are impor
-
tant to you. But I’m also hoping that we can find a way to balance things. Maybe one of the 
things we can talk about is how you can ask for help from others and get your own needs met 
in a way that still respects your family
—
 you know, a way that leaves you with the feeling that 
you aren’t being disloyal.
CLIENT:
 I’d like that. My family is really important to me and maybe another part of this is that 
sometimes it seems likes psychologists just want to blame parents for everything. That doesn’t 
feel right to me.
THERAPIST:
 Your concern makes sense to me. I’m glad you brought it up. That wouldn’t feel 
right to me, either. I’m hoping that we can better understand what’s wrong and causing prob-
lems in your life, so you can make the changes that you choose to make. So, I’m looking to 
understand problems better, not blame. That’s a big difference.
CLIENT:
 I like that. OK, I’ll see you on Tuesday.
THERAPIST:
 Good. I’ll look forward to meeting you Tuesday at 4.
An ineffective response would be to accept the client’s uncertain commitment (“OK, 
I guess I’ll see you then”) and avoid the possibility that an important issue about what it 
means for this client to have a problem, ask for help, or enter treatment is being played 
out. In this dialogue, the therapist has tried to “hear” and respond to the client’s concern 
instead. By affirming both sides of the client’s ambivalent feelings (balancing personal 
needs with family loyalties); differentiating herself from other psychologists in the client’s 
worldview (trying to understand not blame); and simply being accepting and respectful 
of the conflict, the therapist has done much to help this client take the first step and enter 
treatment. Without the therapist’s follow-up on a small, ambiguous statement, however, 
this highly workable client likely would not have been able to enter treatment successfully.
Let’s look further at why therapists in both dialogues would take this stance and 
press for a clear commitment to attend. Wouldn’t it be more supportive to let clients leave 
the appointment a little bit tentative, if that is what they need to do? No. Little thera -
peutic change will occur until clients take responsibility for the decision to enter therapy 
and work on their problems. Therapists do, however, need to be flexible. As we will see 
shortly, for example, therapists can give clients permission to make only a very limited 
commitment— for only one session or just a few sessions— to get a better sense of whether 
treatment, or this particular therapist, is right for them. Without this commitment, how -
ever, the therapist has little to work with. In fact, it is better for the client to remain out of 
therapy than to enter without commitment and have an unsuccessful therapeutic experi -
ence. As Yalom (1981) emphasizes, the therapist wants to be concerned about preventing 
failed hope in certain clients. If clients have one or more unsuccessful therapy experi -
ences, it may discourage them from trying to seek help with their problems again. When 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

86  CHAPTER 3
a client makes a commitment—even if only to attend one session, the therapy process 
becomes a joint endeavor and therapist and client become partners or collaborators in the 
work— which facilitates positive treatment outcome (Tyrone & Winograd, 2002).
Clients Who Try to Make the Therapist Responsible. Let’s continue with a dif-
ferent telephone conversation that new therapists are also going to encounter with pro -
spective clients. Some clients will try to make the therapist (and others) take responsibility 
for their decisions.
CLIENT:
 I’m not sure if I should start therapy or not. What do you think I should do?
It is important to reach out to clients and actively welcome them into treatment, but the 
therapist does not want to resolve clients’ ambivalence by taking responsibility for their 
decisions or being a cheerleader and trying to provide the motivation for treatment. With 
some of these externalizing clients, a helpful response might sound something like this:
THERAPIST:
 From what you’ve just been telling me, it really does sound like this has been a dif-
ficult time for you, and I would like to try and help. But, since you are uncertain about com-
ing to therapy, I suggest that you decide if you would like to come in for just one session and 
see how you like it. As we talk about what’s going on for you, I think you’ll get a good sense 
of treatment, and what it’s like to talk with me, and you will be able to decide for yourself 
whether you’d like to continue or not. How does that sound?
OR
THERAPIST:
 I can’t offer you any guarantees of course but, yes, I do believe that therapy may 
be of help. I’d like to try and work with you, but I suggest that we agree to meet for just one 
time. After we’ve had the chance to talk together, I think you’ll have a good sense of me and 
how I work, and will be able to decide for yourself what you want to do. At the end of the 
session, we can check in on this and talk forthrightly about how it’s been to meet and whether 
you want to continue. If we’re not a good match, I can easily give you other referrals.
As we would expect on the basis of client response specificity, such direct invita -
tions may be useful at times. When the therapist discerns that this client may have felt 
unseen, dismissed, or even rejected while growing up, or otherwise come to expect that 
others are uninterested and do not really care, it becomes important for the therapist to 
express genuine interest or even enthusiasm in working with the client. However, even 
when therapists are trying hard not to repeat the problematic relational patterns the cli -
ent is describing, they still want to respond in ways that ensure clients take responsibility 
for their own decisions to enter treatment. Therapists do not want to cajole, coerce, or 
win clients into therapy. At the same time, therapists do not want to be aloof or indif -
ferent. Thus the therapist is trying to meet clients where they are — working supportively 
with their ambivalence or conflicts about entering — yet without taking responsibility for 
the clients’ choices. In many cases, an effective response to the client’s question about 
entering treatment may be as follows:
THERAPIST:
 It seems as if one part of you wants to be in therapy, but another part of you 
doesn’t. Tell me about both sides of your feelings.
OR
THERAPIST:
 It sounds like a part of you wants to try this and a part of you doesn’t. Why don’t 
we agree to meet for just one or two sessions? Let’s see if we can work together and sort 
through both sides of this, so you can decide for yourself what you’d like to do.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  87
The next client in the following dialogue is providing the therapist with potentially 
important information. As before, the therapist can begin generating working hypotheses 
about what this behavior might mean. Having generated hypotheses, the therapist can 
then be alert for evidence of these themes in other areas of the client’s life. If, for example, 
there are narratives about uncertainty or avoiding personal responsibility that keep com -
ing up and prove to be enduring relational themes, the therapist can use these working 
hypotheses, which have now gained further support, to help provide the client with a 
focus for treatment. For example:
THERAPIST:
 You know, Marie, I’m hearing the same theme again with your landlord that you 
were talking about last week with your boyfriend
—
 you become quiet and “go along,” rather 
than speak up for yourself when you disagree. What do you think about this possibility?
The therapist does not want to become wed to these early hypotheses, however, and 
needs to be ready to discard them if the theme does not keep coming up or hold real feel-
ing for the client. New therapists can be reassured that as they become more experienced, 
their initial hypotheses will become more fruitful. This developing skill will become an 
especially important aid to counselors as they begin working in short-term and crisis 
intervention modalities that require quicker, more accurate assessments during the initial 
phase of treatment.
As we are emphasizing in the interpersonal process approach, the therapist’s over -
arching intention is to try not to get stuck in an ongoing way that reenacts the client’s 
faulty patterns in the therapeutic relationship. However, this can easily occur in a meta -
phorical or encapsulated way in the initial negotiations between therapist and client. This 
is another reason why the therapist does not want to take over and tell the client seeking 
advice what to do. For example, the following response is well intended, but it is not 
going to be helpful to many clients:
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 On the basis of what you’ve told me, I think therapy will help you 
and believe you should give it a try.
Assuming such a directive stance reenacts a problematic relational scenario for many 
clients and confirms a maladaptive schema. Many clients are hampered in life by the 
faulty belief that they cannot act on what they want, pursue their own goals, or advocate 
on their own behalf. Others originally learned in attachment relationships that caregivers 
needed them to remain dependent to assuage the caregiver’s own anxiety. Now, as adults, 
these clients continue to act dependently and allow others to take responsibility and make 
decisions for them in order to remain connected.
Although such clients will also believe that they need to ask the therapist to tell them 
what to do, paradoxically, the healthier part of them that wants a more independent 
Self will resist the control they have just elicited. Clients with these compliance dynamics
(sometimes referred to as “excessive accommodation”) then have to resist the therapist—
and reject the good help the therapist may be offering as well — or they are further 
complying and losing even more of themselves by being helped and getting better in treat-
ment. As this common compliance scenario continues, clients come to feel badly about 
themselves— confused as to why they are rejecting the help they have just asked for, and 
guilty about rejecting the therapist who was trying to help. Therapeutic responses that 
give the client responsibility for deciding whether to follow through and enter treatment 
prevent this reenactment from occurring, and will provide some clients with a new and 
corrective response that challenges the old schema and begins to change a long-standing 
problem.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

88  CHAPTER 3
P/a.sc/r.sc/t.sc II: E/x.sc/p.sc/l.sc/o.sc/r.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc R/e.sc/s.sc/i.sc/s.sc/t.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc /a.sc/t.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc E/n.sc/d.sc  
/o.sc/f.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc F/i.sc/r.sc/s.sc/t.sc S/e.sc/s.sc/s.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc
Toward the end of the first session, no matter how well it seems to have gone, the thera -
pist is encouraged to ask clients how the session felt to them, and whether they have any 
concerns about the treatment process or the therapist. Unless the therapist is willing to 
inquire about potential problems in this straightforward way, such concerns are probably 
going to remain unspoken. Recall that follow-up research with clients after treatment 
indicates that many do indeed have some disappointments or difficulties with the thera -
pist or some aspect of treatment, but they usually do not bring these up or address these 
on their own  (Hill et al., 1992). Failing to inquire about and then sort through what -
ever concerns the client might be having is an opportunity lost. Many clients feel some 
reticence about entering treatment. And, at times, almost all clients will misperceive what 
the therapist is thinking about them or feel that the therapist misunderstood something 
important they have said. Such misperceptions and misunderstandings are an inevitable 
part of all relationships— and may occur because of the distortions shaped by the client’s 
maladaptive schemas or because the well-intended therapist simply misunderstood or did 
not grasp something that was meaningful to the client. Similarly, most clients will be 
uncomfortable at some points in treatment with how the therapist is responding to them 
(feeling, for example, that the therapist is being too quiet, too directive, etc.). All of these 
clients will be less likely to drop out prematurely and will be better able to make progress 
and change in treatment, if the therapist has:
 /uni25CFexplained that these misunderstandings are expectable and given the client overtly 
spoken permission to talk about whatever concerns may come up,
 /uni25CFovertly welcomed hearing any concerns and listened non-defensively and fully, and
 /uni25CFtaken the client’s concerns seriously and demonstrated a sincere effort to sort 
through them and resolve whatever the client risked expressing.
Addressing Interpersonal Conflict. To illustrate, five or 10 minutes before the end 
of the first session (to allow clients enough time to talk about their reactions to the thera-
pist and the session), the therapist can check in with the client:
THERAPIST:
 How was it to be here today?
Most clients will answer, “Fine.” Perhaps thinking that the student therapist is feeling 
insecure and may be seeking some reassurance, clients may go on to say how helpful the 
session has been. If so, the therapist might respond as follows:
THERAPIST:
 Good, I’m glad you’ve found our first session helpful. You’ve told me a lot about 
yourself today, and I feel we have gotten off to a good start, too. As part of our work together, 
I think it will help us if we can establish an important ground rule and talk about our rela-
tionship more directly than others usually do in your everyday life. I’m hoping that it will feel 
safe enough for you to be able to tell me about what does and doesn’t feel good about our 
interaction, and things that we could change or do differently to make our work more help-
ful. So, I’m wondering if there was anything about coming today, or anything about our work 
together, that didn’t feel quite right? If so, I would really welcome talking about it
—
 you know, 
so we could change things and make it better.
CLIENT:
 Oh no. I was eager to begin, and you have been very nice and understanding.
THERAPIST:
 Good. In the future, though, if something does come up
—
 and it probably will
—
 it 
will help our work together if we could talk about it. How would it be for you to do that? 
Would that be OK or maybe kind of hard for you?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  89
CLIENT:
 Well, I don’t know...that might be kind of difficult for me. We were taught to be polite in 
my family, you know.
THERAPIST:
 Absolutely. It is important to be polite, but I’m hoping we can be both polite and 
honest with each other, so we can solve any problems that might come up between us. One 
of the things I value about therapy is that this is a place where we can talk about whatever is 
most important to us, including our relationship and what’s going on between us that does 
and doesn’t feel good. Often that can be things we can’t do so easily with others out in the 
world but, in here with me, I welcome it. That way, we can always be up front, respectful, and 
also know where we stand with each other. How does that sound to you?
(Here, clients might respond in a variety of ways)
CLIENT:
 I like the idea of things being up front...I’m not used to doing that so it might be hard at first;
OR
CLIENT:
 Hmm, what if I have something to tell you about you that I don’t like?
OR
CLIENT:
 Well, I don’t know. I’m a Christian and I believe it’s important to be respectful.
OR
CLIENT:
 So you’re saying we can just get down to brass tacks here and talk about what’s 
really 
important, and not beat around the bush and worry so much about what you might be 
thinking—or try so hard to be nice.
In this vignette, the therapist is educating the client about the treatment process and 
trying to establish an important set of expectations for what is going to occur in therapy. 
The therapist is telling the client that, in contrast to many others, the therapist wants 
to hear about the client’s wishes and concerns, and address potential problems between 
them straightforwardly. Because straightforward communication and, especially, talking 
directly about conflict or personal problems between “you and me,” was not allowed in 
their families of origin, many clients will be surprised by, but welcome, this invitation. 
Here, the therapist is laying the groundwork for a relationship that is more direct and 
authentic than most clients have enjoyed in the past. Therapists want to establish these 
important expectations with their actions, and not just their words, early in treatment. As 
we emphasized earlier, there will be ruptures or misunderstandings in the therapeutic alli-
ance. It’s part of the treatment process— not a mistake (Safran et al., 2002). Effective ther-
apists repair the inevitable ruptures that occur by making process comments, asking about 
potential problems, and sorting them through (Safran, Muran & Eubanks-Carter, 2011).
Therapeutic relationships will remain superficial unless therapists are willing to 
broach these expectable ruptures and take the risk to talk them through. This is challeng-
ing for most new therapists, so further help with this far-reaching issue of rupture and 
repair follows— it is essential for successful treatment.
A More Assertive Client. As previously noted, approaching interpersonal conflict in 
these direct ways is often new and anxiety-arousing for student therapists because it may 
violate familial and cultural norms. Let’s continue with an assertive and critical client.
THERAPIST:
 I see that we’re almost out of time. How has it been for you to talk with me today?
CLIENT:
 Well, OK for the most part, but I did feel you were trying to hurry me a few times.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

90  CHAPTER 3
Clinical training holds many challenges, but for many student therapists none is big -
ger than learning to approach interpersonal conflict — in the moment as it is occurring 
between the therapist and the client. We do not want to minimize or avoid it by moving 
on to another topic, truncate it with a punitive response, or vaguely express hurt and 
communicate that the client’s complaint is in any way too much to handle, or unwanted. 
Instead, the best way to approach conflict is by encouraging clients to express their con -
cerns more fully and, as hard as it may be to do, strive to remain as non-defensive as you 
can and listen with a receptive, open mind.
THERAPIST:
 Thanks for speaking up
—
 it helps our work together when you bring up problems 
like that. Let’s look at this together and see if we can figure out what happened for each of us. 
Tell me more about your feeling of being “hurried up.”
Of course, it is often difficult for new therapists to do this — just as it is for many 
managers in the workplace, teachers in the classroom, and, unfortunately, many experi -
enced therapists as well. Such direct, conversations about conflict between “you and me” 
may arouse the therapist’s own anxiety, especially when the therapist has strong needs 
for the client’s approval. If therapists are to approach such anxiety-arousing ruptures 
and restore the therapeutic alliance, however, they must first become aware of their own 
characteristic responses to interpersonal conflict. For example, the automatic, knee-jerk 
reaction for some therapists is to avoid the client’s complaint and move on as if nothing 
significant was said. For other therapists, the initial response tendency is to agree readily 
with the client and quickly apologize, in order to abate the criticism. Still other therapists 
will automatically begin to justify themselves and offer lengthy explanations aimed at 
clarifying their good intentions and stopping the criticism. Disturbingly, a long line of 
researchers find that a significant number of highly experienced therapists actually coun -
ter with their own hostility and punitiveness, and criticize the client in turn (Ackerman 
& Hilsenroth, 2001; Binder & Strupp, 1997; Najavits & Strupp, 1994). The first step in 
learning better ways of responding is to become more aware of how we typically tend to 
react to criticism, negative evaluations, or unwanted confrontations. Research shows that 
rupture resolution is important to retaining clients in treatment (Muran et al., 2009), and 
is related to treatment outcome across different types of therapy (Safran & Kraus, 2014).
One of the best ways to develop this self-awareness and learn more about how we 
usually respond to interpersonal conflict is to recall how it was dealt with in our own 
family of origin. Regardless of age, our initial reactions to conflict often follows closely 
how our parents dealt with conflict in their marriage and how each parent dealt with 
conflict with in his or her childhood. Rather than automatically following their initial 
response propensity, therapists can learn to approach conflicts with more openness. With 
help from a supportive supervisor, new therapists can learn to do this effectively in a year 
or two and, before too long, feel comfortable and actually welcome misunderstandings 
and conflict as a therapeutic opportunity.
After inviting clients to express fully their concerns, the therapist is not in a hurry to 
explain “what really happened” between them or disagree with the client’s perception. Often 
the client is right and the therapist indeed was “hurrying” the client and, most commonly, 
the client’s perception is partially accurate and partially distorted— there is something to it. — there is something to it. —
Thus the therapist’s intention is to be non-defensive, examine his or her own behavior, and 
try to consider what accuracy there may be to the client’s perception. If we look from the 
clients’ perspective the therapist does not need to be afraid of acknowledging this to clients.
THERAPIST:
 You know, I think you might be right. I was aware of the time going by, and I 
wanted to touch on some other issues before we had to stop. I probably was hurrying you 
there, and I can see why that bothered you. I’m glad you made me aware of that; I’ll try not to 
do it again. You know, I like your honesty
—
 it’s a real strength of yours.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  91
We have been keying on how, throughout their first years of training, many student 
therapists suffer significantly over their fears of making mistakes, hurting clients, failing 
to help, and so forth. Sadly, these worries keep many from enjoying their clinical training, 
and others from taking personal risks and trying out new ways of thinking about and 
responding to clients. Some caring and responsible students simply do not enjoy their 
years of clinical training because of these worries. It is liberating as new therapists learn 
that they do not need to be afraid of making mistakes; they need only to remain open to 
the possibility that they may have erred and be willing to acknowledge mistakes. In the 
previous example, the therapist is responding to the client in a reality-based and egali -
tarian way. The therapist validates the client’s perception, which tells the client that the 
therapist is willing to have a genuine dialogue and risk entering into a real relationship. It 
also indicates that the therapist will respond to clients’ concerns with respect. Too often, 
therapists and clients enact a relationship in which the client fulfills the role of the weak 
or needy one and the therapist is the healthy one who does not make mistakes or have 
problems. The responses suggested here discourage that illusion. The therapist’s willing -
ness to risk having an authentic relationship is a gift to many clients. The client finds 
that, at least sometimes, problems with others can be talked through and resolved. The 
relearning from such corrective experiences with the therapist often has a powerful effect 
on clients and precipitates change with others in their lives. For example, clients routinely 
come back to the next session with reports of having acted stronger with someone in their 
everyday lives, as they have just done with the therapist; such as, using their own voice 
and speaking up for themselves with someone who previously had been intimidating.
In contrast, therapists can handle the negative feedback in a way that keeps the rela -
tionship superficial or puts them in a superior position.
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 Oh, you thought I was hurrying you up, how was that for you?
OR
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 That’s interesting. Do you ever feel this way in other relationships, too?
These responses are a misuse of the client-centered reflection or therapeutic neutral -
ity. With this type of deflection, the message to the client is, “It’s always your problem. 
I will not look at my own contribution here. This will not be an honest or real relation -
ship.” Such a response limits the relationship to a superficial encounter and sets up a 
covert power battle between client and therapist. Little therapeutic gain will be realized as 
long as their interpersonal process continues in this problematic way.
But what if the therapist does not agree with the client’s complaint? We don’t want to 
say anything we don’t really mean. Thus, the therapist can still accept the validity of the 
client’s perception, yet without agreeing to the comment.
THERAPIST:
 I’m sorry you saw me as being impatient with you; that wouldn’t feel very good. I wasn’t  I’m sorry you saw me as being impatient with you; that wouldn’t feel very good. I wasn’t 
aware of being in a hurry or trying to rush you, but I’ll watch out for that in the future. If you ever 
feel that happens again, stop me right then and we’ll look at it together.
In this example, the therapist is telling the client:
 /uni25CFI will take your concerns seriously even if I do not see it the same way.
 /uni25CFWe can disagree and have differences between us, and still remain connected and 
work together respectfully.
 /uni25CFYour feelings about us, and our work together, are important to me.
This type of response doesn’t just tell clients that problems between them can be 
resolved. It behaviorally shows this to them. In turn, this lends hope that the therapist 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

92  CHAPTER 3
and client may be able to resolve the client’s problems with others as well. By addressing 
conflicts between the therapist and the client directly, the therapist provides the client 
with an important model of having interpersonal conflicts resolved in a new and more 
constructive way. Different theoretical orientations use varying terms for this powerful 
type of experiential relearning, which includes exposure trials, modeling, in vivo relearn-
ing, corrective emotional experience, and others. Especially for clients who have learned 
to avoid interpersonal conflict because it has been threatening or simply unresolvable, 
such experiential relearning is empowering indeed. Perhaps because this experiential or 
relational re-learning is more procedural or implicit than only verbal, it can lead quickly 
to behavioral changes(Renn, 2012).
CLIENT:
 Guess what? I spoke up at my big meeting at work! I didn’t even think about it, I just 
jumped in and said what I thought. It was great
—
 my boss seemed really surprised
—
 and 
I/uni00A0think he’s treated me with a little more respect since.
Finally, it is also possible that the client is systematically misperceiving the therapist’s 
behavior in line with an early maladaptive schema. For example, this client may readily 
experience the therapist (and most other authority figures) as demanding more than the 
client would like to produce, and then being dissatisfied with whatever the client does 
produce. If so, this client may have grown up with a parent who repeatedly demanded 
that the client do everything on the parent’s timetable or ignored the child’s own accom-
plishments. Even if the therapist has gained further evidence to support such a hypothesis, 
this type of historical or transference interpretation should not be posed before the thera-
pist and client have resolved the dispute in their real-life relationship. Therapists stand to 
lose a lot if clients see them as sidestepping a reality-based confrontation. However, the 
therapist can use this information to generate working hypotheses about cognitive sche -
mas and faulty expectations that can be utilized later.
Clients Who T est the Therapist’s Adequacy. Because it is so challenging for most 
new therapists to approach interpersonal conflict directly with their clients and work 
with ruptures in the therapeutic alliance, let’s continue with another example. In the fol-
lowing situation, the client questions the therapist’s competence during the initial ses -
sion— which cuts quickly into an anxiety-arousing area for most new therapists. As we 
see, however, this sturdy therapist is able to remain non-defensive enough to approach 
the issue forthrightly and respond effectively by inviting the client to express that concern 
more fully.
THERAPIST:
 As you’re saying that, I’m wondering if there might be something about our rela-
tionship, or being in therapy, that just isn’t feeling good for you right now?
CLIENT:
 Well, you did say you were a student here. Isn’t that what you said when we first spoke 
on the phone?
THERAPIST:
 Yes, I’m a second-year graduate student, working on my master’s degree.
CLIENT:
 Well, I don’t really feel like a guinea pig or anything, but you really are just practicing on 
me, aren’t you? I don’t want to be unkind or anything, but I’m wondering if you think you’ve 
had enough experience to help me?
THERAPIST:
 Thanks for bringing this up. Let me rephrase and make sure I’m hearing you accu-
rately. Maybe you’re saying that you are worried that if you go to all of the trouble of coming 
here each week, and talk with me about problems that are difficult to bring up, that in the end 
I just won’t know enough to be able to help you?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  93
CLIENT:
 Well, yeah, that’s pretty much it. After all, you really are just a beginner, and I must be 
20 years older than you. Do you really think you can you help me?
THERAPIST:
 I cannot offer you any guarantees, of course, but I will do my best. And as we continue 
to meet together for two or three sessions, you will get a better sense of me, and what it’s like to 
work together. I think you will be able to decide for yourself soon whether this is the right match 
for you
—
 and we can talk together about that honestly. But for now, let’s see if there are any 
questions I can answer for you about my training status, and how our age difference might get in 
the way.
In this vignette, the therapist was able to approach the client’s concern directly. The 
therapist responded effectively by remaining non-defensive, even though this encounter 
was anxiety-arousing. The therapist did not act on an initial impulse, which was to try 
to reassure the client. Instead of responding to a personal need to seem competent to the 
client, the therapist was able to respond to the client’s concern— by inviting the client to 
express reservations directly and fully. The therapist tolerated personal discomfort well 
enough to be able to discuss the client’s concerns and, in so doing, behaviorally dem -
onstrated competence. This is always more effective than offering verbal reassurances, 
which would only sound hollow to the client and still leave the burden of proof on the 
therapist.
Clients’ Concerns about Entering Therapy. In the previous section, the thera -
pist has inquired about resistance and the client has expressed concerns that personally 
challenged the therapist. In the following example, the therapist asks about the client’s 
potential resistance (e.g., “How is it for you to come in today and begin talking with me 
about these problems?”) and the client expresses concerns about entering treatment— not 
about the therapist . Student therapists can be reassured that such concerns are far more 
common than challenges to the therapist and, of course, much easier for new therapists 
to address.
CLIENT:
 It’s kind of hard. I guess I’m not used to talking about myself very much, and I’ve never 
liked asking for help.
The therapist’s aim is to let clients know that he or she has heard their concerns 
and is trying to grasp the key message, core meaning, or biggest feeling. The therapist’s 
intention is also to demonstrate that he or she takes the client’s concerns seriously and is 
willing to be flexible and try to do something about them if possible. Again, the best way 
to demonstrate this empathic responsiveness is to invite clients to discuss their concerns 
more fully.
THERAPIST:
 You’re saying a lot right there, and it does sound important. Tell me more about 
what it means for you to focus on yourself, on your own experience or needs, and bring your 
concerns to me for help.
CLIENT:
 I don’t even know where to begin...it’s like I’ve always been so concerned about every-
body else that I’ve never really stopped to pay much attention to what was going on for me. 
Or maybe I just wasn’t supposed to do that...you know, be selfish...
THERAPIST:
 I can see how important your family is to you, and how much you want to honor 
them. So why don’t we agree that, here in therapy, you decide what we talk about and how 
much you want to share. You set the pace and we’ll go at your speed in here. We don’t need to 
talk about anything that you don’t want to. And I’ll join you there
—
 with the things that you 
decide you want to talk about. How does that sound?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

94  CHAPTER 3
CLIENT:
 Yeah, I like that. That sounds good. If I feel like I’m betraying my family, I don’t have to 
bring it up, but if I decide I need to talk about something anyway, then it’s OK with you.
THERAPIST:
 Yes, that sounds like a good way for us to work together.
When There Are Cultural Differences. Listening and responding to the client’s 
concerns with such affirming responsiveness is also important when ethnic or cultural 
differences exist between the therapist and client (McClure & Teyber, 2003). Cultural dif-
ferences can be a sensitive issue; neither client nor therapist may feel comfortable address-
ing them. Sometimes it almost seems as if there is an unwritten rule against recognizing 
differences. As before, however, the best way to work with these important differences—
which often are central to the client’s identity and sense of self—which often are central to the client’s identity and sense of self—which often are central to the client’s identity and sense of self is to acknowledge them 
in an open-ended way. Therapists want to give clients overtly spoken permission to be 
able to express any concerns they may have. To illustrate, suppose it becomes clear that 
the client and therapist are of different ethnicity, age, socioeconomic status, or religion:
THERAPIST:
 I wanted to check in with you about what it’s like to meet with me. Was there any-
thing about coming today, or talking with me, that could get in the way of our work together?
CLIENT:
 Well, I don’t mean to be disrespectful, but I don’t know if you can understand my situation 
because you’re a different race...
THERAPIST:
 I’m glad we’re talking about this, because our cultural backgrounds really are dif-
ferent. At times, there probably will be important things about you that I won’t understand as 
well as I want. When that happens, help me out and tell me when I’m not getting it. We’ll talk 
it through together until we’ve got it right. Was there something today that I missed or didn’t 
understand that we should revisit?
The therapist responds affirmingly by accepting the client’s concern, validating the 
client’s point of view, and being willing to explore it further. It is important for therapists 
to be aware of differences between themselves and their clients as they work with clients 
who differ from themselves in terms of sexual orientation, social class, spiritual beliefs, 
race/ethnicity, and other factors. For example, some minorities may feel different in a pre-
dominantly White school or workplace— especially if few attempts are made to reach out 
and include them. In some settings, people who are different may be regarded as deficient. 
The therapist’s willingness to acknowledge differences and invite clients to express any 
concerns or misgivings they may have will go a long way toward establishing a therapeu-
tic alliance and keeping clients who may feel different from dropping out prematurely.
As we have seen, when obvious ethnic, religious, or other cultural differences exist, 
enlisting the client’s help is even more apt. Ethnic, class, gender, and religious differences 
are complex, and it is counterproductive for therapists to labor under the misconception 
that it is their responsibility to understand everything about a client whose culture of ori-
gin differs from theirs. However, therapists do have a responsibility to educate themselves 
about clients from different social contexts, for example, by reading and consulting with 
informed colleagues (see Pederson et al., 2008; Sue & Sue, 2013). In particular, the thera-
pist can invite the client to educate the therapist whenever the client feels the therapist 
is misinformed or does not understand. By welcoming this clarification instead of feeling 
threatened by it, the therapist signals acceptance of their very real differences, demonstrates 
openness to a genuine dialogue, and offers an invitation for a real relationship. In so doing, 
the therapist gains credibility with the client and strengthens the working alliance.
Therapists also need to explore more fully with clients how they believe their cultural 
or social context influences their current problems and shapes their subjective experience 
(Comas-Diaz, 2006; Constantine & Sue, 2005).
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  95
THERAPIST:
 Would you help me understand this problem in terms of the expectations from your 
family or community?
CLIENT:
 I can’t discipline my children the way I want without being disrespectful to my mother. 
I’m Latina and my mother lives with us—she thinks I’m still her daughter, you know, and that 
it’s her role to help out by taking care of the children. I love her very much and appreciate her 
help, but she’s spoiling my son and she won’t listen when I ask her to stop. She almost gets 
mad at me when I speak up—like she thinks she’s their mother and she decides how to raise 
them—not me!
Harkening back to our core concepts in Chapter 1, even when obvious cultural dif -
ferences are not evident, therapists will be more effective as they try to enter their clients’ 
subjective worldview more fully (Speight et al., 1991; Wachtel, 2014).
To sum up, the therapist’s intention is to encourage clients to express any concerns 
about treatment or the therapist that arise, and then sincerely try to accommodate those 
concerns. This will go a long way toward resolving them and allowing many more clients 
to enter treatment and successfully receive help.
P/a.sc/r.sc/t.sc III: R/e.sc/s.sc/i.sc/s.sc/t.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc D/u.sc/r.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc S/u.sc/b.sc/s.sc/e.sc/q.sc/u.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc S/e.sc/s.sc/s.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc/s.sc
Understanding Clients’ Inability to Change: The Three Rs. As treatment pro-
gresses, some motivated clients will have phases when they find it hard to enter or stay with 
certain issues that come up, or feel stuck and simply can’t make progress in treatment. Too 
often, supervisors observe that student therapists disengage — quietly giving up on clients 
at this point — often doubting whether the client is “motivated” or questioning whether 
this client is ready to take action and start making real changes. More effective therapists, 
however, welcome these expectable impasses and use them as opportunities to explore re-
enactments in the therapy relationship or reveal or identify new issues that can take the 
client further. Rather than blame or judge the client, and give up and stop trying to make a 
difference, effective therapists can use process comments and invite the client to join them 
in a collaborative, non-blaming exploration to understand the resistance or block:
THERAPIST:
 It seems to me that we’ve kind of gotten stuck. You know, like we just aren’t mov-
ing forward the way we were before. What are your thoughts
—
 how do you see things going 
for us at this point?
As we would expect from client response specificity, the reasons for clients’ resistance 
are complex and varied. However, when therapy has stalled or clients have stopped mak-
ing progress on a problem, therapists can begin making sense of things by formulating 
working hypotheses around three issues: Ruptures, Reenactments, and Resistance.
First, we have already seen that Ruptures occur when there has been a misunder -
standing or conflict between the therapist and client that has disrupted the working alli -
ance. The therapist repairs or “restores” these expectable ruptures by bringing them up 
and talking with the client about the potential problems with treatment or between them. 
This active engagement, open-ended questioning, and validation of the client’s experi -
ence is also likely to facilitate the therapeutic alliance and client retention (Sheehan & 
Friedlander, 2015). For example,
THERAPIST:
 You sound irritated with me as you say that, James. I’m wondering if there may be 
a problem between us? If so, I’d sure like to talk it through
—
 you know, so we can understand 
what’s wrong and work it out.
Again, an enduring problem in the counseling field— cutting across every level of clini-
cal experience and within every brand of treatment— is therapists’ reluctance to address the 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

96  CHAPTER 3
misunderstandings and misperceptions that so commonly occur and routinely disrupt the 
therapeutic alliance. As we see in the previous dialogue, the therapist is speaking directly to 
potential conflict but doing so collaboratively—in a non-blaming, noncritical manner. We 
want student therapists to be role-playing and practicing this skill in their training courses.
The second R, Reenactments, also hold back clients from being able to succeed in 
treatment and make meaningful changes in their lives. As emphasized, therapists are 
encouraged to consider the possibility that in some actual or metaphorical way, the same 
type of problem or unwanted interaction that the client is having with others is being 
played out between them. That is, the treatment block is occurring because the interper -
sonal process between the therapist and client is reenacting, rather than resolving, some 
aspect of the client’s problem. For example, based on early maladaptive schemas, the cli-
ent believes the therapist is feeling critical toward her, or privately has become absolutely 
certain that the therapist is deeply disappointed in her — just as her spouse and parent 
have been. As before, the therapist intervenes best by working in the moment and explor-
ing the current interaction between the therapist and client:
THERAPIST:
 What do you think I might be thinking about you right now, Jenn, as you’re telling 
me about this?
Or, suppose a different therapist chose to self-disclose a personal problem of her 
own— without realizing how pervasively this client had been parentified while growing 
up. Now, this client feels she is in her old familial role again and has to “take care of” the 
therapist, too. When such reenactments occur— as they predictably do for all therapists—
the therapist can use process comments to help change the therapeutic interaction once 
it becomes clear that they have become stuck or progress has slowed. In the following 
example, a student therapist shared some personal family information with a client 
who was struggling with her parents’ recent divorce and who was feeling shame about 
this family “failure.” In discussing this self-disclosure with her supervisor, the therapist 
explained her intentions and said she’d shared her own experience of divorce to “nor -
malize” the reality of divorce and minimize the stigma the client appeared to be strug -
gling with. Her supervisor appreciated her good intentions, but cautioned that the client 
seemed to have been parentified in her family of origin and even now, having moved out 
and left for college, was still called frequently by her mother to get emotional support. 
The supervisor suggested that she be alert for an opportunity to explore “caretaking” 
from this client:
THERAPIST:
 You asked about my own life and parenting, and I told you that I got divorced this 
past year. I’m not sure, but it seems like you have gotten quieter since. Maybe it’s just me, but 
you seem a little more distant or reserved. Can you help me out here...could my feeling be  
telling us anything important?
CLIENT:
 Well, I guess I’m feeling sad for you, and concerned that you have had a lot of pain and 
suffering in your life.
THERAPIST:
 I appreciate your genuine concern for me, but I’m doing fine, and wondering right 
now if this is putting you in that very familiar but problematic caregiving role with me as well?
CLIENT:
 Well, maybe…that’s what I do, I guess. I’ve been taking care of others for a long time.
THERAPIST:
 Uh-huh, so this has kind of put you in your old, familiar spot of having to take care of 
me, too. Well, if we continued that, it sure would end your opportunity to learn about and change 
that old role, wouldn’t it? I’m so glad we’re talking about this, so we can make sure that doesn’t 
happen here. You’ve been a caregiver for others, at your own expense, long enough in your life 
and you don’t need more of it with your therapist, too. But I can sure see, now, how talking about 
my own divorce triggered that familiar role for you. Have there been other times when this has 
come up between us
—
 when you have felt that you needed to take care of me, too, in some way?
—
 when you have felt that you needed to take care of me, too, in some way?
—
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  97
By being able to explore and talk together in this way about what may be occurring 
between them, the therapist and client can readily restore their working alliance, stop 
reenactments from continuing to play out, and resume productive work.
Early in their training, most student therapists will not possess the objectivity neces -
sary to identify these predictable but subtle reenactments and will need assistance from 
their supervisors to identify when potential reenactments may be occurring. As well, new 
and experienced therapists alike benefit from personal exploration in their own therapy , 
so they can become more aware of their own response styles and better anticipate how 
their own tendencies to respond could interact with clients’ interpersonal patterns. When 
reenactments are occurring between the therapist and the client, clients are set back in 
treatment because their maladaptive schemas are behaviorally confirmed rather than 
experientially disproved. When maladaptive schemas are confirmed, clients lose the inter-inter-inter
personal safety they enjoyed with the therapist and cannot risk further exploring their 
problems, so treatment commonly becomes stalled and proceeds on a more superficial or 
intellectualized level. However, once the ship has been righted and the therapeutic rela -
tionship again is enacting a solution to clients’ maladaptive relational patterns, they can 
resume changing as these faulty beliefs and family roles are challenged and expanded 
through the interaction with the therapist, rather than confirmed (Silberschatz, 2005).
The third R, Resistance, will be re-evoked throughout treatment. As different issues are 
explored in treatment, clients will not be fully aware of all of the varying conflicts and feel-
ings that have been activated by a certain topic. Especially for clients whose feelings and 
perceptions were consistently invalidated as they grew up, they soon become unaware or 
“confused” about many aspects of their own subjective experience— what they are feeling or 
seeing. Resistant clients are not lying or deceiving the therapist, and they have not lost their 
motivation— these can occur but they are different treatment issues. Resistance occurs when 
clients are simply unaware of the multiple or contradictory feelings that have been activated 
by acknowledging realistically that certain problems really exist, asking for help, exploring 
difficult topics with more specificity, and— surprising to most new therapists— even by suc-
ceeding in treatment, making meaningful changes, and getting better. For example:
 /uni25CFGetting further help is relieving but may also arouse fears of being needy or weak.
 /uni25CFFeeling cared about by the therapist’s genuine concern is comforting but can also 
evoke sadness about the many times this need went unfulfilled.
 /uni25CFBeing listened to and understood in a consistent, reliable manner is reassuring but 
may also evoke fears of being controlled if they get closer to the therapist.
 /uni25CFBecoming more successful is empowering but arouses the fear of being envied, 
undermined, or isolated.
Unless addressed and clarified, these commonly occurring reactions will lead to resis-
tance. They can cause a few clients to leave treatment prematurely, and many more to 
sabotage the success or undo the changes they have achieved. For others, therapy will 
stall and becomes repetitious or intellectualized. At the beginning of their clinical training, 
however, many therapists are not familiar with the ambivalent, push-pull, or paradoxical 
nature of these conflicts. Let’s explore this further by recalling Marsha from Chapter 2.
It was profoundly reassuring for Marsha when her second therapist approached her 
feelings directly and “heard” her and validated her experience. At the same time, however, 
this very positive experience also aroused other contradictory feelings that she “hated.” 
Marsha now felt heard and understood but, at times, also felt:
 /uni25CFsad, as years of unacknowledged loneliness welled up;
 /uni25CFangry, at not being heard, and being denigrated, so many times;
 /uni25CFguilty, for feeling angry at her parents and being disloyal to them; and
 /uni25CFanxious, for breaking unspoken familial rules and talking to someone about these 
problems and naming what was really wrong in her family.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

98  CHAPTER 3
Marsha did not want to experience any of these feelings and, without being very aware 
of it, it was hard for her to stay with these treatment issues related to her family when 
these feelings were evoked. She did not understand them and felt threatened by them, yet 
she could not make them go away. Fortunately, her therapist was comfortable with the 
push-pull nature of conflict and consistently helped her make sense of the different, contra-
dictory aspects of her experience that emerged. His accepting response helped her to recog-
nize and integrate these conflicted feelings and gradually resolve them. In these ways, the 
second therapist was providing Marsha with affective containment. In attachment terms, 
this is a “holding environment” that provided her with the psychological safety she needed 
to address, explore, more fully experience or feel, and then share— these cardinal issues for 
the first time (Greenberg, 2014). As these changes occurred in the therapeutic relationship, 
Marsha began telling the therapist that she found herself “feeling more confident” than she 
had before and that she was getting better grades and making new friends at school.
At different points in treatment, clients will often be unaware of, and anxious about, 
the sequence of ambivalent or conflicted feelings evoked in the change process. As a result, 
they may feel misunderstood or even blamed when the therapist inquires about potential 
signs of resistance. Some clients may feel that the therapist’s questions imply that they are 
doing something wrong or are not trying hard enough. Concerned that the therapist is 
frustrated or disappointed with them, clients may try to justify their good intentions:
CLIENT:
 Oh no, you don’t understand. I really do want to see you and get here on time. It’s just that...
As already emphasized, therapists never want clients to feel blamed or judged. Rather, 
the therapist is inviting the client to join in a collaborative exploration to understand the 
threat or danger that some aspect of treatment has aroused. Once clients understand that 
the therapist’s intention is to explore the threat or danger, and not criticize, most readily 
join in a productive exploration.
Therapists can best approach potential signs of resistance with curiosity and a spirit 
of mutual exploration. Although new therapists are often concerned about being too blunt 
or being misperceived as critical, the problem actually goes the other way. Because so 
many therapists are too worried about hurting their clients’ feelings or evoking their dis-
approval, some avoid these issues and others do not respond as forthrightly as they could. 
Many new therapists dilute what they say to the client in order to mute their impact. If 
therapists are worried that their explorations may be seem intrusive or unwanted to the 
client, they can shift gears and find another way to respond. Better yet, they can check 
this out by just asking the client directly. For example,
THERAPIST:
 I like talking about these issues that come up between us—I think it helps our work 
together. But I wanted to check in and make sure that you’re feeling comfortable with this 
forthrightness, too. How is it for you to talk with me like this
—
 is this going OK for you?
CLIENT:
 It was different at first, I wasn’t used to talking like this. But I like it
—
 I feel like I’m finally 
talking to somebody about what’s really going on. My wife likes it, too. She says I’m speaking 
up and talk about things more than I used to, and she feels “in the loop.”
Researchers evaluating the effectiveness of the widely utilized treatment approach 
of Motivational Interviewing find that it is especially counterproductive when therapists 
push or argue against resistance, whereas collaboration and empathy from therapists 
facilitated change (Arkowitz et al., 2015; Moyers, 2014; White & Miller, 2007). Thus, the 
therapist’s intentions are to inquire about potential signs of client resistance in a curious, 
exploratory manner that invites a collaborative dialogue. As before, a tentative approach 
is needed. Therapists can merely wonder aloud with clients about the possible meaning 
certain behavior may hold; there is no argument or insistence on what a client’s potential 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  99
resistance might mean. Therapists can approach resistance without arousing defensive -
ness through a series of gradual steps that are progressively more direct; a three-step 
sequence is often effective.
Step One: Permission-Giving and Educative Response
In the first step, the therapist offers a permission-giving and educative response to encour-
age clients to talk about the positive and negative reactions that come up for them about 
treatment or toward the therapist. In particular, the therapist explains that problems or 
misunderstandings with the therapist are inevitable, and the client can help by bringing 
them up:
THERAPIST:
 Can we talk about what it’s like for you to come and see me? I noticed that you 
were 20 minutes late today and had to reschedule your appointment last week. Maybe it 
doesn’t mean anything, but I was wondering if something about our work together might not 
be feeling right for you. Any thoughts come to mind?
CLIENT:
 Oh no, I really do want to be here. Things have just been crazy at work. You’ve been very 
helpful, really. I had a deadline last week and today it’s just that my boss called as I was leaving.
THERAPIST:
 OK, but if in the future you ever find yourself having any concerns about therapy 
or the way we are working together, I would really appreciate it if you would speak up and 
tell me about them—you know, let me know about any problems or misunderstandings that 
might come up. This can happen between us just as it does in other relationships. How would 
it be for you to tell me about something I did that you didn’t like or something about being in 
treatment that was uncomfortable for you?
CLIENT:
 Well, that might be kind of hard for me to do.
THERAPIST:
 Uh huh...tell me, what do you think might be hard about that for you?
CLIENT:
 Well, I wouldn’t want to hurt your feelings or anything, especially because you’re such 
a nice person. It’s hard for me to tell people things that are not nice—I try to be nice to ev-
erybody, I guess. It’s important for me to be sure that I’m being respectful and nice. Maybe I 
worry about that too much.
THERAPIST:
 Yeah, maybe being nice all the time has become too much of a worry for you. I can 
honestly say that I would welcome hearing any concerns you might have about us or about 
counseling. I’d think you were working with me to help you. I certainly wouldn’t think that 
you weren’t being nice to me. I would welcome that kind of openness between us. But maybe 
you’re telling me that’s been different with other people that have been important in your life.
In this first example, the therapist offered a permission-giving and educative response 
in the hope that the client would then feel free to talk about any ambivalent feelings 
about treatment or conflicts with the therapist that may emerge. For many, this is all that 
is needed. When this invitation is insufficient, the therapist can take a second step and 
encourage the client to explore the potential threat. That is, if the client continues to show 
signs of resistance without being able to talk about it (e.g., missing, canceling, reschedul -
ing, coming late, discussing only superficial issues, etc.), the therapist moves to the second 
step by exploring the interpersonal threat.
Step Two: Explore the Danger/Identify the Threat
THERAPIST:
 It’s important in our work together that you and I are able to talk about any 
difficulties that might come up between us—they’re bound to occur in any relationship. 
I’m wondering if you would be able to tell me if something about our relationship or work 
together was troubling you?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

100  CHAPTER 3
CLIENT:
 I suppose.
THERAPIST:
 Well, OK, but based on what you’ve told me about some other parts of your life, 
I’m wondering if that might be kind of hard for you to do. You know, thinking that it might 
be kind of new or difficult for you to tell me if I did something that you didn’t like, or if there 
was something about being in treatment that wasn’t feeling very good for you. Sometimes 
people believe they shouldn’t have frustrated or disappointed feelings, or at least they don’t 
think they should express them.
CLIENT:
 Well, yes, that’s probably true.
THERAPIST:
 Let’s try to figure this out together. It seems that you are having some trouble be-
ing in treatment but don’t feel comfortable talking with me about that yet. I’m wondering 
what the threat or danger might be for you if you were forthright and took the risk of telling 
me about something here that didn’t feel right. What’s gone wrong with others in the past, or 
what might go wrong between us?
CLIENT:
 Well, you probably wouldn’t want to see me anymore
—
 I’d be too much trouble, too 
critical, too demanding, or too something. And whether you said it or not, you’d rather I just 
went away and didn’t bother you anymore.
THERAPIST:
 You’re saying so many important things right there, but maybe the biggest thing 
you’re saying is that I’m going to leave you or walk away from our relationship if you speak up 
and have your own voice
—
 and don’t just go along with what I say or comply with what I want?
CLIENT:
 Well, yeah, I guess that’s kinda how it’s been for me. Isn’t that how people really are?
In this example, the therapist is trying to identify the threat that keeps the client from 
being able to talk about feelings or concerns that contribute to resistance and are central 
to the problems she is having with others. Emphasizing process rather than content, the 
therapist is not trying to find out why the client is not showing up for therapy, but why the 
client is having trouble talking about it. Here, the client reveals her pathogenic belief that 
if she disagrees with the therapist, or speaks up and expresses what she wants or doesn’t 
like, the therapist (and others) will leave her. This may not seem like a welcome opportu-
nity to the new therapist, but the potential for significant change is present at this moment. 
The therapist is beginning to provide a corrective emotional experience by clarifying that 
he does not wish to end their relationship as soon as they have a disagreement. As this 
pathogenic belief of “comply or be left” is highlighted and then disconfirmed in their rela-
tionship, it will also reveal how this belief had in fact been a reality-based expectation in 
other important relationships(Tsai et al., 2014). As we will see, this client goes on to recall 
how the abandonment or rejection she expects from the therapist is what she behaviorally 
experienced while growing up in her family and in her first marriage (Client: “In my family 
it was always, go along or be alone”). By first highlighting this outdated coping strategy of 
compliance in the therapeutic relationship and changing it in their relationship, the thera-
pist can then take the next step in the change process and help the client generalize this 
to her everyday life. This occurs as the therapist helps this client begin exploring current 
relationships with others where she is also anxiously pleasing, unable to speak up and say 
what she thinks, and “goes along” in order to keep others connected to her, and begin to 
question and challenge this problematic way of relating with them as well. For example:
THERAPIST:
 Tell me how this poignant problem of either going along or being alone might be a 
problem with others in your life, too, like it’s been with me?
CLIENT:
 I think it makes it hard for me to say 
“
no
“
no
“
 ” 
to anybody. Right now, as we’re talking, I’m 
thinking about what a bad mom I’m being because I just can’t discipline my kids. I guess I 
don’t want them to be unhappy with me either
—
 so, yeah, I guess I’m going along with what 
they want and just trying to please them, too.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  101
THERAPIST:
 You’re doing great. Now that we’re starting to understand this, let’s see if we can 
help you change it. You know, take a stronger stand with them, tolerate their disapproval 
rather than cave in to that fear of being left, and follow through and enforce the rules you set. 
How does it sound to start speaking up more assertively in here with me, and to start working 
together to help you discipline your kids more effectively?
CLIENT:
 It’s like my life would change
—
 I’d be a different person if I could do that.
This client continued to work productively in treatment and did not miss or cancel 
another appointment after this session. Similarly, with most clients,  exploring the threat 
or danger in this way will both resolve their resistance to treatment and uncover key con-
cerns that are central to their presenting symptoms and problems.
For example:
THERAPIST:
 Nadine, again today, it seemed to me that you kept jumping around from topic to 
topic. It was especially evident after you said you had dinner with your sister. I’m wondering 
what the threat or danger might be for you if you didn’t change the topic so frequently but 
stayed with one issue longer and allowed me to join you there?
CLIENT:
 I don’t know—I hear that a lot. I guess I just don’t want to think about anything for 
too/uni00A0long...
THERAPIST:
 You don’t want to think about anything for too long—I’m wondering what feels 
unsafe about that – what would go wrong?
CLIENT:
 Well...(
pauses
) I think maybe I’d start to cry or something.
THERAPIST:
 Uh huh, something about crying isn’t safe—it doesn’t feel OK. Help me understand 
that better. If you were sad and started crying, what might I do that would be unwanted or 
make things worse for you?
CLIENT:
 Well, I’m not sure why I’m thinking this, but I’m afraid you might put me down or 
something.
THERAPIST:
 Put you down?
CLIENT:
 Yeah, think I’m feeling sorry for myself, acting like a baby...but you wouldn’t say that 
out loud cause therapists aren’t supposed to say that.
 When repeated attempts to focus on the threat do not work— the therapist and client 
cannot successfully collaborate and identify the threat or danger—therapists can move 
to the third step. As the next alternative, the therapist can try to interpret the content of 
the client’s resistance. For example, if the therapist thinks the client’s resistance is about 
to pull the client out of treatment, and the client cannot join with the therapist and talk 
about the difficulty, the therapist can draw on working hypotheses and tentatively suggest 
possible reasons or interpretations for the resistance.
Step Three: Tentatively Interpret Potential Reasons for the Resistance
THERAPIST:
 It’s been hard for you to get here; you’ve missed the last two sessions. Maybe you just 
“forgot,” but I’m wondering if there is something about coming here to talk with me that doesn’t 
quite feel safe—or something that might have gone on between us or that I said that didn’t feel 
quite right to you. I know I’ve asked you this before...but do any possibilities come to mind?
CLIENT:
 No, not really.
THERAPIST:
 Well, OK. Let me suggest some possibilities I’ve wondered about, and you tell me 
what you think of them. As I think about some of the things you’ve told me about yourself, 
I’m wondering if you’re concerned that I too am going to “judge” you, like too many others in 
your life have done?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

102  CHAPTER 3
CLIENT:
 Yeah, I guess that might be true. But it’s not so much that you would judge me, it’s more 
like you wouldn’t respect me if you knew more about me.
THERAPIST:
 Thank you for clarifying that. It’s not about judging, it’s that I wouldn’t “respect” 
you. I really appreciate that you are willing to risk sharing this with me. Has that ever hap-
pened between us
—
 has there ever been a time when you felt that maybe I wasn’t treating you 
respectfully?
CLIENT:
 Well, no, it hasn’t happened yet, but I haven’t told you very much either.
THERAPIST:
 Good, I’m glad that hasn’t happened yet. I really don’t ever want you to feel disre-
spected by me and, if that ever comes up here with me, I want you to stop us right then and 
tell me so we can sort it out. But I hear you
—
 you’re afraid I’m going to lose respect for you if 
you tell me more about yourself. I see how that would make it difficult for you to come here 
each week and talk with me
—
 and maybe make it hard to get close to others, too.
CLIENT:
 Yeah, I think that respect thing has gotten in the way a lot in my life. But I’m just not 
going to put up with anybody putting me down...
THERAPIST:
 What would make it safe for you to talk about all you need to say in here?
Why does the therapist take this more interpretive stance (tentative as it is) only 
as a last resort? The interpretation, accurate or not, is the therapist’s issue and puts the 
ball in the therapist’s court. Whenever possible, it is better to try to follow the client’s 
lead, or focus on the therapeutic process, rather than to pull the client along in the 
therapist’s direction. In other words, it is usually more effective to explore why it might 
make sense that the client is resisting, or make a process comment and address the 
current interaction, than to make interpretations or tell the client what to do. Why? The 
goal is to maintain a working partnership and keep the relationship as collaborative as 
possible. Whereas Steps One and Two will be highly effective with most clients, Step 
Three— tentatively suggesting possible reasons or interpretations for the resistance, and 
asking the client to modify or improve the interpretations to make them fit better, can be 
productive at times as well.
SHAME FUELS RESISTANCE
Misunderstandings, resistance, defense, ambivalence, and ruptures will occur throughout 
every phase of treatment— it’s just part of the work. The most common source of resistance, 
however, is shame. Only in recent years have therapists begun to recognize the pervasive, 
trans-diagnostic role of shame in many clients’ symptoms and problems (Dearing & 
Tagney, 2011). Shame is more apt than any other issue to generate resistance, lead to 
premature termination, hold clients back from initiating change, and lead to relapses. In a 
highly unfortunate interaction, it is also the feeling that therapists are most likely to avoid 
with their clients. Simply put, it can be terribly difficult for therapists to bear sitting with 
their clients as they suffer such an excruciating feeling. Routinely, new and experienced 
therapists alike feel inadequate to help and painfully uncertain of what to do. Predictably, 
it evokes their own shame as well—it evokes their own shame as well—it evokes their own shame as well which they wish also to escape as much as their clients — which they wish also to escape as much as their clients —
do. As therapists read and learn more about this cardinal issue, they will develop the eyes 
and ears to recognize the shame motifs that pervade so many of their clients’ narratives. For 
example, therapists will become better able to recognize the many different faces of shame 
that clients present: perfectionism; frequently blaming or criticizing others; having temper 
outbursts; being edgy and explosive; being judgmental or contemptuous of others; being self-
critical and having low self-esteem or chronic depression; struggling with eating disorders 
and other addictions; living anxiously preoccupied about appearances, presentation, or 
approval; social withdrawal and avoidance; an inability to accept compliments or tolerate 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  103
constructive criticism of any type; never feeling vulnerable or in need of anyone; being 
preoccupied about always being seen as strong, powerful, or independent; and many others 
(Ahmed & Braithwaite, 2004; Potter-Efron, 2011; Sanfer & Tantillo, 2011). With guidance 
from supportive supervisors, therapists-in-training can begin listening for and recognizing 
shame-related themes in their clients’ concerns about entering therapy, as well as in the 
issues and concerns that block their progress later in treatment.
S/h.sc/a.sc/m.sc/e.sc V/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc/u.sc/s.sc G/u.sc/i.sc/l.sc/t.sc
Let’s start with the basics: shame is different than guilt— and a far more significant problem 
to deal with. With guilt, clients feel only that they have done something wrong. The guilty 
client often feels regret and may look for ways to apologize or make reparations. With 
shame, in sharp contrast, it’s not that I have donesomething bad, it’s that I am bad (Lewis, 
1971; Tangney, 1998). The sense of “badness” that is activated with shame generally leads 
clients to want to hide and avoid others’ perceived scrutiny, and there is no thought or hope 
of resolution or repair as there is with guilt (Wells & Jones, 2000). A more primary and 
pervasive feeling than guilt, shame is a total or all-encompassing feeling about one’s Self. 
With the toxic or core shame discussed here, as opposed to everyday, innocuous experi -
ences of self-consciousness or embarrassment, clients report feeling essentially flawed in 
who they really are. Throughout this discussion, keep in mind that the key emotion in all 
forms of shame is contempt (Miller, 1984; Tomkins, 1967). To suffer shame is to feel that 
the true self with all of its defects is exposed, naked, and vulnerable to the damning judg-
ment or criticism of others (Spiegel & Alpert, 2000; Teyber, McClure & Weathers, 2011). 
Clients may be without words to communicate their experience when they are suffering a 
profound shame reaction (“My mind went blank.”). Sometimes all they can say is some -
thing like, “I’m just hideous,” “I don’t matter,” “There’s something wrong with me,” or sim-
ply, “I hate myself.” A full-blown shame reaction is agonizing to suffer, and very difficult for 
compassionate therapists to remain co-present with and share. During these shame-filled 
moments, when the Self is being annihilated, some clients may express a wish to die.
Often, shame can be expressed by clients along two different themes or within two 
distinct domains. First, there is a dimension of self as bad that predominately reflects feel-
ing worthless, flawed, unlovable or unwanted, or defective in the core of their being. This 
client, sometimes referred to as a “hated child,” often has been overtly rejected or angrily 
denigrated by caregivers and struggles with a sense of disgust for, and anger toward, the 
self. Perhaps the most heartbreaking consequence of child sexual abuse is this internalized 
contempt and resulting sense of self as stigmatized (“ruined,” “dirty”) (Finkelhor, 1990). 
The second dimension is one of self as inadequate and reflects enduring feelings of being 
small or weak, helpless or disempowered, incompetent or lacking, or a failure. In particu-
lar, this client regularly feels defeated, inadequate, and inferior (e.g., “stupid”).
Researchers also differentiate internal and external shame. Clients who struggle 
more with external shame are concerned about how one exists in the minds of others —
how others are seeing or evaluating them. Those with internal shame hold a devaluing 
and self-critical attentional focus on themselves, and some clients cope with both inter -
nal and external shame (Lewis, 1995). Another related distinction in the rich literature 
on shame is that some clients are quite unaware of their own propensity to feel shame, 
whereas others are highly sensitive to it. Some clients, who may be variously described 
as narcissistic, aggrandizing, or controlling, are unaware of their own shame but often 
are critical or judgmental and readily evoke shame in others. In contrast, other clients 
are more aware of their own low self-esteem (Joireman, 2004). They are intra-punitive, 
harshly self-critical, and too readily please, take care of, or comply with others (Wells 
& Jones, 2000). Sadly, these clients also withdraw from many promising social relations 
and good opportunities in life, thinking, “She won’t want me,” “They won’t hire me,” 
and so forth.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

104  CHAPTER 3
S/h.sc/a.sc/m.sc/e.sc-P/r.sc/o.sc/n.sc/e.sc S/e.sc/n.sc/s.sc/e.sc /o.sc/f.sc S/e.sc/l.sc/f.sc
Let’s use the term shame-prone to clarify the difference between the toxic or core shame 
that is central to so many clients’ symptoms and problems, and the everyday embarrass -
ments that are just an awkward part of life for everyone but are not important treat -
ment issues. It is universal to feel embarrassed in awkward situations and common to 
feel ashamed in certain moments. This is unpleasant, of course, but not important to our 
work as therapists or relevant to this discussion. In contrast to these situation-specific 
feelings, clients who have been frequently shamed in their important relationships — that 
is, repeatedly held in contempt by their attachment caregivers, develop a shame-based 
sense of self and are shame-prone (Mills, Imm, Walling & Weiler, 2008).
This shame-proneness pervades most types of psychopathology and is central to our 
work with many clients. Shame-prone individuals, for example, will not be able to accept 
constructive criticism because it threatens to expose their deeper, pervasive, and long-
standing feelings of shame. Even good-natured teasing from family or friends can evoke 
these feelings. Humiliating feelings of being profoundly diminished, rejected or aban -
doned, or exposed are readily triggered for shame-prone clients. As noted, these intense 
and sometimes volatile reactions are triggered in many different situations in their daily 
lives that would not evoke such strong reactions in others. In response to the intense feel-
ings of shame that are continuously evoked, shame-prone clients employ a wide variety 
of coping strategies to keep their shame concealed from others and, perhaps more impor-
tantly, from themselves as well. Routinely, such clients protect themselves from having 
their underlying sense of shame-worthiness revealed by:
 /uni25CFacting arrogantly and self-righteously toward others;
 /uni25CFintimidating, controlling, or inducing shame in others;
 /uni25CFadopting perfectionistic standards around their own work, cleanliness, or religious 
practices;
 /uni25CFdeveloping eating disorders or other addictions;
 /uni25CFbecoming preoccupied with appearances and social approval;
 /uni25CFbecoming derisively self-critical and withdrawing socially;
 /uni25CFbecoming judgmental and critical of others;
 /uni25CFwithdrawing from others and avoiding many interactions.
S/h.sc/a.sc/m.sc/e.sc-R/a.sc/g.sc/e.sc C/y.sc/c.sc/l.sc/e.sc
Therapists will observe other faulty coping strategies that clients have developed to cope 
with these dreaded feelings. Perhaps most disturbing to witness is the shame-rage cycle
that characterizes “road rage” and most domestic violence episodes of battering and 
physical abuse (Gilligan, 2009; Simon, 2002). The shame-prone individual explodes in 
rage in the seconds after feeling diminished or demeaned by someone, often in response 
to a completely innocuous, benign comment, such as his wife asking him to take out the 
trash (or a child asking “why?”). The temper outburst or rage-filled response is a desper-trash (or a child asking “why?”). The temper outburst or rage-filled response is a desper-trash (or a child asking “why?”). The temper outburst or rage-filled response is a desper
ate but futile attempt to disprove shame-worthiness (“I’m not weak”; “I’m not a piece 
of garbage”; “You can’t boss me around like that!”). This is an artificial or defensive 
attempt to restore a sense of personal power and Self —a sense of personal power and Self —a sense of personal power and Self often through aggression or con -
temptuously diminishing others (Potter-Efron, 2007).
To emphasize, clients who have grown up suffering contempt from caregivers (e.g., a 
parent who often says, in a disgusted tone of voice, “What’s wrong with you? Can’t you 
do anything right?” or “You’re ruining my life...I wish you were never born”), develop 
a shame-based sense of self. These clients usually remember the painful developmental 
experiences that were so crushing of their sense of self but have split-off or defended 
against the accompanying feelings. For example, the client whose drunken father made 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  105
him lick the kitchen floor, while frightened siblings looked on helplessly, can usually 
remember what occurred behaviorally — what was said and done, and can recount this 
humiliating experience to the therapist. However, he does so without being able to feel the 
shameful affect or experience the unwanted emotions that accompany this abuse. That is, 
the behavioral events are often accessible and remembered whereas the accompanying 
feelings are too painful to acknowledge or experience and may be split off or sequestered 
away. Similarly, this client often cannot recognize or identify the current experience (feel-
ing bossed around) that has just triggered a temper outburst. In the following dialogue, 
the therapist is helping a shame-prone client make the connection between the triggering 
event (feeling put down or “dissed” by someone) and the presenting problem (losing close 
relationships because he keeps losing his temper).
THERAPIST:
 As I listen to the sequence here, it sounds like you lost your temper just after your 
wife asked you to take out the trash. Last week you told me you lost your temper when your 
coworker decided which part of the job you should do. You said afterwards that in reality it 
wasn’t a big deal but your first response was to “go off” at him. I wonder if that’s telling us 
that you lose your temper when it seems as if others have put you down by telling you what 
to door dominated you in some way?
CLIENT:
 I hadn’t thought of that, maybe...You know, that reminds me, I almost got in another 
fight this week, when this worm flipped me off on the freeway. I wanted to kill him
—
 my 
buddy, the one who calls me “pit-bull,” said my face was so red he could see the veins bursting 
out of my neck while I was screaming at him.
THERAPIST:
 That fits with my suggestion that when someone flips you off, or even just tells you 
what to do in a reasonable way, you feel shamed
—
 and then the rocket goes off. It’s like it almost 
becomes a matter of life and death for you
—
 as if you are saying: I’m being put down, I can’t 
stand it—no matter what, nobody is ever going to treat me like this again—and you explode.
CLIENT:
 Yeah, that’s right. I hadn’t thought of the word “shame,” but I do go kind of crazy when 
someone puts me down.
THERAPIST:
 Yes, I think you do, too, and I’m concerned that you are embarrassing your wife 
and scaring your son. Maybe you feel shamed sometimes even when others aren’t putting you 
down. It sounds to me like your wife really was just asking you to take out the trash. So, as 
you think about it now—here with me—do you think she was trying to boss you around or 
put you down? Let’s think about what she might have been thinking—what could have been 
going on in her mind, as all of this began.
CLIENT:
 She’s a good person...she wasn’t trying to put me down. (long pause) I’ve got to change 
this—it’s ruining my life.
THERAPIST:
 Yes, it is ruining your life, and I’d like for us to keep working together to help you 
change this. So, let’s keep talking about “shame”—that’s the feeling that seems to trigger or 
set off your temper. When I say “shame,” what comes to mind?
CLIENT:
 ...Well, my stepfather used to beat us...he’s dead, but I still hate him...
S/h.sc/a.sc/m.sc/e.sc-A/n.sc/x.sc/i.sc/e.sc/t.sc/y.sc
Instead of temper outbursts and rage, other clients who are shame-prone have intense 
anxiety evoked in many different situations that hold the ever-present threat of reveal -
ing their basic unworthiness, inadequacy, or inherently flawed and defective self. As the 
dreaded feeling of shame is evoked, yet again in this new situation, therapists will com -
monly witness shame-anxiety. For example, something as innocuous as asking someone 
for a date, applying for a job, needing to ask for help with a flat tire, getting lost and 
needing to ask for directions, or making a simple mistake at work evokes the anxiety that 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

106  CHAPTER 3
the clients’ shameful inadequacy, neediness, demandingness, and so forth will be exposed. 
Repeatedly, throughout these clients’ lives, strong anxiety is evoked by the threat of hav-
ing their inadequate, flawed or bad self revealed. In many shame-prone clients, this occurs 
so frequently that they live with a pervasive, anxious vigilance that may be expressed in 
the presenting symptom of anxiety attacks, social phobia, avoidant personality disorder, 
a generalized anxiety disorder, and others. In other words, the anxiety signals that clients’ 
defenses against their shame are being threatened in this situation, and raising the specter 
that their shame-worthiness is going to be revealed to others right now. To manage this 
anxiety and protect against the potential exposure of their shame, clients may cope by 
withdrawing or avoiding, being pleasing or complying, trying harder to be perfect, never 
needing anybody or asking for anything, and so forth, which becomes a characteristic or 
habitual coping response that characterizes their lives (Greenberg & Iwakabe, 2011).
As we will continue to explore, therapists can help clients recognize and change these 
problematic coping strategies for defending against their shame (e.g., yelling and hitting, 
avoiding and withdrawing, controlling or dominating others, inhibiting or constricting 
oneself, complying with others and going along when they want to say no, becoming 
intoxicated or getting high every day, binging, etc.). Therapists help clients resolve their 
shame-proneness, and the many varying symptoms that accompany it, by allowing them 
to experience and share the self-hatred or contempt they feel toward themselves. Change 
occurs as clients have a corrective emotional experience and find that the therapist is 
not critical/judgmental but compassionate and the client, in turn , begins to have some 
empathy or compassion for themselves and the plight they once were in (Gilbert, 2009; 
Gilbert, McEwan, Matos & Rives, 2011; Gilbert & Procter, 2006).
 The biggest problem with these interventions, however, is that therapists often have as 
much difficulty witnessing and responding to the raw experience of shame as clients have 
in bearing it. Of course, many therapists are shame-prone themselves and have their own 
unresolved shame dynamics activated by the client’s shame. Too often, these therapists try 
to cope with their own activated shame by reassuring the client, minimizing the problem, 
offering intellectual explanations or interpretations, changing the topic or avoiding the issue 
altogether, and providing other well-intended but ineffective responses. Further guidelines 
for responding to shame and helping clients contain these and other painful feelings will be 
provided in Chapter 5— we need to learn about this challengingtopic in manageable doses. 
For the time being, therapists can begin listening for the presence of shame in their clients’ 
narratives and begin considering the possibility that resistance often serves to protect clients 
from their shame and from having seemingly unacceptable parts of themselves revealed. This 
is a simple concept to say but, because of our own shame dynamics and cultural prohibitions 
against approaching such taboo issues, takes most new therapists several years to integrate 
and apply. Having a supportive supervisor who is attuned to shame dynamics is essential to 
help new therapists begin working with their clients’ shame. Consider the following example:
Susie’s boyfriend did not show up for their date. Feeling desperate and empty, she found 
herself in the kitchen spooning peanut butter out of the jar and into her mouth until the jar 
was empty. The next day in therapy, telling her therapist about what had happened, she be-
came overwhelmed with shame— feeling like a “disgusting pig.— feeling like a “disgusting pig.— ” Susie’s therapist wanted to 
look away; her mind raced trying to think how she could make her client feel better and stop 
this sickening pain. By asking about the binging episode, Susie’s therapist felt she would be 
causing her client incredible self-loathing that only seemed to be accelerating out of control. 
Almost immediately, the therapist’s shame about her own weight and appearance began to 
flood her as well. The therapist wanted to do anything to change the conversation and end 
this excruciating moment. It was too painful and too close. Fortunately, she was able to recall 
her supervisor’s words of support and take a slow, deep breath instead. Rather than flee from 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  107
her own shame and try to stop the client from feeling hers, the therapist was able to provide 
a corrective emotional experience by somehow getting out the words, “I“I“ ’m honored that 
you are able to share such a vulnerable part of yourself with me. It is a privilege for me to be 
with you right now.” Susie cried hard and spent the next three sessions sharing her history 
of experiencing rejection, feeling alone, and her desperate need for some support in her life. 
Susie and her therapist were able to begin addressing her profound shame related to issues of 
worthiness as well as how to cope without binging when these feelings were activated.
Learning to work with clients’ shame is not easy, certainly, but therapists will find their 
clients remain engaged in treatment, and make real progress with their problems, as they 
become more effective in working with shame. More specifically, clients resolve their shame 
as therapists acknowledge or “name” it and respond empathically, as Susie’s therapist dem-
onstrates so effectively. It’s exciting to see the important changes that commonly follow as 
the client’s shame-based sense of self improves (“low self-esteem” is often a euphemism for 
shame). Shame-prone clients, for example, who were too preoccupied with their appearance 
or weight become more self-accepting; others who didn’t care enough about how they looked 
take pride as they lose weight, begin fixing their hair, or dress better. Anxiety over having 
their shame-based sense of self revealed, and depression over feeling so bad about one’s self, 
diminish markedly as clients finds that their therapist can see this unacceptable part of them 
and still respond with compassion rather than the criticism and judgment they expect.
SUCCESS IN TREATMENT CAN BE THREATENING
Many clients will experience anxiety and conflict over succeeding in treatment and achiev-
ing these new behavioral changes. This paradox or self-defeating behavior is perplexing 
to most new therapists. Resistance predictably returns, even as clients make healthy new 
changes. For example, some clients will experience feelings of guilt or disloyalty over 
making progress and having success in treatment. Therapists are going to observe that 
some clients retreat from progress in treatment or undo successful changes they have just 
made. Often, clients cannot sustain positive changes they have just achieved because the 
healthy new behavior is inconsistent with their cognitive schemas. Following attachment 
theory and internal working models, acting in this successful new manner (e.g., stopping 
binge-eating episodes, leaving a nonsupportive relationship, graduating from college, etc.) 
threatens their attachment ties to caregivers who did not support their independence or 
success—and for a few other clients, actively sabotaged or punished it. Becoming stron -
ger or improving in therapy makes some clients feel cut off from parental approval and 
affection, disloyal to caregivers, or guilty about hurting, leaving, or surpassing the parent. 
As clients make significant behavioral changes, or report feeling better about themselves, 
therapists can expect some clients to report feeling either:
(1) alone, empty, or disconnected following meaningful change or
(2) guilty, selfish, or bad.guilty, selfish, or bad.guilty
When these reactions occur, clients need to be reassured of the therapist’s continued 
presence and support for this stronger Self (Gilbert, 2010). If not, they will have to manage 
their guilt, or restore their insecure and threatened attachment ties, by sabotaging their own 
success. For example, the therapist challenges the client’s maladaptive schema, disconfirms 
the problematic expectation, and provides a corrective emotional experience by saying:
T
HERA
P
I
ST:
 You’ve just had a big success at work
—
 and I’m wondering if that has something to 
do with why you feel so anxious and alone right now
. How does that sound to you?
do with why you feel so anxious and alone right now
. How does that sound to you?
do with why you feel so anxious and alone right now
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

108  CHAPTER 3
CLIENT:
 As you say that, it makes so much sense...You know, I called my brother last night, really 
excited, thinking he’d be happy. You know, when he was promoted last month I took him out 
to a fancy dinner. All he said was, 
“
oh
...
nice” and quickly he had to go. Usually he talks more. 
It made me sad. I do feel that somehow I should not be succeeding...or succeeding so fast...
THERAPIST:
 I am glad we are talking about this. I hope your experience with me will be different 
than with your brother
—
 and maybe from others you have been close to in the past as well, be
-
cause I am very happy for your new promotion. I’d like to hear all about it and spend as much of 
the session as you like talking about this success and what it is like for you to be doing so well.
CLIENT:
 I’d like that; it would be good to have someone who can help me learn to celebrate the 
good things in my life too.
These commonly occurring sources of resistance and impediments to change will be 
explored further in the chapter ahead. In particular, we will return to the cardinal affect 
of shame in Chapter 5.
CLOSING
Listening to the client with presence and respect is the most important intervention the 
therapist can make in the beginning of treatment. Sustaining this empathic stance toward 
the client and consistently grasping the most important feeling or key concern in what 
the client just said is the basic tool the therapist uses to establish a working alliance. 
The next step in the treatment process is to be attentive for ambivalence and find non-
blaming, exploratory ways to inquire about potential signs of resistance in order to main-
tain the relationship that has just begun. Resistance will be more of an issue with some 
clients than with others, but it will occur to some extent for every client. As we have seen, 
if the client can talk about these conflicted feelings, and the therapist responds affirm -
ingly, these feelings will be far less likely to pull the client out of treatment prematurely. 
Resistance will wax and wane throughout therapy, often reemerging as clients enter more 
deeply into difficult issues and as they try out new behavior and make successful changes. 
To sustain progress in treatment, therapists need to continue responding effectively to the 
many types of resistance that occur. If therapists formulate working hypotheses about 
potential client resistance, it will help them to anticipate when it is likely to occur and to 
respond more effectively when it does. In sum, the therapist’s goals are:
 /uni25CFto encourage the client’s lead and ownership of the treatment process;
 /uni25CFto provide accurate empathy to foster a working alliance;
 /uni25CFto remain alert for potential signs of resistance and address it collaboratively 
through process comments, and;
 /uni25CFto begin formulating treatment plans by generating working hypotheses.
Resistance, ambivalence, and defense provide a window to observe the fascinating 
workings of internal conflict. People do not possess a unified self; we are so complex and 
multifaceted that it often feels as if one part of ourselves is working against another part. 
By resolving an internal conflict like the ones discussed here, a person becomes a little 
more integrated or whole. Integrating disparate parts of the Self is usually an important 
part of behavior change and the avenue to greater self-efficacy. Working successfully with 
resistance shows clients that they possess the internal resources, and have the help they 
need, to make chosen changes in their lives.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HONORING THE CLIENT’S RESISTANCE  109
CHAPTER EXERCISE
 If I start to feel bad, worthless, inadequate, or one of these shame-based feelings, what 
is most likely to have triggered this reaction…(e.g., when my partner is not meeting my 
needs, when I feel vulnerable or criticized, etc.)?
When this shame-based feeling is evoked in me, my initial response is to (e.g., with -
draw, eat, drink, become pleasing, lose my temper, etc.)?
SUGGESTED READINGS
R. Dearing & J. Tagney (Eds.) 2011. Shame in the therapy hour. Washington, D.C.:
American Psychological Association.
Visit CengageBrain.com for a variety of study tools and useful resources such as interac-
tive exercises, flashcards, and quizzes. Also included with this chapter is a video demon-
stration by the authors illustrating working with potential resistance at the end of the 
first session and working with the client’s reluctance to address an issue.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

110
CHAPTER 4
An Internal Focus for 
Change
Year after year as we supervise bright, promising student therapists, we are continually point -
ing out how they are keeping the conversation on the surface. Almost more than any other 
issue, we are giving some therapists permission, and challenging others, to go beyond surface, 
everyday conversations and engage clients with more depth—to repeatedly strive to join the 
client at the most meaningful point possible. This chapter gives therapists tools to achieve this 
goal. Consider the following situation:
Dana was presenting a new client she was seeing to her first-year practicum class. She 
showed a videotaped segment from her previous session in which her client was complain-
ing about her past two husbands, her mother, her previous therapist, and others. Lost in 
trying to grasp what all of this meant, Dana half-pleaded with her practicum instructor, 
“What should I do?” With her usual good sense of humor, her instructor jokingly replied, 
“OK, you guys are always asking me what to do, and this time I’m actually going to tell 
you. Next week, Dana, tell your client that she has two choices. Either everyone she has 
ever known needs to be in therapy—so she should refer every person in her life here to the 
clinic for treatment. Or, she can just meet with you herself and begin to explore the deci-
sions and choices she makes and her contributions to these problems.” The class laughed 
and got the point.
CONCEPTUAL OVERVIEW
The first stage of therapy is complete when therapist and client have established a working 
alliance and begun to work together on the client’s problems. This collaborative partner-alliance and begun to work together on the client’s problems. This collaborative partner-alliance and begun to work together on the client’s problems. This collaborative partner
ship is a necessary prerequisite to the second stage of therapy: the client’s journey inward. 
In order to change, clients need to become less keyed on the problematic behavior of oth-
ers and begin to explore their own role in problems. As real and compelling as these prob-
lems with others usually are, many clients need to stop focusing exclusively on historical 
events, past relationships, and the problematic behavior of others in their lives. Instead, 
these clients change when they begin to clarify their own thoughts, feelings, and reactions 
to the troubles they are having. Why? Clients will usually fail in their attempts to change 
others in their lives, whereas they can often resolve problems by changing themselves—
the way they respond and their own participation in problems. In this process, clients:
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  111
(1) Examine their habitual response patterns in problematic situations, (e.g., am I with-
drawing and avoiding this situation),
(2) Evaluate the patterns’ usefulness in their current lives (e.g., am I becoming quiet and 
walking out of the room without addressing the problem) when there is conflict with 
someone, and 
(3) Begin trying out new and more adaptive ways of responding (e.g., trying to dialogue 
with my mother about the problem we are having). 
This internal focus on changing their own responses, rather than focusing on or try -
ing to change the other person, leads clients toward greater self-efficacy, which dimin -
ishes symptoms of anxiety and depression. The therapist’s task is to help clients make 
the transition from seeing the source and resolution of problems in others to adopting 
an internal focus for change. This is a two-fold process. First, the therapist helps clients 
begin to look within. Without invalidating clients or using language that makes them feel 
“blamed” in any way, the therapist looks for opportunities to focus clients away from 
complaining about or trying to change others, and toward understanding and changing 
their own problematic reactions. Psychotherapy process studies demonstrate that across 
differing types of treatment, positive outcomes are facilitated by interactions with the 
therapist that encourage clients to engage in self-observation and introspection (Beitman 
& Soth, 2006; Watson, Goldman & Greenberg, 2011). The clinical approach presented in 
this chapter is grounded in Carl Roger’s client-centered theory (1967), and informed by 
talented colleagues who delved deeply into helping clients focus inward and explore their 
own subjective experiencing (Gendlin, 1996) and feelings (Greenberg, 2002). 
Second, the therapist’s intention is to help clients assume more responsibility for change. 
This occurs when clients move the dialogue from everyday surface issues towards their 
core struggle in the treatment process—by becoming active agents in their own therapeutic 
work. As clients become more aware of how their cognitive schemas are not always accu-
rate and their usual coping styles and behavioral patterns are not effective in many current 
situations, they begin the change process. With greater awareness of their own responses, 
and how they may be participating in or contributing to some of their problems, clients 
increasingly recognize that they do not have to keep responding in old and familiar ways 
that are no longer effective (Goldman, Watson & Greenberg, 2011). With this new perspec-
tive, clients often join readily with the therapist in exploring new behavioral options and 
begin working actively to change the problematic ways they are responding both to them-
selves internally and to others. As clients become more aware of their contribution to prob-
lems and how changing their responses may change the reciprocal patterns that have not 
being working in some relationships, they are more able to commit to a change process that 
is empowering, and this will, in turn, contribute to behavioral change (see Miller & Rose, 
2009 for research on empowering clients to commit to change). Throughout this chapter, 
we will see that when clients change their part in problematic scenarios, the interaction 
sequence changes—even if the other person doesn’t change and keeps giving the same hurt-
ful or disappointing response (Wachtel et al., 2005). By modifying their role in internal and 
interpersonal problems, and using the therapist’s support for clients’ own self-direction and 
initiative within the therapeutic relationship, clients are empowered to change.
Self-efficacy develops out of this collaborative process between therapist and client 
(Bandura, 2006). The therapist is not fixing or curing the client—the client is sharing 
ownership of the treatment process. Why is this interpersonal process so important? The 
therapist’s goal is to empower clients rather than just give them answers or tell them 
how to live their lives. Our goal is to help clients know their own mind—to give them 
permission to have their own voice and trust their own intuition or gut—and thereby 
support them to become better able to make their own decisions. When given answers or 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

112  CHAPTER 4
prescribed solutions, most clients do not make them their own—they cannot apply the 
advice in the next situation or learn how to solve future problems or self-soothe, without 
having someone else tell them what to do or how to do it. By helping clients look inside 
at what they are feeling, expecting, and doing, we are teaching them skills that they can 
carry over to their everyday lives and use on their own when treatment is over. In this 
way, enduring change results when clients participate actively in treatment and feel own-
ership of the change process (Tufekcioglu & Muran, 2015).
New behavior and thinking come about when the client has been an active partici -
pant rather than when the therapist has just explained a connection or interpreted what 
something means. When this process occurs, treatment gains can be better maintained 
after therapy has stopped. Per client response specificity, the externalizing stance we are 
describing does not fit all clients. For example, some clients feel solely responsible for 
what is wrong in their lives. These clients are so preoccupied with their own self-criticism 
and self-blame, or a pathogenic belief that they are “bad,” that they cannot even consider 
the realistic ways that others may be contributing to their distress. For many other clients, 
however, it will be difficult to shift their focus away from others and begin looking at 
their own contribution or role in problems. For some clients, looking inward without the 
partnership that the therapist provides can be challenging. In order to take this rewarding 
journey inward, clients need a relationship with a therapist who is affirming yet willing to 
repeatedly invite them to look within and collaboratively explore. In this chapter, we will 
see how therapists can do both.
HELPING CLIENTS FOCUS INWARD ON THEIR 
OWN/uni00A0EXPERIENCE
Early in treatment, many clients see the source of their problems in others. Clients often 
want to spend more time describing others’ problematic behavior than discussing their 
own experience of and response to the problems. For example, many clients begin the 
first few therapy sessions by announcing that the problem is really with another person:
 /uni25CFMy husband won’t pay any attention to me.
 /uni25CFMy wife is always on my back.
 /uni25CFMy children are impossible; they won’t do anything I say.
 /uni25CFMy boss is a demanding tyrant. I never seem to do enough.
 /uni25CFMy mother won’t stop criticizing me; I can’t do anything right in her eyes.
 /uni25CFI’m 27 years old, and my father treats me like a child.
 /uni25CFMy boyfriend keeps cheating on me.
It is essential for the therapist to affirm these complaints as genuinely troubling concerns. 
The therapist’s sustained intention is to address the problem that is most pressing, “alive,” 
or salient for the client right now— to find and begin with the client’s “point of urgency.” 
Even though these concerns and complaints may include over-reactions or schema distor-
tions, from the client’s point of view, they are the truth. As emphasized in Chapter 2, the 
therapist joins the client there, validating and even helping articulate more clearly how 
the problematic behavior of others is indeed troublesome.
In some cases, however, the therapist’s assessment of the situation is so different that 
such affirmation would not be genuine for the therapist. In these situations, therapists can 
at least affirm the subjective reality of the client’s perceptions. For example:
THERAPIST:
 It sounds as though you feel your boss, like your girlfriend, is overly demanding. So, 
from your point of view, it seems that they are being unfair again.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  113
If the therapist does not provide this affirmation first, many clients will feel that 
the therapist doesn’t understand the reality of the other person’s problematic behavior, 
doesn’t believe them, or doesn’t care about what’s really troubling them. This unwanted 
outcome is counterproductive and will often reenact clients’ developmental histories—
they are not listened to, taken seriously, or believed again. Thus, to keep this potential 
invalidation from occurring, the therapist’s first aim is to hear and validate clients’ con-
cerns. Throughout treatment, there is a consistent intention here: We are repeatedly trying 
“to meet clients where they are at.” Only after making this genuine empathic connection, 
which often requires the therapist to de-center and see issues from the clients’ subjective 
viewpoints, can the therapist take the next step.
The second step is to begin focusing clients back on their own thoughts, feelings, and 
reactions to the problematic behavior of others, rather than joining clients in focusing 
exclusively on the external problem. Often, it will be easy for therapists to pair these first 
two steps.
THERAPIST:
 I’m sorry your father keeps doing that to you. I can see, as you talk about it, how 
affected you are by it. How do you respond—what do you say and do, when he...?
OR
THERAPIST:
 I can see how frustrating it can be to have your boss respond that way over and 
over again, no matter what you do. How do you feel, what’s going on inside, when he...?
This principle is especially important when working with individuals who have been 
disempowered or disenfranchised, including racial minorities, women, gay men, and 
lesbian women. Often, they are accurately describing the social inequities that realisti -
cally contribute to their problems. Here again, the therapist wants to join the clients in 
the reality of their social context, as they experience it, before focusing inward on their 
reactions to, and ways of coping with, these inequities. Validation and empathy need to 
precede exploration.
Why is therapy more productive when therapists focus clients inward? In many cases, 
clients who feel anxious, distrustful, angry, or helpless because of the behavior of another 
person will try to enlist the therapist in criticizing, blaming, or trying to change the other 
person. However, therapy will not progress very far if the therapist merely joins clients 
in focusing on the other person’s behavior, no matter how problematic this behavior may 
be. Why? As the existential therapists inform us, clients’ attempts to change the other 
person will usually fail; clients are much more likely to resolve the problem by changing 
their own way of responding and finding their own authentic voice (Jacobsen, 2007). 
Yalom (2003) emphasizes that once clients recognize the role they may play in creating 
their life predicament, they realize their power to change it. Working in a supportive and 
non-blaming way, therapists are trying to help clients consider the question: How might 
I be contributing to my own distress; or How can I change my response when she does 
that? Once they grasp this, they are able to chart a new course with a different inter -
nal dialogue and different behavioral responses. For clients whose problems stem from 
trauma or abuse, looking inward with the partnership of a therapist to begin questioning 
their schemas of shame or self-hatred and move toward greater self-compassion will be a 
significant part of the treatment process.
Thus, the therapist’s task often is to (1) expand clients’ focus beyond the other person 
and include themselves as well and (2) help clients be compassionate as they explore their 
internal working models (i.e., internalized views of themselves and others). The therapist 
should be flexible in adopting an internal focus. The goal is to clarify both the reality 
of what the other is doing, as well as the client’s ineffective internal and interpersonal 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

114  CHAPTER 4
responses to it. Most clients will benefit greatly from the therapist’s help in understanding 
the behavior or more flexibly considering the potential intentions of problematic others 
(Fonagy & Allison, 2014). For example, if a client has grown up being befuddled by a 
parent with a Borderline or Narcissistic Personality Disorder, it may be deeply validating 
for the client to read the descriptions of these disorders in the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual (DSM-V, 2013). This type of external validation may help these clients realize 
that all of this was not their fault and did not happen solely to them:
CLIENT:
 That list of behaviors was so familiar and accurate. My father really was unpredictable 
and self-centered
—
 it wasn’t just me! I wasn’t making it up or imagining it.
In tandem, however, therapists are working to increase clients’ awareness of their own 
thoughts, feelings, and reactions in challenging situations and make sense of them. Recall 
the externalizing comments cited at the beginning of this section. Each of the following 
questions can be used to focus those clients back on themselves, help them begin to con -
sider their role in the problem as well, and find better ways to manage their responses:
 /uni25CFWhat do you find yourself thinking when your husband is ignoring you?
 /uni25CFHow do you feel when your wife is nagging you?
 /uni25CFWhat do you do when your children won’t listen to what you say or do what you ask? 
 /uni25CFWhen your boss is being demanding and critical, how do you typically respond?
 /uni25CFWhat thoughts were you having as your mother was criticizing you?
 /uni25CFHow would you like to be able to respond when your father diminishes you like that?
 /uni25CFTell me about the thoughts and feelings that are evoked in you and then what you 
would like to be able to say or do when you find that your boyfriend is cheating again?
Simple inquiries of this type serve two important functions. First, they tell clients that 
the therapist is listening and grasping their core concerns. The therapist has not changed 
the topic and is responding directly to clients’ concerns as the clients see them. Second, 
while inviting clients to say more about their concerns, the therapist is also expanding 
the clients’ focus away by encouraging them to look more closely at themselves as well. 
For clients, becoming more aware of their own cognitive, affective, and behavioral reac -
tions is a powerful intervention that will elicit strong feelings and reveal the issues that 
are most important and troubling to them. This pivotal step toward clarifying what their 
central and enduring problems really are provides the basis for a shared treatment focus.
In many cases, clients will welcome the therapist’s offer to talk more about themselves. 
Their active exploration of their own expectations and responses in problematic situa -
tions will lead to increased awareness of the narrow range of responses they repeatedly 
employ, and help them consider a wider range of options. This increased self-awareness of 
their old response patterns, coupled with learning new or more flexible ways of respond-
ing with the therapist, leads to more problem resolution skills and increased feelings of 
self-efficacy. However, not all clients will respond so positively to the therapist’s initial 
invitation to look more closely at themselves. A few clients may avoid an internal focus 
and continue to talk about the problem out there in others. In that case, the therapist 
does not want to start an argument or rigidly demand that clients look inward, because 
those clients are behaviorally telling us they can’t quite do this yet. Fortunately, a range of 
options exists. For example, the therapist might wait for the next opportunity to enter the 
client’s experience:
CLIENT:
 My husband is impossible to live with. He complains constantly; nothing ever pleases him.
THERAPIST:
 It sounds like living with him is difficult. What’s the hardest thing for you?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  115
CLIENT:
 Do you know how hard it is to live with an angry, demanding husband who keeps trying 
to tell you what to do all the time?
THERAPIST:
 You sound very angry. I can see how hard it is for you to have someone after you 
like that.
CLIENT:
 He just won’t stop
—
 he just keeps at it.
THERAPIST:
 How do you cope when he is doing this? What do you do when he keeps at it?
CLIENT:
 I get really mad, and I suppose I start to yell back some.
THERAPIST:
 You get really mad and start to yell back at him?
CLIENT:
 He just won’t stop...
THERAPIST:
 What does the yelling mean to you? How do you make sense of all his yelling?
CLIENT:
 That he is just an angry person. It’s not just him, you know; his whole family is like 
that—always finding fault with others. It’s just tiresome. I’m tired of constantly hearing what’s that—always finding fault with others. It’s just tiresome. I’m tired of constantly hearing what’s 
wrong with me—that I’m doing everything wrong and failing all the time.
THERAPIST:
 “Doing everything wrong and failing”
—
 ouch! Sounds like his family’s constant 
criticism taps into your own painful feelings about yourself of not measuring up or not be-
ing enough. And having those shameful feelings of inadequacy aroused all the time could be 
infuriating...
CLIENT:
 Yeah, I hate them for making me feel this way. If I could just make them stop, I think my 
whole life would be better.
THERAPIST:
 This is very important for you, and we need to work together on it. I would like 
to understand better what you do when they criticize you, so that I can help you learn some 
more assertive, limit-setting responses. But your own feeling of not measuring up is also a part 
of this problem that we need to work on, so that you can stop charging at the red flag they 
are waving. If we can change the internal part of you that reacts so strongly
—
 as if you believe 
what they are saying is true,
—
 it would be much easier for you to handle this than it has been 
in the past. I can see how their criticisms can upset you, but what’s more important is the way 
you end up feeling inside, about yourself, that becomes the bigger problem.
CLIENT:
 I’m not really sure what you mean.
THERAPIST:
 There is relatively little we can do about their expectations. But we can work on 
your feelings about yourself
—
your feelings about yourself
—
your feelings about yourself
 separate from their feelings about you
—
 and on your responses 
to them, which could help you.
CLIENT:
 Well, maybe, I see what you mean a little bit, but I’m not sure what to do.
THERAPIST:
 Tell me more about your feeling of not measuring up. Let’s work together to modu-
late that feeling better, so you don’t lose credibility by going off at them—and then we can 
role-play some more limit-setting responses to their criticisms and demands.
CLIENT:
 Well, I guess I’ve always sort of felt like I’m not really good enough... 
In this dialogue, the therapist validated the client’s experience and encouraged the cli-
ent to look at her own reactions and role in the problem. Although the client kept trying 
to focus on her husband and his family, the therapist’s repeated, patient but modest invi-
tations to have the client look at herself as well, soon diminished her defensive, externaliz-
ing stance. As a result, the client moved closer to her own problematic feelings and beliefs 
about herself that made her vulnerable and contributed her reactivity to the marital con -
flict. By gaining a better understanding of her own feelings of inadequacy, which are pain-
fully amplified by her husband and in-laws, the client can become less shame-prone and 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

116  CHAPTER 4
reactive to others’ criticisms. This ability, in turn, will be an important part of learning to 
respond more assertively and set limits more effectively, rather than alternating between 
merely yelling back or withdrawing— which only exacerbate the conflict. 
Many clients have not been encouraged to focus on themselves before. Some clients 
may resist this internal focus initially because it asks them to come face-to-face with dif -
ficult feelings that they have not been able to understand or resolve alone (in this case, 
for example, “I feel inadequate.”). For many others, focusing on the other fends off the 
blame or criticism they have learned to expect from others (e.g., “Can’t you do anything 
right!”). However, the paradox is that as long as clients avoid the internal or personal 
aspects of their relational conflicts, by externalizing their problems onto others, they will 
feel powerless and frustrated.
In particular, many clients who enter treatment are overly invested in changing others 
as a means of managing their own problems or insecurities. That is, they often are seek -
ing an external solution to a problem that may better be managed internally. The reality 
is that, beyond clearly expressing our preferences and personal limits (“I would like...”; 
“I will not...”), we cannot readily influence how others think, feel, and act. In contrast, 
however, we can change problematic interpersonal scenarios that keep playing out by 
changing our own responses to others. For example, clients routinely fail in their attempts 
to make their spouse stop drinking, smoking, or overeating. Similarly, some clients try for 
decades to win the approval or recognition from others that they never received from a 
parent. Others try unsuccessfully for years to have their grown offspring choose a differ -
ent mate, religion, or career. As a result of these failed attempts to change others, many 
clients enter therapy with feelings of helplessness, hopelessness, and depression.
In sum, to gain a greater sense of self-efficacy and feel less anxious or depressed, 
many clients will need to focus more on understanding and changing themselves. Feel -
ings of helplessness are inevitable when one tries to change others who do not want to 
change— whereas empowerment can come from recognizing and changing one’s own 
responses and addressing one’s own internal reactions and responses. Thus, a consistent 
therapeutic intervention is to pair an empathic or affirming response with an invitation to 
focus clients back onto themselves (such as, “I’m sorry that happened. How would you 
like to be able to respond the next time he does that?”). The following types of questions 
will help clients explore their own responses.
 /uni25CFWhat is the main feeling you are left with when...?
 /uni25CFWhat were the thoughts you were having when...?
 /uni25CFWhat was the most difficult thing for you when...?
 /uni25CFHow would you like to be able to respond when...?
T/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc/a.sc/p.sc/y.sc I/n.sc/t.sc/e.sc/n.sc/s.sc/i.sc/f.sc/i.sc/e.sc/s.sc W/h.sc/e.sc/n.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc F/o.sc/c.sc/u.sc/s.sc I/n.sc/w.sc/a.sc/r.sc/d.sc
Focusing clients on their own behavior often reveals how they are contributing to, or 
participating in, their own problems. As we will see, clients who can focus on themselves 
and see their own participation in a conflict are usually motivated to change their own 
part in it. This, in turn, often changes the usual sequence and may allow the other person 
to respond differently as well. To illustrate, let’s return to our example of the shame-prone 
wife who complained about her critical husband and in-laws.
Although the client did begin to explore her own lifelong feelings of inadequacy 
and the ineffective ways she responded to her husband, she kept complaining about her 
“obnoxious” husband and “superior” in-laws. As before, the therapist was empathic, val-
idated her experience, and affirmed her anger. At the same time, however, the therapist 
did not join the client in focusing exclusively on her husband or blaming him as the sole 
source of her problems. Instead, the therapist looked for opportunities to focus the client 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  117
away from her singular preoccupation with her husband’s behavior and toward her own 
reactions to him as well. For example:
THERAPIST:
 Rather than just insulting him back, which isn’t making things better for you, what 
could you say instead the next time he criticizes you like that? What would be a realistic way 
that you could speak up for yourself and say what you don’t like?
What would have happened if the therapist had not taken this approach? If the thera-
pist had responded to the client’s eliciting pull  to blame her husband, the client would 
have remained an angry but helpless victim. In contrast, if the therapist had emphasized 
just the client’s contribution to her marital conflict, without first validating her experi -
ence, it would have repeated the problematic relational pattern for her of always being 
blamed and “sided against.” Exploring the client’s feelings of inadequacy revealed a 
broader developmental context for these feelings of shame that stemmed from rarely 
being supported by her caregivers and consistently being blamed for whatever went 
wrong— in her recollections, “everything was always my fault.” Thus, by validating the 
client’s experience first and, second, focusing her inward, the therapist helped the client 
adopt a new and more assertive response to the old problem of excessive criticism from 
her husband (and eventually her in-laws and own family of origin as well). For example, 
the client rehearsed with the therapist and later tried saying to her husband:
CLIENT:
 You’re saying, in so many words, that I did it wrong, but I disagree. I think I handled it 
okay. I guess we just see this differently.
AND
CLIENT:
 I feel put down when you talk like that. It’s hurtful. Please stop or I’m leaving the room.
While helping the client clarify and become more aware of her own internal and 
interpersonal responses to her husband, the therapist was also suggesting different ways 
she could respond that would change her part in their marital conflict. Specifically, the 
wife began to express more directly to her husband when she would like to talk or inter -
act and when she would prefer to be alone. For example, she clarified with her husband 
that when she came home from work she wanted about 30 minutes to herself because 
she feels tired and “frazzled” and wants to unwind while she is getting dinner started. But 
after dinner, she would like to sit down together and share their day—without the TV or 
the phone—to just be with each other for a while.
More important, as the wife gained a better understanding of her tendency to 
feel responsible for everyone’s needs—which left her feeling overwhelmed by others’ 
demands—she felt less “controlled” and reactive to her husband’s requests. Significant 
change occurred as she increasingly realized that she felt shamefully ruled by him because 
she could neither say no to his requests nor express her own wishes or set boundaries. On 
the one hand, if her husband wanted something from her, she believed that she was failing 
if she didn’t comply and do it his way and on his timetable. The therapist was also able to 
help the client progressively recognize that she expressed this resentment to her husband 
indirectly— in her own critical, shaming, and withholding ways. Over the next few months, 
this new awareness allowed her to respond more often to her husband’s requests without 
feeling like she was complying with him or being dominated. As she increasingly realized 
that she too readily felt that she must comply with him and others, she began to challenge 
this faulty belief and started trying out more assertive responses. She found that her resent-
ment and irritability decreased. This was not a simple “aha” experience that came about 
quickly, of course, but her situation gradually improved as she continued to set limits with 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

118  CHAPTER 4
him and speak up for herself, which the therapist helped her to do by actively role-playing 
new ways of responding that she had never really been exposed to. Making this important 
intervention more specific for new therapists, the therapist demonstrated this by playing 
new assertive ways of responding while the client played the role of her husband and said 
the things to the therapist that he frequently said and that bothered her most. In this way, 
as clients begin to understand that more alternatives are available than they had realized, 
clients become more hopeful and see that their lives can change. 
RELUCTANCE TO ADOPT AN INTERNAL FOCUS
In the three sections that follow, we explore issues that can make it difficult for some 
therapists and clients to focus inward. For most student therapists, it is “different” to 
approach and try to enter, rather than minimize, reassure or avoid, pain, conflict, or 
strong personal distress. As we will highlight in the first of the following sections, trainees 
say, “I’m not used to this—it’s not how we talked in my family.” For other trainees, mak-
ing bids to approach the fear, shame, or loss that the client just vaguely alluded to evokes 
feelings of anxiety that they will not know “where to go” or how to join with the client 
in this more significant struggle. In the second section, we will provide tools to help move 
therapists toward core issues by attending to “Points of Entry”. In the third section, we 
will consider reasons why some clients will be reluctant to stop externalizing and offer 
suggestions and illustrations for how best to respond.
T/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc/a.sc/p.sc/i.sc/s.sc/t.sc/s.sc’ R/e.sc/l.sc/u.sc/c.sc/t.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc
Most new therapists feel comfortable talking about things that are on the surface—akin per-Most new therapists feel comfortable talking about things that are on the surface—akin per-Most new therapists feel comfortable talking about things that are on the surface—akin per
haps to how they have learned to interact socially, and do not hear or respond to the sig-
nificant emotional and relational messages that are compressed in what the client just said. 
Routinely, new therapists bring their familial and cultural socialization, and try to reassure cli-
ents about their fears or concerns, engage in problem-solving, or move away from and avoid 
the fear or pain, vulnerability or distress, that the client has just voiced or implied. These are 
well-intended, benevolent social skills, but this familiar role of “friend” does not apply well to 
the role of therapist. Thus, focusing the client inward often means that the therapist is drawing 
out and highlighting—out and highlighting—out and highlighting rather than reassuring or minimizing— rather than reassuring or minimizing— —rather than reassuring or minimizing—rather than reassuring or minimizing the client’s core concerns:
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 Don’t worry, your doctor will figure out what’s wrong
—
 it’ll be all 
right. Have you gotten a second opinion yet?
VERSUS
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 Your doctor can’t make a diagnosis yet and tell you what’s wrong. You 
just don’t know what to expect or prepare for
—
 so it makes sense that you’re scared right now. 
Let’s explore together the fear and potential consequences you are most concerned about.
There are many reasons why therapists often have difficulty approaching, and even 
just registering and empathically reflecting, the personal meaning or distress in what the 
client just said. For many, such forthrightness goes against unspoken but strongly held 
familial rules or cultural norms. In treatment, however, therapists want to do more than 
follow the limiting social rules and norms they may have grown up with. With every turn 
of the conversation that seems to hold something meaningful for the client, the therapist 
is trying to register, reflect, or highlight the most important issue or key concern— what’s 
really being said here— rather than keeping things conversational or on the surface. Doing 
so helps clients feel heard, seen, and understood — that the therapist “gets” them, and, as 
the attachment researchers put it, has the client’s thoughts, feelings, and experiences in 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  119
mind (Allen et al., 2008). That is, the therapist is fully present and attending — trying to 
discern the most salient message or grasp what the client is really saying or trying to con-
vey right here (Groth, 2008). When therapists can repeatedly capture the most important 
feeling or key issue in what the client just said, clients leave the session with the feeling, 
“We’re really getting down to it” or “I’m not exactly sure what I want to do about this 
yet, but we’re sure talking about what’s important.” This is not at all about leading clients 
toward more threatening material or pressing for difficult feelings or further disclosure; 
rather, it is more about approaching the significance of the material that clients have just 
volunteered or already chosen to present on their own.
Another reason why new therapists may have difficulty engaging the client consis -
tently in this substantive manner involves feelings of incompetence or inadequacy. While 
this approach brings meaning and intensity to the therapeutic interaction , new therapists 
often feel unsure of what to do as clients focus inward and get closer to their feelings, 
choices, and meanings in their core concerns. These unwanted performance anxieties 
often arise because new therapists inaccurately believe they need to “fix” or “solve” the 
client’s problem that is now etched more clearly, when what is really needed is a continu-
ing partnership that first focuses on clarifying what the key concerns are and the meaning 
they hold for the client, and then collaboratively setting treatment goals. This process 
involves helping the client articulate:
“This is what keeps hurting me...”
“This is what it means to me…”
“This is what I need or want...”
“This is what I want to change...”
“This is what I would like to stop doing...”
“This is what I would like to be able to do...”
There are other reasons for not hearing or approaching the client’s emotional distress 
or bigger meaning. For example, some new therapists may equate this attempt with being 
intrusive or exposing because in the therapists’ personal experiences they have seen such 
honest communication utilized only in non-empathic, hurtful ways. Still other therapists 
are reluctant to hear or respond to their clients’ emotional messages, or to help clients 
explore their participation in relational conflicts, because they don’t want to make others 
“feel bad.” These therapists try to make clients feel better by reassuring them about their 
insecurities and by emphasizing only their strengths and successes. Stepping back from 
the accurate reflection of clients’ concerns or distress is usually ineffective. Although well 
intended, it keeps things on the surface and prevents clients from being able to explore 
and clarify what’s really wrong. When this happens, clients lose the opportunity to deter-When this happens, clients lose the opportunity to deter-When this happens, clients lose the opportunity to deter
mine what the real problem is, explore what they want to do about it, and develop the 
self-efficacy that comes from being able to address and resolve problems. Our therapeutic 
intention should be to provide Carl Roger’s accurate empathy. We do not want to make 
the client’s problem bigger or smaller than it really is. To achieve accurate empathy we need 
to work collaboratively and ask the client, “Did I capture that accurately or can you help 
me say it better—what are your words for how that was?” In this vein, Farber et al. (2009) 
write compellingly about clients who have experienced trauma and who can, through self-
disclosure with a supportive and affirming therapist who listens to all aspects of their story, 
develop greater self-awareness and a more integrated identity or cohesive sense of self.
Still other therapists may avoid an internal focus in order to please clients and main -
tain their approval. These therapists may fear that clients will feel awkward or uncom -
fortable and become angry as the therapist reflects or invites them to explore the difficult 
feelings or choices they have just identified. In particular, many new promising therapists 
may also be concerned that they may not be able to remain present and responsive to the 
client when strong emotions are expressed. It is understandable that some therapists will 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

120  CHAPTER 4
struggle with this and it is important that they find help by sharing these concerns with a 
supportive supervisor. They should bring to supervision those emotions that might impact 
their work with clients so that they can discuss, role-play, and manage them with supervi-
sors. When concerns are very strong and linked to significant personal issues, student ther-
apists’ strong reactions to the material can be best resolved in their own personal therapy.
Student therapists need their instructors to model and role-play responses, and they 
also need permission and overt support from supervisors to risk not staying on the surface 
with clients and instead to enter the real meaning in what the client has just presented. 
As we have already seen, fears of the clients’ feelings— what they might reveal, or of not 
knowing what to do or say— often interfere. What is most important to clients, however, 
is that their therapist join them where they are and convey a willingness to try and grasp 
what is most difficult or important in what they just said. This willingness to be present 
in their need or vulnerability means more to our clients than having an “intelligent” or 
“learned” answer or solution— it gives clients a sense of partnership and feeling that some-
one wants to understand and respond to their need. Attachment theorists have often noted 
that this type of attuned responsiveness contains or helps to modulate distress (Shore & 
Shore, 2008). For clients, the safety or security provided by such attuned responsiveness 
will facilitate an internal focus and lead to try new ways of thinking and behaving.
Therapists collude with the client in externalizing problems when they repeatedly:
 /uni25CFgive advice and tell the client what to do or how to respond,
 /uni25CFinterpret or explain what something means,
 /uni25CFreassure clients that their problems will go away or are not something to be concerned 
about, or
 /uni25CFdisclose what the therapist has done to cope with a similar person or problem.
As we would expect from client response specificity, each of these responses will be 
effective at times. However, if they come to characterize the ongoing course of treatment, 
they will hold clients back from learning about themselves and, ultimately, from being 
able to resolve their own problems. It is important that throughout treatment therapists 
repeatedly try to help clients become more aware of their own internal reactions and 
interpersonal responses in problem situations. Although it can be awkward or uncom -
fortable for new therapists to focus clients inward at times, it routinely strengthens the 
working alliance as the therapist gains credibility by demonstrating the ability to join the 
client in what’s most important for them a way that others in their daily lives cannot. 
P/o.sc/i.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc /o.sc/f.sc E/n.sc/t.sc/r.sc/y.sc
 As longtime Practicum instructors and supervisors, we do demonstration initial inter -
views and cases for our students. We do not wish to be immodest, but the most common 
response we hear from trainees is how quickly we are talking with clients about substan -
tive and compelling issues and sharing the deep feelings that accompany it. Even though 
they are watching the interview through a one-way mirror or on videotape, students don’t 
“get” how we got to the bigger feelings and significant issues so quickly. We and many 
other therapists are able to do this, in part, because we “pick our spots.” We realize that 
we often can’t make much of what clients just said, so we follow along, joining and help-
ing them unfold their story. But we are always listening with full attention for opportuni-
ties to approach Points of Entry that commonly take us into clients’ core struggles. These 
points of entry include listening for:
 /uni25CFPainful feelings that accompany what the client is discussing (especially fear, sadness 
or loss, and shame);
 /uni25CFDistressing experiences (such as being disappointed or let down, helpless or alone 
with a problem, and invalidated or not heard);
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  121
 /uni25CFTopics that link or connect in big or small ways to developmental/familial issues 
(such as growing up witnessing domestic violence or chronic parental conflict, physi-
cal or sexual abuse, or nonsupportive caregivers who undermine the child’s confi-
dence or sabotage the child’s friendships or individuation and emancipation);
 /uni25CFInterpersonal patterns or relational scenarios that keep recurring and causing con-
flict for the client (such as feeling left or betrayed, having to prioritize the needs of 
others and ignore their own, being subjugated or controlled in relationships and 
having to just go along and comply, or having to be the responsible one and take 
care of others);
 /uni25CFInternal conflict or ambivalence (such as the client saying, “I want to lose weight but 
keep losing my resolve” or “Everybody tells me this relationship isn’t good for me, 
and I agree, but I just can’t break it off”).
Developing the “ear” to hear how a seemingly small issue can be a point of entry 
because it connects to an affect-laden issue or more significant life-theme is a challenging 
skill for instructors to teach and for new therapists to develop. In the following section, 
we try to help by illustrating with two case vignettes where the clients present a promis -
ing point of entry but the supervisees miss the opportunity. In the first vignette, the trainee 
simply doesn’t hear the far-reaching themes of rejection and loss the client presents in an 
encapsulated way and, in the second vignette, the trainee “sort of” hears the bigger prob-
lem and deeper meaning evoked in the concern the client is presenting, but is not confident 
enough to meet the client there. We will also provide effective responses to both of these 
points of entry that illustrate how to move beyond surface dialogue and engage the client.
Sarah, a 19 year-old Caucasian female, came to the Student Counseling Center because she 
was “depressed.” Sarah’s parents had both been drug involved and she spent many of her el-
ementary and high-school years in foster-care homes. When Sarah was 16, her aunt decided 
to take her in but, as soon as Sarah turned 18 and was no longer eligible for foster-care 
support, her aunt told her she was “old enough to take care of herself.” Sarah felt deeply re-
jected by her parents, not really wanted by the various foster homes she’d been in, and used 
and then “thrown away” by her aunt. 
C
LIENT
:
 Last week my friend said she didn’t want to hang out with me—didn’t have enough free 
time to be with me as much anymore 
{Point of Entry}
. I was mad at first but I got over it. I 
decided I should take care of myself and clean my room—but it’s such a HUGE mess I don’t 
even know where to start.
I
NEFFECTIVE
 T
HERAPIST
:
 Well, I like that you are trying to figure out how to take care of 
yourself—and I have some ideas that could help you get going making your room nice again. The 
whole room sounds overwhelming. Maybe you could start with just one section at a time. Which 
part of your room is the worst, or which part do you think you could successfully tackle first?
E
FFECTIVE
 T
HERAPIST
:
 Oh Sarah, I’m so very sorry to hear that you may be losing this 
friendship. Yes, of course you were mad, and maybe it was hurtful too? Can you bring me in 
some more about this loss or rejection?
Losing a friend is nothing like losing one’s parents, but this friendship loss does evoke 
all of the painful losses that have defined Sarah’s life. Even though the ineffective, prob -
lem-solving therapist knew Sarah’s developmental history, she missed this theme or link 
of rejection and loss that provided a point of entry. Like most new therapists, she has not 
yet learned to listen for, or recognize in the moment as it is being said, how the seemingly 
small issue being presented also expresses a larger life-pattern that holds great mean -
ing for the client. In contrast, the effective therapist “heard” the painful theme of loss 
and rejection occurring yet again in Sarah’s current life, saw this as a point of entry, and 
approached it with empathic understanding. approached it with empathic understanding. approached
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

122  CHAPTER 4
In the second vignette, the client has a history of domestic violence. She grew up hear-
ing her parents fight and saw them hit each other. She was the oldest daughter and her 
mother confided in her:
MOTHER:
 Your father has just become a terrible old man! When we were dating and first 
married, he was so loving and considerate. Then he lost his job and became jealous and 
controlling.
The client, a 22 year-old Mexican-American woman, recently married to a police 
officer, felt anxiety as she heard her mother’s story. Her husband was loving and thought-
ful when they were dating but, on returning from Iraq, he was showing signs of jeal -
ousy and control over her time and activities and had begun checking her cell phone and 
emails. She brought this up with her therapist:
CLIENT:
 My husband is becoming controlling. He is jealous of any man who looks at me—even 
old men. But I can’t control who looks at me. He says I dress in ways that attract attention. 
He is even jealous of my going to school—he says I won’t want him when I’m done with 
school. He has even begun checking my phone and emails when he comes home from work.
{Point of Entry}
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 He is jealous of you going to school? What reason does he have 
that going to school will affect your marriage? Have you been less available to him since you 
started school?
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 I appreciate you sharing this with me. I’m so sorry you are faced with 
a jealous and controlling husband. What feelings come up for you when he acts this way? 
CLIENT:
 I’m afraid we’re going to end up like my parents—fighting all the time. I don’t want 
the same thing to happen to my children and have them grow up the way I did, scared all the 
time. 
{Point of Entry}
THERAPIST:
 That makes sense to me. Let’s work together to lessen the likelihood that your 
marriage will go down the same path as your parents’ marriage.
CLIENT:
 How do we do that?
THERAPIST:
 The first three things that come to mind are: One, that you are not isolated and 
have a support system that knows about your concerns and is willing to respond when you 
need help; Two, that we figure out how you can talk to him about your concerns; and Three, 
that we can role-play how to set limits and boundaries and see if he can respond adequately 
to those. Let’s address those red flags you identified so you are not at risk for more difficulties 
in your relationship. Those are my thoughts, how do they sound to you? 
C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc’ R/e.sc/l.sc/u.sc/c.sc/t.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc
Why do some clients tend to avoid an internal focus? As we have seen, a shift away from 
their focus on others can make some clients feel that the therapist does not really under -
stand them. Clients can become frustrated because it seems as if the therapist is not grasp-
ing how difficult the other person really is behaving or is just not sympathetic to their 
concerns. Other clients fear that if they give up their attempts to change others, they will 
have to either accept the blame for the problem and be the “bad” one, or remain forever 
resigned to defeat. Still other clients, not yet feeling that a working alliance is solidly in 
place, do not have the safety they need to approach the difficult feelings or choices that 
looking inside entails. Clients also will be unable to enter certain topics that have evoked 
their vulnerability if the therapist and client are reenacting  some aspect of the client’s 
conflict in their interpersonal process as they have been in developmental and current 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  123
attachment relationships. Finally, the most important reason for clients’ reluctance is mis-
trust or expectations based on previous experience that others don’t want to hear their 
experience or will respond in unwanted ways. 
THERAPIST:
 It sounds as though you feel misunderstood by your husband, your children, and by 
others often...
CLIENT:
 Yes, no one seems to get me. 
{Point of Entry}
THERAPIST:
 No one seems to get you—that’s a real problem. Let’s make it different here. I want 
to get you, so please tell me more about you—what you wish they, or I, would “get.” 
CLIENT:
 Like with my husband?
THERAPIST:
 Sure, what does your husband not know or see in you that you wish he did?
CLIENT:
 That I like my quiet time...that I can deal with problems better in the morning than I can 
after a long day at work...that I’m tired too…
Cultural factors may also impede an internal focus. For example, Native-American, 
Asian, and other clients from communally centered cultures may initially react nega -
tively to invitations to look within because it may sound self-centered. If clients perceive 
a difference in values like this, they may question the therapist’s credibility. Therapists 
can help by educating clients about the treatment process and responding in a manner 
that is congruent with the clients’ worldview. Sue and Zane (2009) highlight the con -
structs of credibility and giving in working with culturally diverse clients. They note 
that therapists can achieve credibility by intervening in a way that shows sensitivity 
and conveys to clients that they are trustworthy and capable of providing assistance. 
In a family where roles are hierarchical, for example, it would be helpful to role-play 
respectful ways to respond or see if there are culturally sanctioned ways to express one’s 
own views or differing opinions. They also identify “gifts” as features that convey hope 
or provide some benefit in the treatment process. This could include many different 
interventions that clients find useful with problems as they see and experience them, 
and that are still culturally congruent for them. For example, this may include helping a 
client reframe a parent’s unwanted, hurtful behavior as a wounded expression of their 
own painful immigration story and unresolved loss—rather than the parent just “not 
loving me.” 
Perhaps the best way to work with clients who are reluctant to look at their own 
behavior or shared participation in problems is to explore—in a non-blaming, curious 
manner, their reasons for not wanting to look within.
THERAPIST:
 When I ask you about your feelings or responses when your mother is critical, you 
often change the subject. Help me understand what could go wrong if we talked about those 
feelings?
CLIENT:
 I’m afraid I’d get sad and maybe mad too, you know, like I might get too upset. 
{Point of {Point of 
Entry}
THERAPIST:
 Uh huh, afraid of getting too upset. What’s the danger—help me understand what 
you are afraid is going to happen or could go wrong if you get too upset? 
CLIENT:
 Well, I’d start out acting mad, but then I might start crying too hard and not be able to 
stop. I’d just be completely out of control—just humiliating...
THERAPIST:
 Angry, and also sad, both very big feelings—that take away your sense of control 
and your dignity and leave you with this terrible sense of humiliation. There’s so much here—
tell me more about all of this…
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

124  CHAPTER 4
When a client talks about big feelings such as this, it provides the therapist with a point 
of entry, which is an opportunity to explore these feelings more fully. For example, where 
her belief about crying and not being able to stop comes from, if this has ever happened and, 
if so, how others responded to her in this vulnerable/exposed moment. Externalizing is often 
a defense against feelings that might, at the surface, include anger but often cover profound 
fear, sadness, or shame. These might include sadness and/or shame about being unseen, not 
cared about, demeaned, and so forth. However, empowerment comes from owning these 
feelings and then choosing to respond to oneself and to others, rather than repeating the 
cycles of behavior that have simply fueled the feelings of hopelessness and helplessness. 
Thus, focusing inward to explore these feelings will help clients understand that the feel -
ings may have made sense for a child whose vulnerability was ignored or whose longing for 
comfort was ridiculed as weak. Clients might then be able to link their externalizing defense 
to a disconnection from family, Self, and other aspects of their presenting problems.
In most cases, however, clients will welcome and accept the therapist’s invitation to 
say more about themselves. However, if clients remain unable to respond, the therapist 
can simply give clients permission to disclose or proceed at their own pace. For example:
THERAPIST:
 It doesn’t seem comfortable for you to share very much of yourself with me yet, but 
I do think it’s important that you choose what and how much you share. You know, you are 
in the driver’s seat. How does that sound to you?
Gradually, however, rather than sit and wait, and the client’s externalizing stance does 
not begin to change, the therapist can make a process comment that makes their interac -
tion overt—as a topic that is now acceptable for discussion. For example:
THERAPIST:
 I’ve noticed that you talk very easily about your husband and your daughter, but 
you don’t say very much about yourself. Are you aware that that happens?
OR
THERAPIST:
 I think we’ve been missing each other the last two sessions. I keep asking what you 
were thinking about or trying to do in a particular situation, and you usually respond by tell-
ing me more about the other person. What do you see going on between us?
Such process comments will help clients become aware of their externalizing style with 
the therapist and learn that they probably respond in the same way to other people as 
well. For example, clients who cannot share themselves in a personal way will often be 
perceived by others as boring or aloof. In that case, part of the clients’ presenting problem, 
such as the clients’ complaint of loneliness or lack of meaningful relationships with oth -
ers, may also be reenacted in their relationship with the therapist. While it’s often initially 
discouraging for clients to realize that they are re-creating their conflict in therapy, this 
reenactment provides the opportunity to begin resolving this problem by changing the dis-
tancing pattern first within the safety of the therapeutic relationship. This interpersonal 
feedback from the therapist is often a gift that helps clients become aware of how they 
interact with others and recognize—often for the first time— how others frequently experi-
ence them. Now, the therapist’s intention is to begin working to help create a different and 
more effective way of relating in their relationship. In the following example, the therapist 
uses a process comment (specifically, a self-involving comment) to disclose how the client is 
affecting him at this moment, and uses this immediacy intervention to move beyond their 
surface, everyday conversation and invite a more meaningful dialogue and relationship:
THERAPIST:
 I feel that I am being held away from you when you talk so much about others but 
so little about yourself. I would like it if you found me safe and we could talk more about 
your concerns or what matters to you. Can we work together on this?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  125
When the therapist uses a process comment or bid to focus clients inward like this, 
clients often reveal new and important concerns they have not talked about previously. 
As we see in the following sample client responses, meaningful issues commonly become 
accessible for collaborative exploration and work in treatment:
 /uni25CFWell, I guess there really isn’t very much about me that people would want to know.
 /uni25CFI’m not used to telling people what’s going on for me. I guess I usually take care of them.
 /uni25CFEvery time I try to get close to someone, they betray me.
 /uni25CFYou wouldn’t like me very much if you knew more about me.
 /uni25CFWhen I start to get close to others, they try to take control. It’s better to just be alone.
In each of these differing ways, the therapist’s process comment brings out important 
new concerns—that are actually life-defining for the client—that can now be addressed in 
treatment. The therapeutic relationship has intensified, and highly significant new infor -
mation that is central to the client’s symptoms and problems has been identified. Clearly, 
this process of helping clients focus inward, and exploring their resistance to looking 
within, provides some of the most important material to be addressed in therapy. These 
far-reaching concerns are unlikely to be brought out and addressed in treatment unless 
the therapist uncovers them by working in the moment with different types of process 
comments and focusing clients inward. When therapists can provide this kind of safety 
and understanding in the therapeutic relationship, clients can let down their guard and 
allow themselves to know and feel things they have tried to keep at bay. 
DEVELOPING AGENCY: PLACING THE LOCUS 
OF/uni00A0CHANGE WITH CLIENTS
F/o.sc/s.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc’/s.sc I/n.sc/i.sc/t.sc/i.sc/a.sc/t.sc/i.sc/v.sc/e.sc
Effective therapy of any treatment length should foster the client’s self-efficacy— we want 
the client to develop a greater sense of agency through the treatment process (Cervone, 
2000; Galassi & Bruch, 1992). Therapists cannot just talk with clients about choice, 
responsibility, and personal power, however; they want to co-create a relationship in 
which clients are behaving in stronger ways with the therapist in the session. When clients 
can first do this with the therapist, the therapist can readily help them transfer this stron-
ger way of acting to the rest of their lives. Thus, the therapist first gives clients permission 
to follow their own interests and actively encourages them to introduce the material that 
seems most relevant to them. Consider the following example:
THERAPIST:
 Where would you like to begin today?
CLIENT:
 I’m not sure
—
 what do you think would be best?
THERAPIST:
 I’d like to join you in exploring whatever you think is most important to work on 
right now. What might that be for you?
CLIENT:
 I’m not sure.
THERAPIST:
 Sure, let’s sit a moment, let you take a breath, settle into yourself, and think about 
what you would like to have different in your life. What seems most alive for you right now?
CLIENT:
 (
Pause
) I think I want to talk about my wife. We had the best weekend together we’ve 
had in a long time.
THERAPIST:
 Wonderful, I’m happy for you. What was different this weekend
—
 were you doing 
anything differently?
CLIENT:
 I think I talked to her more in the way that you talk to me. I asked about what she thought a 
few times and what she wanted to do, and I could tell she liked it. Maybe I should keep doing this…
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

126  CHAPTER 4
After giving clients permission and actively encouraging them to begin pursuing 
their own agenda in this way, the therapist can be an active participant who helps 
clients to explore their own concerns more fully, to understand their problems bet -
ter, and to generate potential solutions and behavioral alternatives. Why is it essential 
to encourage clients’ own initiative and meet them at their point of urgency, even in 
the time-limited modalities within which therapists increasingly work? In one way or 
another, many clients have been unable to act on their own interests or have not been 
supported in pursuing their own goals. In past relationships, these clients have not had 
significant others support their own interests or help them do what they want. As a 
result, these clients will feel encouraged but often anxious as well, if the therapist sup -
ports their own self-direction and tries to discern what matters most to them, regardless 
of theoretical orientation. therapy becomes a more intense and productive experience 
when the therapist can successfully engage clients in pursuing their own interests and 
clarifying what matters most to them. When this occurs, clients take more ownership 
of the change process. Routinely, this will be evidenced as they invest more fully in the 
working alliance.
When the therapist can help clients explore and better understand the material 
they choose to focus on, rather than direct them to the therapist’s agenda, change often 
begins to occur and presenting problems improve (Csillik, 2015). Whatever interven -
tions or techniques the therapist uses, they will be far more effective when given in 
response to the client’s own interests or concerns, rather than the agenda of the therapist, 
employer, or spouse. This process dimension is one of the most important characteristics 
of the therapeutic relationship and, because it is so challenging in the beginning, we will 
explore it further. Once new therapists “get” this interpersonal process dimension and 
can apply it to their clients, it can help make every type of therapeutic intervention more 
effective. When therapist and client can engage in this type of mutual interchange and 
sustain it throughout several sessions, most clients become committed to the treatment 
process and will report that meaningful changes with others are beginning to occur. 
Facilitating this growth process may be the primary challenge and satisfaction of being 
a therapist. Let’s see how this sequence might actually sound with a more challenging or 
provocative client:
CLIENT:
 I need more direction from you. What should I do here? You’re the expert.
THERAPIST:
 I have a couple of ideas to share with you, but I think it would work best if I heard 
yours first.
CLIENT:
 (
impatiently
) If I knew what to do, I’d just do it. I come here to get help from you!
THERAPIST:
 (
bidding for client initiative
) All right, let’s swap ideas. You tell me what you think 
is going on; then I’ll tell you what I see occurring; and let’s see what we can put together.
CLIENT:
 (
Client rejects bid—presses therapist to lead
 ) Like I just said, I don’t know
—
 I don’t 
really have any ideas.
THERAPIST:
 (
Making a second bid for the client’s initiative
) Let’s wait for just a minute and see 
if anything comes to you. If not, I’ll be happy to go first and start us off.
CLIENT:
 (
Client accepts bid and focuses inward
) (
20-second pause
) Well, maybe I’m afraid of 
being alone or something like that.
THERAPIST:
 (
Client focused inward and revealed vulnerability, and therapist recognized this 
point of entry
) That’s interesting and fits with what I’m thinking about. Tell me more about 
what it means to be “alone”; it sounds important.
CLIENT:
 (
Client responds to bid and elaborates further
) I think I’ve always been worried about that.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  127
THERAPIST:
 (
With client now working collaboratively, therapist tentatively suggests a possibility
) 
From other things you’ve said, it makes me wonder if your parents cut off or disengaged from 
you emotionally whenever you disappointed them by doing what you wanted rather than what 
they expected. I’m wondering if that contributed to this feeling of being all alone, even though 
others were physically present
—
 which would have been very confusing to a child.
—
 which would have been very confusing to a child.
—
CLIENT:
 (
Collaboration continues as client refines therapist’s hypothesis
) Yeah, maybe...and the 
worst thing about it was that it seemed like it was all my fault. They were going away because 
I let them down. What do you think?
THERAPIST:
 (
Therapist validates client’s strength, and uses it as a further point of entry for 
exploration
) Uh huh, you know, I think you have very good ideas, but something often seems 
to hold you back from expressing them in the strong way you have just been doing with me. 
This collaborative interaction, in which the therapist and client each build on what 
the other has just produced, is an independence-fostering approach to treatment. Clients 
have the experience of sharing responsibility for the course of treatment, as the therapist 
actively encourages and facilitates addressing their own concerns. As therapists support 
clients in achieving this more active stance, they are simultaneously contributing their 
own ideas and suggestions in a way that creates a working partnership. The therapist in 
the previous dialogue is highly engaging and active— but not very directive. She is follow-
ing the client’s lead, but she is not being non-directive, either. The interpersonal process 
we are striving to achieve, and has long been an empirically supported aspect of effective 
therapeutic relationships, is this collaborative effort (Horvarth & Greenberg, 1994). 
A common misconception is that longer-term, dynamic, or relationship-based thera -
pies are dependency fostering, whereas short-term, problem-solving, or strictly behavioral 
ones are not. Actually, whether therapy fosters dependence or independence is determined 
by the therapeutic process and not by the length of treatment or the theoretical orienta -
tion of the clinician. In short- or longer-term therapy, the client’s dependency is inappro-
priately fostered when the therapist repeatedly directs the course of therapy, gives advice, 
and prescribes solutions for the client. Let’s examine this collaborative alliance further, 
because it offers an effective middle ground between the less productive polarities of 
directive and non-directive control. 
Shared Control in the Therapist–Client Relationship. As we have begun to see, 
treatment will be most successful when the therapist and client share control over the agenda 
and direction of therapy. In most cases, it is overtly controlling for the therapist to play the 
predominant role in structuring and directing the course of treatment and it is ineffective to 
non-directively abandon clients to their own confusion and conflicts. In a more productive 
relationship, therapists will encourage the client to take the lead but will actively contribute 
their own understanding and guidance about the material that the client has produced. It will 
be therapeutic for many clients to experience a relationship in which both participants share 
responsibility. This collaboration in the therapeutic alliance is the key to greater self-efficacy 
and provides clients with the support they need to act in new and stronger ways with others 
in their lives. As previously discussed, the therapist is (1) encouraging clients to take the lead 
and initiate whatever they believe would be most useful to discuss; (2) following clients’ lead 
and joining in their sense of the problem or what’s most important; and (3) looking for points 
of entry where clients have expressed a significant feeling, concern, or issue, and making ac-
tive bids to enter this significant topic more fully. Doing so will move the client and therapist 
from everyday conversation to exploration of meaningful material. Consider this statement:
THERAPIST:
 I would like to begin each session by having you bring up what you want to talk about. I 
would like to join you in working on what seems most important to you. I will be sharing my own 
ideas, reactions, and suggestions as well, but I think this is the best way to begin a good partnership.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

128  CHAPTER 4
Some therapists will be frustrated by this approach and direct clients toward taking 
action and finding solutions, especially if they are feeling pressed to fix the problem quickly 
because of the limited number of sessions available.
Responding to these arguments, the solution-oriented or directive therapist might 
counter, “What if you follow the client’s lead and it takes you nowhere?” This type of 
therapist might also express concern that a non-directive approach requires an unrealistic 
amount of time from the therapist and results in a disorganized therapy that is lack -
ing in focus. Thinking in terms of reenacting patterns and themes, a purely non-directive 
approach may be more likely to reenact problematic relational patterns for clients who 
grew up in a permissive home, or with passive/disengaged caretakers. In parallel, a purely 
directive approach may reenact familiar patterns for some clients who grew up with con-
trolling parents in an authoritarian home. As we are repeatedly trying to illustrate in our 
sample dialogues, however, there is an effective middle ground of shared therapist-client 
control or collaboration, and it is especially well-documented by Miller & Rollnick’s 
Motivational Interviewing (2013). With this middle ground of shared control and collab-
oration, the therapist in the following example does not wait non-directively for the client 
to bring up more relevant material, or directively lead the client to a new topic. Instead, 
the therapist makes a process comment about their current interaction and invites the 
client to join in reshaping it:
THERAPIST:
 It doesn’t seem to me that this is taking us anywhere right now. Maybe I’m not 
getting what you are trying to tell me, or maybe there’s a better way to use our time. Do you 
think there’s another way to talk about this or is there something else that matters more to 
you? What are your thoughts about what I’m wondering?
Therapists need treatment plans and intervention strategies with short- and 
longer-term goals. However, these are most effective in producing enduring or sustain -
able change when they develop out of a collaborative interaction, where the client shares 
responsibility for successes and disappointments and feels ownership of the treatment 
process. To implement this interpersonal process, the therapist needs to be able to toler -process. To implement this interpersonal process, the therapist needs to be able to toler -process. To implement this interpersonal process, the therapist needs to be able to toler
ate ambiguity and refrain from subtly controlling the interaction. Instead, the therapist is 
trying to create opportunities for clients to voice their own concerns and to act on their 
own initiative. The therapist’s task, then, is to be able to de-center; enter into the client’s 
subjective worldview; and empathically highlight  the core meaning, central feeling, or 
relational pattern that this issue seems to hold for the client. This is what we mean when 
we talk about the therapist looking for a point of entry to move beyond surface dialogue. 
This approach requires an active therapist who is neither directive nor non-directive but 
has the flexibility to tolerate ambiguity and share control. In this approach, therapists 
respond actively by:
 /uni25CFcommunicating their understanding and affirming the client’s experience;
 /uni25CFjoining the client in exploring further the key meaning in what the client just said;
 /uni25CFusing self-involving comments or their own experience of the client to provide inter-using self-involving comments or their own experience of the client to provide inter-using self-involving comments or their own experience of the client to provide inter
personal feedback about how the client affects the therapist—personal feedback about how the client affects the therapist—personal feedback about how the client affects the therapist and may be contribut-
ing to problems with others;
 /uni25CFaffirming new behavior that disrupts old patterns and demonstrates change with the 
therapist or with others; and
 /uni25CFproviding a focus for treatment by highlighting the repetitive interaction sequences, 
central feelings, and faulty beliefs that recur throughout the client’s narratives.
Furthermore, the therapist is using process comments to address treatment impediments—
such as resistance or an externalizing focus— and to prevent unwanted reenactments or unrec-
ognized ruptures between the therapist and client (e.g., the client is silent about her faulty 
belief that the therapist is impatient, bored, or burdened by her— as others often have been). 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  129
Therapists do this by working in the here and now and asking about what may be going on 
between them in their relationship or current interaction. For example:
THERAPIST:
 What’s it like to be talking with me about this?
CLIENT:
 Well, you’re probably feeling impatient with me—like everybody else does—because I’m 
still stuck on this.
In this way, the therapist intervenes by taking the client’s problems out of abstract 
discussions about others “back then and there.” Instead, the therapist is looking for 
opportunities to create immediacy by linking the client’s problems with others to what 
may be occurring between them in the way they are interacting right now. For example:
THERAPIST:
 No, I’m not feeling “impatient” with you at all. Is there anything I’m doing or that 
is happening between us that makes you feel that way? If so, let’s sort that through together 
and change it. I can see this is a complicated problem for you, and I appreciate how hard you 
are trying to do something about it.
CLIENT:
 Really, you’re not frustrated with me? You know, that makes me almost want to cry—it 
feels like I’ve been a disappointment to just about everybody in my life….
Working in the here-and-now with clients is a big new step for most therapists. It 
brings therapists and clients out of the mode of everyday social interaction and, as we 
see above, it quickly takes us to the heart of what’s wrong.  Significant feelings come up 
and key issues that the therapist didn’t know even mattered to the client now take center 
stage. And, just as important, the relationship becomes more intense and begins to matter 
more to both the therapist and the client.
As we will explore in Chapter 6, an Authoritative parenting style that combines both 
parental affection and communication with firm limits reflects a more effective middle 
ground between the better known and more widely adopted Authoritarian and Permis -
sive parenting styles. In parallel, therapists will find that shared control offers most clients 
a more productive alternative than either directive or non-directive approaches. Trainees 
need role models of how therapists and clients can work together in this actively engaged 
and collaborative way, so let’s examine interventions that foster a strong working alliance 
and illustrate this middle ground of shared control.
As we are seeing, the therapist is trying to establish and sustain the interpersonal 
process throughout each session and encourage the client’s lead while still participating 
actively in shaping the course of treatment. The key is for the therapist to intervene with-
out taking the impetus away from the client. The following examples illustrate ineffective 
and effective ways to do this.
Ineffective Interventions. Suppose that the client is filling the therapy session with 
seemingly irrelevant storytelling. The therapist cannot find a common theme to any of 
the client’s narratives or understand the personal meaning that these vignettes hold for 
the client. It seems as if nothing significant is occurring. At this point, it is easy for the 
therapist to stop the client and direct him or her toward a specific topic that the therapist 
thinks would be more fruitful. This refocusing can be effective at times, but therapists will 
succeed more often if they revitalize the therapeutic interaction without shifting the im -
petus away from the client and onto the therapist. In the following dialogue, the onus for 
therapy comes to rest with the therapist, and the client loses an internal focus for change:
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 I’m wondering where this is taking us. Have I lost the focus here?
CLIENT:
 I’m not sure where I’m going with this, either. What do you think I should talk about?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

130  CHAPTER 4
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 You’ve had trouble asserting yourself in the past, and I think we 
need to look more closely at that. Last week, you said you wanted to ask your boss for three 
weeks of vacation instead of two. How are you going to handle that confrontation?
CLIENT:
 I’m not sure. What do you think I should say?
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 To begin with, you need to arrange a face-to-face meeting with 
him. It is important that only the two of you are present, so that you can have his full atten-
tion and there is less threat for either of you to lose face. Then use the “I” statements we have 
practiced to state directly what you want.
CLIENT:
 Sounds good, but what would you say to him first?
Assessing the client’s responses in this dialogue, it is clear that this intervention is 
not productive, even though the therapist has moved the client to a more salient topic 
and provided useful information about effective negotiations. The fulcrum of therapeutic 
movement has tipped from the client to the therapist, and a hierarchical teacher-student 
process has been established. Most clients will not be able to utilize the therapist’s useful 
information until they pick up the momentum and begin to participate actively again. 
Furthermore, because the client remains in a passive role as the therapist continues to 
inform, the client does not gain the increasing sense of self-efficacy that comes from par -
ticipating more collaboratively in treatment. A more productive intervention might be 
to make bids to engage the client more actively in treatment rather than continuing this 
faulty interpersonal process. However , if the client does not become actively engaged 
again, therapists do not want to just sit and wait non-directively. Instead, they can actively 
intervene by simply observing this with a process comment. Let’s illustrate this more 
effective approach.
Effective Interventions. The therapist can refocus clients toward more productive 
material— but in a way that keeps the momentum for treatment with the client. Again, 
process comments that make the current interaction between therapist and client an overt 
topic for discussion are often effective in these circumstances.
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 I don’t have the feeling that what you’re talking about is really very 
important to you. Am I missing the point here, or is this really important? Help me out.
CLIENT:
 Yeah, you’re right, I’m not sure where I’m going with this, either. What would you like 
me to talk about?
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 I think that we should try to identify what would be most important 
to you and talk about that. What might that be right now?
CLIENT:
 Uh, I’m not really sure.
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 OK, Let’s just sit together quietly for a few moments, and let you 
check in and be with yourself, and see what comes to you.
CLIENT:
 (
pauses
) Well, there is something that I’ve been ashamed to talk about. Do you think it 
would be a sin if I was bisexual, or if I had sexual feelings toward men sometimes?
New therapists often feel uncomfortable with silences and may find themselves anx -
iously filling them. If therapists can refrain from doing so, even just for a moment or 
two, these are opportune moments for clients to establish their own agenda or introduce 
new material that is far more meaningful — as in the preceding dialogue. Again, this type 
of process comment invites the client to approach more substantial material but, in line 
with our goal, without taking the impetus away from the client. The therapist has directly 
intervened by sharing an observation and asking about the client’s perceptions of the 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  131
current interaction, but the therapist has been skillful in leaving the client an active col -
laborator in revitalizing the discussion. Routinely, clients produce far more significant 
material when they are invited to lead in this way rather than to follow. As always, try it 
out with your clients, assess their reactions, and see what works best for you.
Let’s look at a different illustration of these treatment guidelines, but this time with 
a provocative client who would be challenging for new therapists. Imagine the following 
situation: A 19-year-old White client in a college counseling center had been telling his 
therapist about his attempts in early adolescence to observe his stepmother undressing. 
The client had been detailing his voyeuristic efforts at great lengths, but the therapist did 
not feel that this was genuinely of much concern to the client. Unless the therapist could 
find the relevant meaning for the client, he wanted to move on to other, more salient 
issues in the client’s current life. In the following dialogue, the therapist uses a process 
comment to refocus the client in a way that places the locus for change more fully with 
the client and, in the process, reveals a new and more salient treatment issue.
THERAPIST:
 As I listen to you, I don’t get the feeling that you are really very interested in what 
you are telling me. Is that the case, or am I not understanding the meaning this holds for you?
CLIENT:
 I thought therapists were interested in this oedipal stuff. I figured you would want to 
hear about it.
THERAPIST:
 I’m struck by the fact that you are telling me what you think I want to hear, rather 
than talking about what’s most important to you. Maybe that’s something we should discuss. 
I wonder if you find yourself doing something like this in other relationships as well?
CLIENT:
 (
sarcastically
) Well, duh! Of course—isn’t that what everyone has to do with teachers 
and parents and therapists like you? Figure out what you want and go along with it?
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 Well, it’s what some people have learned they have to do with some 
teachers and some parents and some therapists. But it’s not what you have to do with every-
one, and it’s not what you have to do with me. I like people who have their own mind.
CLIENT:
 (
sarcastically again
) Do you now?
THERAPIST:
 Yes, actually, I do. So, tell me, who in your life can you be honest with and talk 
about what you really care about—and who do you have to superficially comply with and 
talk their talk? While perhaps simultaneously feeling resentful as you may be doing with me 
right now?
CLIENT:
 So you think I’m being a bad boy and dis-sing you
THERAPIST:
 No, I don’t think you are being a bad boy—but I do feel you are being provocative 
with me. Are there others that you talk to in this way?
CLIENT:
 Well, (
pause
) maybe my mom, sometimes.
THERAPIST:
 What happens if you to talk to her about what matters for you?
CLIENT:
 She gets mad—like I embarrass her by being who I am.
THERAPIST:
 Ouch! I’m sorry for both of you. Have you ever tried talking with her about this? 
You just said it so clearly.
CLIENT:
 (
with disdain
) Of course not—do you believe in Santa Claus and the tooth fairy, too? 
She’s not going to change!
THERAPIST:
 As you talk with me like that, especially in that contemptuous tone of voice, I feel 
insulted—as if you think I’m an idiot. Is that what you meant to convey?
CLIENT:
 (
pauses
) Uhh...
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

132  CHAPTER 4
THERAPIST:
 I wonder if you are aware of sometimes talking to people in that sarcastic or 
contemptuous way?
CLIENT:
 I guess I sort of do and sort of don’t—but as you say it, I guess it could be a problem.
THERAPIST:
 Yeah, I don’t think others would like that much. Some might respond in kind, you 
know, spit back, and some might step away a bit—or even end their relationship with you.
CLIENT:
 Yeah, all that’s happened...(
pause, silence
) My mom and I do this to each other some-
times too.
THERAPIST:
 I’m sorry, I can see that would not go very well for either of you. I don’t know if 
your mother can change or not, but I think it’s worth testing the waters to see. Maybe she 
could respond better if you began talking to her differently
—
 in a more respectful and straight-
forward way about what’s really going on between you, rather than in the sarcastic way you 
were just talking to me. That improves her chances of being able to respond better. What do 
you think?
CLIENT:
 Yeah, maybe, but how can things get better for me if she still thinks I have to do every-
thing her way and be the way she needs me to be all the time?
THERAPIST:
 I have several ideas about what you could do differently with her
—
 whether she is 
capable of change or not
—
 that could leave you feeling better about yourself.
CLIENT:
 How would things be better for me if it turns out to be hopeless with my mom? I think 
she’ll just say what she always does
—
 everything’s my fault; I’m always doing it wrong.
THERAPIST:
 She very well might, sadly, but if you tried talking with her about this in a more 
respectful way, I think you’d feel differently about yourself and your part in this hurtful inter
-
action. Maybe you’d even stop believing that all of the problem is always your fault. So, other 
relationships in your life might go a little better, too, even if it doesn’t change with your mom.
CLIENT:
 Like with my girlfriend?
THERAPIST:
 Yes, exactly. Tell me how this goes with your girlfriend…
In summary, the therapist in this dialogue is taking the risk to talk judiciously about 
“you and me.” The therapist provides interpersonal feedback about the client’s insulting 
manner in a non-blaming manner and invites the client to take more responsibility for 
causing and solving the problem. Carkhuff (2008) calls this personalizing , and encour-
ages therapists to respond in ways that help clients realize that they usually have some 
shared responsibility for creating and maintaining their problems. Therapists who avoid 
making this challenge for greater personal responsibility generally lose credibility with the 
client, and the working alliance is diminished. The therapeutic dialogue may be support -
ive and understanding, but it doesn’t go very far— it isn’t enough to lead to change for a 
client such as this. Thus, therapists are encouraged to respond in this personalizing way 
and say, for example, “You’re upset because they took advantage of you, and because you 
didn’t stand up for yourself when it happened.”
ENLIST CLIENTS IN SOLVING THEIR OWN PROBLEMS
As noted earlier, clients benefit most from looking within, sharing their inner world, and 
engaging in understanding and resolving their own problems; that is, taking ownership 
of the change process where they can learn from their mistakes and gain from their suc -
cesses. Too often, new therapists hold unrealistic expectations that they must be experts 
who possess insightful solutions to their clients’ problems; they then suffer under these 
performance demands with painful feelings of inadequacy. Here again, this misconception 
places the impetus for change in the therapist’s lap and gives clients the role of passive 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  133
recipients, waiting to be cured. Rather than adopting this hierarchical model, a more 
effective approach is to extend the collaborative alliance into the problem-solving phase 
as well. Therapists will be more effective when they elicit clients’ active involvement in 
resolving their own problems. For example, a therapist might ask:
 /uni25CFWhat is the most important thing you want to change to make your life better?
 /uni25CFWhat have you tried in the past that has worked for you?
 /uni25CFLooking back, what have others done to make things better— or worse— for you, — for you, —
when you were in this situation?
 /uni25CFWhat could you and I do together to try and help with this?
 /uni25CFHow do you understand the way things have gone in your life to get you in this 
position?
 /uni25CFIf you were to wake up tomorrow and your problems had improved, what would 
you have changed to make things better?
Therapists too often establish expectations that set the stage for the therapist to tell 
clients how to lead their lives — by explaining what it all means, giving advice, and pre -
scribing solutions. However, when clients participate in a collaborative partnership, it is 
empowering and gives them the opportunity to become more capable of managing their 
own lives. Rather than just providing answers, therapists are most effective when they 
help clients learn how to think about and explore their own problems, consider things 
from different perspectives, and generate their own solutions and alternatives (Arkowitz 
et al., 2015). Real change occurs when therapy has not only resolved clients’ presenting 
problems but has fostered their self-efficacy. To illustrate this, let’s look at two different 
ways of responding to a client’s dream. Although the interpretation of the dream remains 
the same, the first example reenacts the client’s problems whereas the second enacts a dif-
ferent interpersonal process and provides a CEE.
R/e.sc/s.sc/o.sc/l.sc/v.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc’/s.sc C/o.sc/n.sc/f.sc/l.sc/i.sc/c.sc/t.sc
Anna, a 24-year-old client, lived at home with her embittered and chronically embattled 
parents. For several years, Anna had been struggling with the developmental transition of 
emancipation from her family of origin. She could not establish her own adult life. Anna 
had few friendships, dated little, and had no serious educational or career involvements. 
Anna’s “martyr-ish” mother and alcoholic father wrangled constantly, and Anna felt that 
it was her responsibility to stay home and help her mother cope with her failed marriage. 
Anna entered therapy complaining of depression.
After several sessions, Anna recounted to her therapist a dream that was of great 
importance to her. As the dream began, Anna was riding a beautiful horse across an open 
savannah. She felt as one with this graceful animal as they glided effortlessly across the 
broad grasslands. They sped toward a distant mountain, past sunlit rivers, birds in flight, 
and herds of grazing elk. Anna felt strong and free as she urged the tireless animal onward.
The distant mountains held the promise of new life amid green meadows and tall 
trees. Anna felt their promise quicken inside her as she urged the horse onward. But as the 
mountains drew near, Anna and the horse began to slow. The horse’s legs became her own 
and grew heavier with each step. Anna desperately tried to will them on, but their footing 
became unsure and they began to stumble. At that moment, she was surrounded on all 
sides by menacing riders, ready to overtake and capture her. As she awoke, Anna choked 
back a scream.
“What do you think my dream means?” Anna asked.
Her bright, concerned, young therapist offered a lengthy and insightful explanation. 
The interpretation focused on Anna’s guilt over leaving home. The therapist suggested 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

134  CHAPTER 4
that, if Anna went on with her life and pursued her own interests, she would feel power -
ful and alive — just as she had in the dream. But before Anna could reach her goal and 
experience the satisfactions of having her own adult life, she would have to free herself 
from the binding ties of responsibility that she felt for her mother and her parents’ mar -
riage. Her loyalty to her mother threatened to entrap her in guilt and prevent her from 
being able to live her own adult life. The following dialogue then took place between 
Anna and her therapist:
ANNA:
 (
enthusiastically
) Yes, you’re right, I do feel like I’m doing something wrong whenever I 
leave my mother and do what I want. Is that why I dreamed that?
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 We’ve been talking about whether you are going to move into an 
apartment next month. I think the dream reflects your guilt over taking this big step on your 
own. You know, like we’ve been talking—that by becoming more independent—in a normal 
or appropriate way, you’re being selfish and hurting your mother.
ANNA:
 I want to move out, but I can’t leave my mother with my father. She says she will divorce 
him if I move out, and it’ll be my fault. What should I do?
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 I can’t make that decision for you. It’s important for you to be 
responsible for your own decisions.
ANNA:
 But I don’t know what to do, and you always know what’s best. You’re so much smarter 
than me. I thought about that dream a lot, and I didn’t know that’s what it meant.
Throughout the rest of the session, Anna continued to plead for advice and expressed 
her discouragement about being able to resolve her own problems. The well-intended 
therapist did not want her to become dependent on therapy and kept refusing to tell her 
what to do — giving her explanations about autonomy, independence, and the need for 
Anna to find her own solutions. At the end of the hour, Anna felt agitated and depressed, 
and the therapist was still trying to explain the need for Anna to make her own decisions.
Although the therapist was astute in linking Anna’s dream to her separation guilt and 
the current manifestation of her emancipation problems, this was an unproductive ses -
sion. How did their interpersonal process go awry?
In this session, Anna experienced a relational pattern with her therapist similar to 
the pattern she was struggling with at home. In her family, Anna was indeed trained to 
be dependent and believe that she didn’t have the wherewithal to live successfully on her 
own. Further, she was made to feel guilty whenever she did act independently or on her 
own behalf. In the beginning of their session when the therapist interpreted the dream so 
accurately, the therapist acted as the knowing parent who gave all the necessary answers 
to the needy child. This interaction behaviorally communicated the message that Anna 
will be dependent on the therapist’s superior understanding. On another level, however, 
this message was contradicted by the therapist’s verbal message about independence. 
This mixed message from the well-intentioned therapist immobilized Anna. The thera -
pist’s direct interpretation could have worked well for some clients but, recalling client 
response specificity, such an approach was problematic for Anna.
Anna reacted so strongly because this interaction cut to the quick of her problem. On 
the one hand, she needed and greatly wanted permission from the therapist to become 
more independent but, on the other, she expected that the therapist needed her to remain 
dependent, just as her mother did. When the problematic relational pattern of having to 
remain dependent on the authority was reenacted with her therapist, Anna’s faulty belief 
that she was incapable of making her own decisions and having her own life was con -
firmed. Anna remained depressed until the therapist successfully reestablished a more col-
laborative interpersonal process with her. With the help of a supervisor, the therapist did 
this in the next session by soliciting Anna’s ideas about something they were discussing. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  135
The therapist expressed genuine pleasure in watching her be so insightful and, following 
this, shared some related ideas. This time, Anna readily picked up on the therapist’s ideas 
and used them to further her own thinking— it was a partnership.
Recalling “rupture and repair,” Anna and her therapist soon corrected their reenact -
ment and restored their working alliance, and treatment successfully progressed. When 
therapists can acknowledge a misattunement on their part, it allows the client to enter the 
relationship more fully and make progress (Safran & Kraus, 2014). The client is given the 
opportunity to clarify his or her experience and need. In this way the client becomes further 
empowered to elucidate what is going on and what he or she wants to have change — the 
client is now more actively engaged as an agent of the treatment process (Benjamin, 2009). 
With this in mind, let’s consider other, more effective ways of responding to Anna’s 
question, “What do you think my dream means?” Interventions that invite a collabora -
tive partnership— that engage clients in exploring issues with the therapist — will usually 
be more effective than explanations or guidance provided by the therapist, no matter how 
accurate(Kazantzis & Kellis, 2012). Therapists can choose to respond in many different ways 
and can engage clients in exploring their own dreams or any other material they present. In 
such a collaborative interpersonal process, therapists might ask the following questions:
 /uni25CFIt sounds like a very important dream to me, too. Let’s work on it together. Where 
should we begin?
 /uni25CFWhat was the primary feeling you were left with from the dream? Can you connect 
that feeling to anything going on in your life right now?
 /uni25CFWhat was the most important image in the dream for you? What does that image 
suggest to you?
 /uni25CFLet’s exchange ideas. I’ll give you a possibility I’m thinking about, and you share 
one with me. It’ll be interesting to see what we can come up with together. Who 
should go first?
Each of these varying responses encourages the client to participate actively with the 
therapist. Ultimately, the therapist may want to give the same interpretation of the dream 
but will do so with skillful tentativeness by collaboratively inviting the client to modify or 
refine the interpretation to make it fit better (Kiesler, 1996).
 Even though the therapist provides an explanation, the process will be significantly 
different and far more enlivening for clients if it evolves out of their joint efforts and is 
integrated into their continuing collaboration. This approach gives clients a relationship 
in which they are neither dependent on the therapist, nor unable to move forward on 
their own. Instead, clients are encouraged to exercise their own abilities, and selectively 
utilize suggestions, and refine possibilities from the therapist. When this occurs, clients 
feel more ownership of the therapeutic process, their motivation to work in treatment 
increases, and their self-efficacy is enhanced. Facilitating such self-efficacy provides a CEE 
for clients like Anna, who get the permission they need to grow out of their dependence 
or binding ties of guilt and act capably in their relationship with the therapist— something 
they may not have experienced in past relationships (Silberschatz, 2005; Weiss, 1993). To 
illustrate this more balanced approach, let’s return to Anna’s situation and see how read-
ily the therapist can make it more collaborative and productive:
ANNA:
 (
enthusiastically
) Yes, you’re right, I do feel like I’m doing something wrong whenever  
I leave my mother or do what I want. Is that why I dreamt that?
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 We’ve been talking about whether you are going to move into an 
apartment next month. I’m wondering if the dream has something to do with you feeling 
guilty about taking this big step on your own. What comes to mind for you as I wonder aloud 
about this possibility?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

136  CHAPTER 4
ANNA:
 I want to move out, but I can’t leave my mother with my father. She says she will divorce 
him if I move out, and it’ll be my fault. What should I do?
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 Tell me what you think as I slowly reflect back what you just said: “It 
will be my fault if my mother leaves my father.”
ANNA:
 (
pauses
) It sounds crazy...it’s ruining my life.
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 That’s right—it’s ruining your life and it’s not true. Children are not 
responsible for their parents’ marriages, and it’s not fair when they are pulled into taking sides 
in marital conflict or expected to rescue a parent from their problems like this—it keeps you 
from having your own life.
ANNA:
 I feel better when you say that...but what should I do?
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 What would you like to be able to do about this?
ANNA:
 I think I want to speak up, but I just don’t want to hurt her feelings...
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 Yes, I get the maddening conflict you’ve been talking about: you want 
to be able to have your own life, but you don’t want to hurt your mother because you love 
her. So, tell me about both sides of “speaking up.” What would you want to say, and how 
would it be for you if your mother felt hurt by that?
ANNA:
 I’d like to say that I don’t want her to complain to me about my dad anymore. I don’t 
want to hear what’s wrong with him. I don’t want to have to take sides. But she’d definitely 
feel hurt and totally betrayed if I said anything like that.
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 It would be great to set boundaries with her like that, but the guilt 
over hurting her would be very hard for you. You’ve struggled with this dilemma for a long 
time now...saying and doing what you need “hurts” her.
ANNA:
 Yeah, it does, but I would like to find a nice way to speak up—you know, respectfully… 
but she’ll still be hurt.
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 Sure, let’s find respectful ways to do this, but also keep realistic expec-
tations about how she’s likely to respond—and how that’s going to affect you.
ANNA:
 Right, I know what you’re thinking. I can probably stand up better for myself, but my 
mother’s probably not going to give me any support for moving out or doing what I want 
with my life. She’s going to feel hurt and betrayed no matter how I say it.
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 I’d love to be wrong but, sadly, I think that’s a realistic possibility too.
ANNA:
 Yeah, it is sad, really sad. So I’m stuck here and have no clue what to do next.
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 Well, in the past you’ve liked it when we role-play things. Why don’t 
we practice and explore this some more by role-playing how the conversation might go, and 
anticipate the trouble spots that are likely to come up. I could role-play a more assertive but 
still respectful Anna, and you could be your mother, you know, and say the things she will 
probably say if you decide to talk to her about this some time. And we can both watch out for 
the guilt, and the sadness, as we go along...
TRACKING CLIENTS’ ANXIETY
Another way to help clients turn inward is to develop the skill of being able to track 
the client’s anxiety (Sullivan, 1970) . Although the subjective experience of anxiety is 
distressing and may even be painful, we want to show that it can still be the therapist’s 
ally. How so? Anxiety serves as a signpost that points to the heart of the problem — a 
signal that the real threat or danger is at hand. Tracking precisely what makes a particular 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  137
client anxious will help therapists identify the client’s key concerns and provides a point 
of entry for the therapist (Wolfe, 2005). Therapists do not fully understand clients’ 
problems— or what needs to occur in counseling to resolve them— until they discern what 
makes a client anxious. Why do certain situations or interactions make a particular client 
anxious, and how has the client learned to cope with this threat or insecurity? Therapists 
are encouraged to begin formulating working hypotheses to this question in order to 
clarify a treatment focus (Levenson & Strupp, 2007). As we will see, focusing clients 
inward on their anxieties — exploring together what activates or triggers this unwanted 
feeling— will lead the therapist and the client to the client’s central concerns.
Therapists can use a four-step sequence to track clients’ anxiety and better under -
stand what’s really wrong. In this sequence, the therapist:
1. Identifies manifest and covert signs of the client’s anxiety; 
2. approaches signs of client anxiety;
3. notes the topic presently under discussion and considers the interpersonal process 
currently transpiring that may have precipitated the client’s anxiety; and
4. focuses the client inward to explore the meaning of the client’s anxiety.
Let’s look at these four steps more closely.
S/t.sc/e.sc/p.sc /one.alt. I/d.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/i.sc/f.sc/y.sc S/i.sc/g.sc/n.sc/s.sc /o.sc/f.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc’/s.sc A/n.sc/x.sc/i.sc/e.sc/t.sc/y.sc
Clients become anxious in the session when the issues they are discussing hold real 
meaning and touch on their key concerns. Clients develop certain interpersonal coping 
strategies, which they employ over and over again in different situations, to ward off 
or diminish this anxiety (e.g., pleasing, controlling, withdrawing, etc.). The therapist is 
trying to identify what makes this particular client anxious (e.g., needing to ask for help 
and expecting the other to attach “strings” to their response; not knowing how to fix 
or do something and expecting the other to be impatient, critical, or disdainful, etc.). 
When therapists can do this, they are better prepared to recognize the unifying themes 
or repetitive patterns that have triggered the client’s anxiety (Levenson, Butler, Powers & 
Beitman, 2002). Thus, throughout treatment, therapists are continually asking themselves, 
and inviting the client to join them in identifying, “What makes this client anxious? When 
does the client feel threatened or insecure? Where do safety and danger lie?”
To identify the patterns and themes that are causing problems in clients’ lives, the 
therapist tracks their anxiety and remains alert for signs indicating that something they 
are experiencing is making them anxious right now. Clients may express their anxiety 
in a thousand different ways — through nervous laughter, for example, or through nail 
biting, hand gesticulation, agitated movement, stuttering, hair pulling, speech blockage, 
and so on. These “anxiety equivalents” will be expressed in endlessly varied ways across 
clients, and therapists and clients together can learn how each particular client tends to 
express anxiety. This insight will be especially important when working with clients from 
cultures in which certain behaviors — such as gaze aversion — may be normative rather 
than a signal of anxiety (Ridley & Kelly, 2007).
 When most clients become anxious, they employ the same interpersonal coping strat-
egies in a repetitive or characteristic way Johnson, Popp, Schacht et al. (1989). As noted 
above, these strategies routinely include becoming critical or controlling, acting helpless 
or confused, withdrawing from people or avoiding certain situations, and so forth. We 
will explore these strategies closely in Chapter 7. For present purposes, it is enough to 
note that the first step in tracking the clients’ anxiety is to observe and note when they 
become anxious (e.g., when they have to assume a leadership role or follow someone’s 
lead, when they succeed or make a mistake, when they have to establish boundaries with 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

138  CHAPTER 4
someone, when they have to disagree with someone or advocate on their own behalf, 
when they become intimate and begin to trust someone, when they feel distressed or need 
to ask for help, etc.).
S/t.sc/e.sc/p.sc 2. A/p.sc/p.sc/r.sc/o.sc/a.sc/c.sc/h.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc’/s.sc A/n.sc/x.sc/i.sc/e.sc/t.sc/y.sc D/i.sc/r.sc/e.sc/c.sc/t.sc/l.sc/y.sc
In working with resistance in Chapter 3, we encouraged therapists to ask about and work 
with the feelings and concerns that clients may have around asking for help, having a prob-
lem, or entering treatment. Our key question was, “What is the threat or danger if…?” 
Further along in treatment, therapists similarly are encouraged to approach clients’ anxiety 
about an issue they are discussing or about what may be occurring with the therapist at 
that moment. Following Greenberg (2004), therapists can focus clients on their immediate 
experience in an open-ended way (e.g., by asking, “What are you feeling, right now, as you 
talk with me about this?”). Therapists can also hold the steady intention to be looking for 
opportunities to better discern and name the anxiety more specifically. For example:
THERAPIST:
 Something seems to be making you uncomfortable right now. Any ideas about what 
that may be?
CLIENT:
 Not really—I am restless but I’m not sure. Why…?
THERAPIST:
 Let’s do that sentence completion exercise again. What’s the first thing that comes 
to mind when you ask yourself, 
“
Right now I
’
m afraid that ________.
”
CLIENT:
 …
 You’re mad. I think I’m afraid that you’re mad or disappointed with me somehow.
By focusing clients inward on their anxiety as they are experiencing it , and helping 
them explore it further and discern it more precisely, the therapist is following the clients’ 
lead and helping them get closer to the source of their problems. For example, Greenberg 
(2010) writes, in an illuminating way, about the importance of attending to emotions, and 
shows how the therapist and client together can use this to facilitate change. Although 
some clients may be ambivalent about the therapist’s request to look within and explore 
their anxiety further, many clients will welcome this opportunity to explore their anxiety 
with the therapist — and the sadness or loss, shame or, or pain that usually follow close 
behind. On the other hand, clients may also recognize that approaching their anxiety will 
bring them closer to their internal working models  (IWMs)—faulty beliefs about them -
selves and unwanted expectations of others that evoke further anxiety (Pietromonaco & 
Feldman, 2000).
Although clients often experience the therapist’s focus on their anxiety as helpful, 
at other times it may intensify anxiety and even arouse resistance. As discussed in the 
previous chapter, therapists need to respond to the client’s resistance when it emerges by 
exploring what about this anxiety-arousing topic is threatening or does not feel safe to 
approach. This process will be far more effective than ignoring the client’s reluctance as if 
nothing significant is occurring, or “pressing” and trying to persuade the reluctant client 
to talk further about the difficult issue. This respectful, non-demanding, and collabora -
tive approach honors the client’s autonomy, fosters motivation and empowerment, and 
contributes to positive outcomes ( Csillik, 2015; Guame et al., 2008). Before the therapist 
and client address the specific issue, they first can explore the resistance and together 
learn what doesn’t feel safe and engenders anxiety. For example:
THERAPIST:
 OK, let’s pause and stop talking about this. Instead, help me understand what’s 
the threat or danger for you if you did talk to me about that? You know, what’s going to go 
wrong between us
—
 or how are you going to end up getting hurt again
—
 if you kept talking to 
me about it?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  139
The therapist’s intention here is to respond in a way that honors the client’s resis -
tance. Recall from Chapter 3 that the therapist does this by: 
(1) trying to understand the original, aversive experiences that led the client to behave in 
this particular way; 
(2) helping the client appreciate how this “resistant” or “defensive” response was 
once, at a different time and with different people, a necessary and adaptive coping 
strategy; and 
(3) disconfirming the schema or IWM by providing the client with a different and more 
reparative response (CEE) than the client has come to expect, as in the following 
example:
THERAPIST:
 No, I don’t find you “needy” or “demanding” for asking me if I would call you and 
touch base for a minute before you make this big presentation on Tuesday. It would be easy for 
me to take a few minutes to do that, and I’m pleased that you are willing to risk asking for this.
S/t.sc/e.sc/p.sc 3. O/b.sc/s.sc/e.sc/r.sc/v.sc/e.sc W/h.sc/a.sc/t.sc P/r.sc/e.sc/c.sc/i.sc/p.sc/i.sc/t.sc/a.sc/t.sc/e.sc/s.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc’ A/n.sc/x.sc/i.sc/e.sc/t.sc/y.sc
As we have seen, the therapist first observes when the client is anxious, and then helps the 
client focus inward to explore and try to understand what the client is experiencing. At 
the same time, the therapist has a third task: to try to recognize what issue was just being 
discussed (content) or what type of interaction between the therapist and the client may 
have precipitated the client’s anxiety (process). If the therapist can identify what it was 
that made the client anxious, the therapist will be better able to identify the faulty belief, 
interpersonalscenario, or difficult feeling that may have generated the anxiety. When the 
therapist and client can collaboratively discern the precipitating or triggering event, it will 
help them understand what’s really wrong and needs to change. Thus, approaching anxi-
ety is a point of entry for engaging the client more meaningfully.
Generally, the client will be able to discuss comfortably a range of different issues 
with the therapist. However, when the client becomes anxious, the therapist’s aim is to try 
to identify the issue that has just precipitated the anxiety. Which topic was the client just 
talking about? The answer will highlight the concerns that are most central to the client’s 
problems. As we know, therapists can help the client explore this more effectively if they 
have already formulated working hypotheses about the possible issues that may be gen -
erating the anxiety. Keeping process notes after each session, as suggested in Appendix A, 
will help therapists formulate their working hypotheses more effectively.
In addition, the client’s anxiety may also be a signal that the interpersonal process 
between the therapist and client is reenacting a developmental problem or cyclical rela -
tional pattern for the client. For example, the therapist might observe client anxiety in the 
following circumstances:
 /uni25CFAs the therapist was expressing uncertainty about what was going on in the session at 
that point, the client became anxious, perhaps because her alcoholic father would start 
demeaning her whenever he felt uncertain, confused, or felt insecure or unsure of himself.
 /uni25CFThe client had just made a significant insight and the therapist applauded his 
achievement. The client then became anxious, perhaps believing that now he would 
always have to be so insightful and perform so well, as an aggrandizing and bragging 
parent had expected of him.
 /uni25CFThe therapist had just been supportive, and perhaps the client felt anxious because 
“strings” had always been attached to what she had been given in the past. 
 /uni25CFFollowing her IWMs, the client may have become concerned that the therapist would be 
irritated and withdraw from her following her request to have her appointment changed 
to a more convenient time, just as a caregiver used to do when she asked for something. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

140  CHAPTER 4
The therapist can generate working hypotheses such as these about how the cur -
rent therapist-client interaction may have triggered a developmental problem or unwit -
tingly reenacted a maladaptive relational pattern for the client. These hypotheses can then 
be used to help therapists and clients explore together what evoked the client’s anxiety, 
understand what this threat really did mean and with whom, and find more effective 
ways to respond when similar issues emerge in the future.
S/t.sc/e.sc/p.sc 4. F/o.sc/c.sc/u.sc/s.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc I/n.sc/w.sc/a.sc/r.sc/d.sc /t.sc/o.sc E/x.sc/p.sc/l.sc/o.sc/r.sc/e.sc T/h.sc/e.sc/i.sc/r.sc A/n.sc/x.sc/i.sc/e.sc/t.sc/y.sc
As we have seen, the therapist is alert for signs of client anxiety and approaches it when -
ever it seems to be occurring. Simultaneously, the therapist is trying to identify what pre-
cipitated the client’s anxiety — especially what has just transpired between them — and 
begins to generate working hypotheses about the relational patterns, faulty beliefs, or 
difficult feelings that may have triggered the anxiety. Finally, the therapist also focuses the 
client inward— to explore more specifically what the threat or danger seems to be for the 
client right now. If the therapist can help clarify the thoughts and feelings that are asso -
ciated with the anxiety, the client’s vague discomfort will usually become more specific. 
That is, once the client’s basic concern is highlighted, the client can address the anxiety-
arousing problem more directly. (Client: “I guess I’m afraid they won’t like it if I speak 
up, or say ‘no’— but maybe that’s a consequence I can live with.”) The following dialogue 
illustrates this process:
THERAPIST:
 It seems like something’s going on for you right now. I wonder what’s happening?
CLIENT:
 You know, this doesn’t sound very nice to say, but I don’t think my mother really wants 
me to change very much. I don’t think she’s a mean person or anything, but I do think I’m get-
ting better in therapy, and she’s not completely happy about that.
THERAPIST:
 Uh huh. How so?
CLIENT:
 Well, I haven’t been depressed for a while now, and I’ve actually been feeling pretty good 
the last month or so. Maybe it’s just coincidence, but it seems that as I’ve gotten better and 
started spending time with friends again, my mother has withdrawn and been harder to talk 
to. Like she’s always got something else to do, or is thinking about something else, when I try 
to talk with her. And I think this has gone on between us before.
THERAPIST:
 Yeah, you know, I think that’s a very good hypothesis. You have been doing good 
work in here, and getting better, and it does seem that your increasing confidence and inde-
pendence have been kind of hard for your mother sometimes.
CLIENT:
 (fidgets, begins picking at her nail, and then starts talking about another topic)
THERAPIST:
 Maybe something just made you feel uncomfortable?
CLIENT:
 I don’t know. How much time is left?
THERAPIST:
 I’m wondering if something we’re talking about, or something that might be going 
on between us, could be making you uncomfortable right now?
CLIENT:
 (
pauses
) Well, I don’t really know why I’m saying this, but maybe I’m afraid that you’re 
going to go away or something?
THERAPIST:
 Well, that actually makes sense to me. We were just talking about how your mother 
seems to act hurt and withdraws when you are feeling stronger, and I just told you that you 
were doing good work in here.
CLIENT:
 Well, I guess so, but that just makes things worse. You’re not going to stay with me 
either if I get better
—
 isn’t that the point of this whole therapy thing anyway?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

AN INTERNAL FOCUS FOR CHANGE  141
THERAPIST:
 That sounded important, but I didn’t understand it as well as I wanted to. Can you 
say that again or say it differently?
CLIENT:
 Well, if I get better, then we stop
—
 just like with my mother. Then I won’t have my 
mother, or you, or anybody. Don’t you see? It’s hopeless.
THERAPIST:
 You’re saying this so clearly. I didn’t understand at first, but you’re right
—
 the 
issue 
we are struggling with right now is like what’s gone wrong before. To feel better and act 
stronger has meant that you have had to be alone. In the past, you have had to be sad and 
depressed and needy in order to be close or connected to others. I think you’ve been strug-
gling with this dilemma most of your life, and, right now, it feels like it has to be the same 
old unwanted story again for you and me.
CLIENT:
 Yeah, it kinda does.
THERAPIST:
 But I wonder if you and I can do this differently for once. Can we work together 
and try to find a way to make it come out better this time?
CLIENT:
 I don’t know, it’s sure not working very well so far.
THERAPIST:
 OK, I hear you. But one difference I’m thinking about is that we’re talking about 
it
—
 naming it and sharing it
—
 and that hasn’t happened before.
CLIENT:
 What difference does that make?
THERAPIST:
 Maybe it’s different because I can see what’s happening for you and get how dis-
couraging it’s been for you to have your autonomy and success undermined in this way so 
many times. And right now, I’m still feeling connected to you
—
 still “for” you
—
 as you are 
changing this and acting stronger in here with me.
CLIENT:
 Well, that’s probably true, but these don’t ly seem like huge differences to me.
THERAPIST:
 OK. I see these differences as more significant than you do right now, but let’s keep  OK. I see these differences as more significant than you do right now, but let’s keep 
talking about this.
CLIENT:
 Why? What’s the point?
THERAPIST:
 If you can stop holding yourself back in here with me and find that I, and maybe 
some other people in your life too, don’t go away like your mother does but stay connected 
to you when you succeed, it might help you act stronger with others in your life. Like your 
boyfriend, and your professor, and others we’ve been talking about.
CLIENT:
 You really think that could happen?
THERAPIST:
 Yes, I do. How do you think your boyfriend will respond to you if you let yourself 
be as intelligent and capable with him as you are in here with me? Would he be threatened, 
like your mother has been and some others in your life, or would he enjoy that stronger part 
of you, as I do and some others will?
In this way, tracking the client’s anxiety can help the therapist and the client focus 
inward and clarify the client’s key concerns. In particular, it will often reveal how aspects 
of the same core problem that the client is having with others has been activated in 
the therapeutic relationship. This will allow the therapist to intervene in two important 
ways. First, therapists can use a process comment to change their interaction with the 
client and ensure that the therapeutic relationship does not continue to repeat the same 
problematic patterns that have occurred with others. Second, as we have just seen, they 
can link the client’s positive new behavior with the therapist to others in the client’s life. 
In the chapters ahead, we will explore further how clients can begin trying out new ways 
of relating with the therapist and then generalize this to other people in their lives.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

CLOSING
We believe therapists from every theoretical orientation can help their clients change 
through experiential relearning and enacting solutions to their problems in their real-life 
relationship with the therapist (Friedlander, Sutherland, Sanders et al., 2012; Goldfried, 
2012; Levenson, 2010). We find that helping clients adopt an internal focus for change 
is one important way to move beyond surface conversation to their most important 
problems. By codetermining what issues will be pursued in treatment, and by actively 
participating in finding solutions to their problems, clients take more ownership of the 
treatment process. When this interpersonal process sustains, we find the working alliance 
is strengthened, and clients are more likely to change and gain an increasing sense of 
self-efficacy in the process. Perhaps Bowlby (1988) has captured this most succinctly by 
saying that the basic therapeutic stance toward the client is not “I know; I’ll tell you” but 
“You know; you tell me.”
It is important to remember that we are not pressing clients for further disclosure . 
In supervision, as we watch our trainees’ videotapes, we routinely find that the client is 
presenting significant material and the trainee doesn’t hear the feeling or grasp the greater 
meaning in what the client has just said, or doesn’t meet the client at that significant 
point but moves to surface issues. In this chapter and throughout this text, we are try -
ing to highlight this as a significant topic for clinical training. Instructors need to work 
with trainees to help them develop the capacity to hear and respond to the key message 
in what the client just said. The intention is to give clients the feeling that they have been 
fully seen and fully met.
As clients begin to reflect on their own reactions and become less focused on the 
problematic behavior of others, their entire emotional world opens up and becomes more 
accessible. This affective unfolding is a pivotal step in the change process. However, the 
strong feelings commonly evoked by pursuing an internal focus can be difficult for some 
clients—and often present a challenge for new therapists. The next chapter explores how 
therapists can help clients with the significant feelings evoked by looking within.
CHAPTER EXERCISES
What does it evoke in you to try to help clients move beyond everyday, surface conversa-
tion to their core concerns and feelings?
What are the familial/cultural rules that in/f_luenced or may have restricted your ability 
to enter more emotionally charged topics?
SUGGESTED READING
Hill, C. (2014). Helping skills, (4/E), Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association. 
See chapters 8–10.
Visit CengageBrain.com for a variety of study tools and useful resources such as interac-
tive exercises, flashcards, and quizzes. Also included with this chapter are video demon-
strations by the authors. In the first vignette they contrast an effective and ineffective 
response to an externalizing client. In the second vignette they demonstrate several dif -
ferent points of entry that trainees can use as guides for entering more significant issues 
with their clients.
142 CHAPTER 4
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

143
CHAPTER 5
Helping Clients 
with/uni00A0Their/uni00A0Feelings
Jennie, a first-year practicum student, was off to a good start with her client, Sue. However, 
at their third session, Sue entered in true crisis. “I have breast cancer!” she cried. “My “I have breast cancer!” she cried. “My “
doctor says I have breast cancer!” With undisguised anguish, she went right to her biggest 
fear: “My girls may not have a mother to help them grow up!” Taken aback by the intensity 
of this raw emotion, Jennie didn’t know what to do at first. Thinking of what she could 
say, Jennie jumped in and began doing what she had always done best: getting the facts, 
making plans, and solving problems: “Have you got a second opinion? Have they talked to 
you about your treatment options yet? They can do so much more now than they used to; 
chemo has become so much more effective....”
The next day, in supervision Jennie’s supervisor tried to help Jennie see that she had 
moved right into a problem-solving and reassuring mode without responding directly 
to Sue’s profound fear. The supervisor commented, “Such big feelings, Jennie, such 
vulnerability. It sounds like you wanted to help Sue figure out what to do. Instead,  
what do you think would have happened if you had just tried to stay with her feelings 
longer?” Jennie was rather quiet, and vaguely suggested that she wasn’t sure how to do  
that. Her supervisor tried to be more specific: “I’m thinking of several ways you might 
be able to do that in the future— like expressing more directly your own compassion 
or concern for her. Or perhaps helping her clarify or name her feelings that seem so 
overwhelming, or maybe just affirming how frightening all of this is right now? I think 
the sequence is important here. If you respond to her feelings first with this type of 
understanding or empathy, I think that then she could better use your suggestions about 
what to do.”
As their discussion unfolded, however, Jennie disagreed and said, “The client wasn’t 
ready to go that deep yet—ready to go that deep yet—ready to go that deep yet we haven’t been working together long enough to push her 
into feelings like that.” Jennie looked puzzled as the supervisor replied, “But you weren’t 
‘pushing’ her to ‘go deeper’ than she wanted. Sue initiated this— she brought these feelings 
to you.”
It was too new and too much for Jennie to absorb now, but, by the end of her practicum 
year, Jennie had become better at letting her clients feel what they were feeling.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

144  CHAPTER 5
CONCEPTUAL OVERVIEW
Painful feelings lie at the heart of enduring problems, and therapists help clients change 
when they respond effectively to them. When the therapist focuses clients inward on their 
own experience, clients will begin to feel more intensely, and express more directly, the 
difficult feelings that accompany their problems. This affective unfolding highlights or 
reveals the conflicted feelings that are central to the clients’ problems — clarifying what’s 
really wrong. These important feelings, which have not been responded to well in the 
past, are now accessible for the therapist to respond to and work with. On the one hand, 
clients will welcome the promise of having therapists make contact with them on this 
deeper, more personal level. But on the other hand, clients still fear and may want to 
avoid feelings that have been unacceptable in other relationships — or that just seem too 
painful, shameful, or hopelessly unsolvable. Thus the therapist’s response to the challeng-
ing feelings that clients bring will have a significant impact on the outcome of treatment 
(Elliott, Watson, Goldman & Greenberg, 2004).
Therapists facilitate change by providing a more helpful response to clients’ feelings 
than they have come to expect from others. That is, the therapist validates these, takes 
them seriously, and does not minimize them or offer superficial reassurances (Linehan 
et al., 2002). When therapists avoid or do not respond to clients’ feelings, the therapeutic 
relationship loses its vitality and meaning — treatment is reduced to an intellectual pur -
suit (Greenberg, 2010). The purpose of this chapter is to help therapists learn to respond 
effectively when clients present important feelings.
Let’s begin this chapter with a note of encouragement and an eye toward realistic 
expectations for new therapists. The material presented in this chapter is more person -
ally evocative and challenging for many therapists than the material presented in other 
chapters. Initially, these principles are often difficult to apply with clients. Understand -
ing these processes intellectually is a realistic goal for first-year therapists; being able 
to utilize these interventions effectively in ambiguous therapeutic interactions is not. 
Be patient: In a year or two, you will be able to integrate these suggestions and make 
many of these interventions your own. Like so many things, learning this comes with 
practice.
RESPONDING TO CLIENTS’ FEELINGS
W/o.sc/r.sc/k.sc /w.sc/i.sc/t.sc/h.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc /a.sc/b.sc/o.sc/u.sc/t.sc A/d.sc/d.sc/r.sc/e.sc/s.sc/s.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc T/h.sc/e.sc/i.sc/r.sc A/m.sc/b.sc/i.sc/v.sc/a.sc/l.sc/e.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc
Many of the problems that clients present can be resolved by trying out new coping 
strategies or behavioral alternatives, such as questioning faulty beliefs or reframing 
problems in a new perspective. These brief interventions are sufficient to help with 
many of the difficulties clients present, and they are an important aspect of change 
for most problems. However, for the more enduring and pervasive problems that most 
clients present, the conflicted emotions that accompany their difficulties need to be 
addressed as well. Psychotherapy process studies have demonstrated that positive 
outcomes are associated with therapist interventions that facilitate clients’ emotional 
experiencing and encourage verbalization of affect (Diener et al., 2007; Greenberg, 
2014). Clients resolve their problems better when they are in touch with their feelings 
(Elliott et al., 2004).
At times, clients may be reluctant or ambivalent about exploring more fully the dif -
ficult feelings that emerge in treatment. Although clients hope that the therapist will be 
able to help with their emotional reactions, they may also want to avoid the difficult 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  145
feelings that they have not been able to resolve on their own. This reluctance emerges in 
the beginning for many different reasons. To clients, it may seem pointless to:
 /uni25CFShare the same painful feelings again when— based on what has happened before—
they have scant hope of receiving support;
 /uni25CFSuffer shame by revealing secrets, failure experiences, or feelings of inadequacy;
 /uni25CFRisk unwanted but expected judgment from the therapist for having feelings that 
have always seemed unacceptable;
 /uni25CFStruggle with their own fear of “losing control.”
As a result of these and other concerns, clients sometimes resist the therapist’s attempts to 
reach the emotional core of their experience. At the same time, however, they often long 
for this empathic understanding. The hope is that:
 /uni25CFSomeone may, at last, truly listen to them with deep understanding or compassion 
rather than criticism or blame;
 /uni25CFTheir experiences might, in fact, be validated;
 /uni25CFThey no longer have to be alone with the shame, anxiety, anger, guilt, or other form 
of distress;
 /uni25CFThey can begin the process of connecting meaningfully with another person and 
have a relationship characterized by trust.
Once the therapist recognizes the client’s relational schemas and understands how 
significant others have characteristically responded to the client’s vulnerability in the past, 
the fear or shame that motivates the client’s ambivalence will make sense. As outlined in 
Appendix B, therapists can generate working hypothesesabout the client’s problems, their 
genesis, and what the treatment focus should be—and try to anticipate the client’s poten -
tial response to conflicted feelings and attempt to work with those feelings rather than 
avoid them. Otherwise, treatment will not be sufficiently potent to propel meaningful 
and enduring change. Affective arousal is needed in order to reorganize meaning schemas, 
expand subjective worldviews, and find meaning (Goldfried, 2006; Lieberman, 2007; 
Schore 2012). In sum, the therapist can appreciate the client’s reluctance to approach 
certain feelings yet also keep in mind the client’s simultaneous wish to be responded to in 
this deeply personal way.
Although difficult emotions are central to most clients’ problems, the therapist’s 
affirming response to these feelings also provides the avenue to resolution and change. 
The Corrective Emotional Experience (CEE) that the therapist provides to clients —
the experience of sharing important feelings with another who remains connected and 
validating— loosens the hold of faulty beliefs and expectations. As rigid schemas become 
more flexible and expand, clients are empowered to make the changes they desire. At 
this critical juncture, when clients experience a reparative or corrective response to such 
significant feelings, the treatment process springs forward. This is the point when we see 
clients typically become more receptive to a wide range of interventions from varying 
theoretical orientations (Friedlander et al., 2012; Gold, 2006; Renn, 2012).
C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc A/v.sc/o.sc/i.sc/d.sc F/e.sc/e.sc/l.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc/s.sc B/e.sc/c.sc/a.sc/u.sc/s.sc/e.sc /o.sc/f.sc U/n.sc/w.sc/a.sc/n.sc/t.sc/e.sc/d.sc  
I/n.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/p.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc/o.sc/n.sc/a.sc/l.sc C/o.sc/n.sc/s.sc/e.sc/q.sc/u.sc/e.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc/s.sc
In Chapter 3, we saw that both therapists and clients may be reluctant to address the cli -
ent’s resistance. As we have just seen, however, treatment doesn’t progress far — it soon 
stalls and loses meaning — when strong feelings are not dealt with. As with resistance to 
treatment, the therapist does not simply want to push through these defenses in order to 
reach clients’ sadness, anger, or other significant feelings. We don’t want to press clients 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

146  CHAPTER 5
to feel or disclose anything they don’t want to share. So what do we do instead— just wait 
and try to be patient? No, as before, therapists can collaborate with the client in trying to 
understand the threat or danger if they shared a certain feeling, rather than press for it. 
Let’s see how therapists can take this more effective approach.
The common notion is that clients avoid sharing or experiencing feelings because “it 
hurts too much.” We suggest something entirely different: We suggest that the defenses 
are against expected but unwanted interpersonal consequences. For example,
CLIENT:
 You wouldn’t respect me if you really knew how afraid I am to leave him, and how 
much I put up with just so I don’t have to be alone. It would be humiliating for you to see 
what a doormat I really am. 
This contrasts to the more traditional notion of intrapsychic dynamics:
CLIENT:
 It hurts too much; I can’t stand it.
We propose that clients often minimize or avoid difficult feelings because they expect 
to receive familiar but unwanted responses from the therapist (e.g., disapproval, disap -
pointment) and others in their lives that evoke fear, shame, or guilt. Therapists create 
a more affirming interpersonal process, with greater safety for clients, if they enlist cli -
ents’ collaboration in trying to understand the very valid or realistic reasons why it has 
been threatening to experience or share certain feelings (Geller & Greenberg, 2012). For 
example, rather than pressing the client to disclose a difficult feeling, the therapist may 
use responses such as these to explore the relational threat instead:
 /uni25CFOK, let’s talk about what might go wrong for you, or between us, if we talked about 
your feelings.
 /uni25CFIf you did cry or let me see your vulnerability, what might I be thinking about you? 
 /uni25CFI’m wondering if something has happened with others that you don’t want to 
happen again here with me? 
 /uni25CFWhat is the danger for you if you let me see your sadness? Help me understand how 
you have been hurt in other relationships— what have others said or done ?
 /uni25CFGrowing up, how did your parents respond to you when you were feeling _______? 
What did each of them typically say and do when you were feeling that way? Can 
you recall the look on their faces, or talk about what they might have been thinking 
or feeling toward you as you were feeling ________? 
In these ways, the therapist does not push for the content — the specific feeling — but 
works with the client to clarify the threat or danger — the reality-based reasons for why 
it has not been safe to experience or share the feeling. As in Chapter 3, the therapist is 
honoring the client’s resistance by collaborating with the client in trying to understand 
why this reluctance once made sense. However, the therapist can make it clear that he or 
she (and later, that some others in the client’s life) will not respond in these familiar but 
unwanted ways. With this new understanding, it will soon be safe enough for the client’s 
threatening or unacceptable feelings to emerge.
To emphasize, there are often interpersonal reasons why clients want to avoid dif -
ficult feelings. Although they may use vague terms like it’s too painful or overwhelming, 
they expect to be responded to in familiar but unwanted ways. Such interpersonal threats 
are usually far more important than their own subjective discomfort. Although it is dif -
ficult for most beginning therapists to grasp this, clients also hold these same expectations 
toward the therapist—toward the therapist—toward the therapist even though the therapist has never responded in any of these prob-
lematic ways. The key issue is for therapists to be empathic to clients’ feelings and expec-
tations, and help clients clarify the valid reasons they learned that certain feelings were 
not safe to experience or share (Moyers & Miller, 2013; Tsai, Yard & Kohlenberg,/uni00A02014). 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  147
Therapists can also help the client differentiate “then” from “now” and clarify how they 
would like to respond differently now in their current therapist–client relationship than 
others have in the past. Although it may seem to the therapist that these distinctions are 
obvious to the client, they are not; the client will need to have these differences high -
lighted. For example:
THERAPIST:
 I’m wondering if it has ever seemed like I was responding to you in that kind of 
judgmental way
—
 you know, like your husband does sometimes, and your father did, at times?
OR
THERAPIST:
 How do you think I am going to respond if you risked sharing that feeling and let-
ting me see that part of you?
OR
THERAPIST:
 Tell me two things. If you chose to share that with me, how would you hope I 
would respond? What response from me would you be most afraid of receiving?
Many clients avoid or minimize their own painful feelings in order to protect their 
caregivers from seeing the hurtful impact they are having or have had on them. However, 
this loyalty to the caregiver is carried out at clients’ own expense. As adults, these clients 
are still complying with familial rules and colluding with their caregivers in denying the 
impact of hurtful parental actions. These clients are preserving insecure attachment ties 
(“Everything’s fine—no problem”) at the cost of disavowing their own fear or depriva -
tion. When clients lose the validity of their own experience in this way, they also lose 
their own voice. This protects the (internalized) caregivers from seeing what they did that 
hurt the client (e.g., embarrassing or ridiculing the child, repeatedly ignoring him or her 
or favoring a sibling, needing the child to be “perfect” or fulfill the family role of “hero,” 
hitting or exposing the child to domestic violence, etc.). If clients participate in this denial 
and dismiss the problems that actually were occurring, homeostatic family rules are main-
tained. Clients remain attached to internalized caregivers who often remain idealized or 
“good” while, in this splitting defense, the clients remain “bad” and feel that something 
is wrong with them. However, if painful feelings are permitted expression in therapy, and 
the therapist can affirm the clients’ experience without blaming or rejecting the attach -
ment figure, chronic symptoms such as lifelong dysthymia or generalized anxiety often 
improve. For example:
THERAPIST:
 Yes, it makes sense to me that you feel anxious and worried “all the time.” It must 
have been frightening to hear your parents fight like that—threatening and demeaning each 
other. Your mom might get really hurt—your dad might go away, and you couldn’t stop 
them or fix this big problem. And you and your sister listening to them at night through your 
bedroom door like that...it’s such a heartbreaking spot for a little girl to be in. So, no, I don’t 
think you’re making a “big deal out of nothing.” This was hard for you, and probably for 
your parents as well. 
The therapist’s intention is not just to help clients get their feelings out . This does 
not help them connect their feelings to the specific person with whom they are sad, mad, 
or hurt, and just what it was about that interaction that evoked their feelings. Venting 
in this general way does not help most clients make progress on their problems (Lohr 
et al., 2007). Too often, instead, it serves only to divert clients away from the real feel -
ings or concerns they are struggling with. In attachment terms this is called a “miscue.” 
A more useful approach can be for the therapist to help clients identify the problematic 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

148  CHAPTER 5
interaction sequences that repeatedly occurred and gave rise to their difficulties with 
experiencing or sharing certain feelings. For example, the client feels upset about some -
thing and tells her mother, who exaggerates the issue and then subtly shifts the focus 
to her own distress; the client, feeling confused and alone, finds herself walking toward 
the refrigerator to eat ice cream. By clarifying and naming what actually did occur over 
and over in other important relationships, the therapist provides the interpersonal safety 
that clients need to enter and experience their feelings more fully (Geller & Greenberg, 
2012). With the safety that comes from this empathic understanding, therapists can also 
help clients identify the problematic relationships in their current lives where these same 
unwanted scenarios are recurring, and discern other relationships where better responses 
are occurring or could be developed.
A/p.sc/p.sc/r.sc/o.sc/a.sc/c.sc/h.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc’/s.sc M/o.sc/s.sc/t.sc S/a.sc/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc F/e.sc/e.sc/l.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc
With each turn of the conversation, therapists are challenged to select how they want to 
respond to what the client has just said. For example, the therapist might respond by seek-
ing more information, clarifying what the client has said, making connections between 
this issue and other material the client has presented, or linking it to what is occurring 
between the therapist and client at that moment. As a general principle, however, the most 
productive intervention is to approach the most salient feeling in the material that the cli-
ent is talking about right now. In other words, the therapist’s initial focus or priority is 
to acknowledge the affective component— the primary feeling or emotion— in the client’s 
response (Elliott et al., 2004).
To illustrate, imagine that the therapist and client have just sat down to begin their 
first session:
THERAPIST:
 Tell me, Mike, what’s the difficulty that brings you to therapy?
CLIENT:
 I’m having a lot of problems with my 15-year-old son. We disagree about everything and 
can’t seem to talk to each other anymore. He doesn’t do what I ask him to, and I don’t like his 
values or his attitude. I guess I’m pretty ANGRY (
salient feeling
) with him. His mother and I 
are divorced and have been sharing custody, but I’m thinking it may be time for him to go live 
with her. Do you think it’s OK for a teenage boy to live with his mother?
THERAPIST:
 I don’t think either of us understands what’s going on between you two well 
enough to make any decisions yet, but you said you were “pretty angry” with him. Tell me 
more about your anger.
The client quickly has presented many different issues that the therapist could have 
chosen to pursue. Following the general guideline, however, the therapist approached the 
primary affect or feeling that the client presented. The therapist could have responded 
differently and inquired further about the issues that the father and son disagreed about, 
worked on values clarification or communication skills, obtained more background infor-
mation about the father-son relationship or the divorce, provided research findings about 
the effects of mother custody versus father custody on boys, and so forth. These and 
many other responses will often work well for some clients. However, responding first to 
the central or most salient feeling that the client expresses will usually produce the most 
meaningful information and intensify the interaction (Whelton, 2004).
In this dialogue, the therapist responded when the client spoke directly about his 
anger. Clients often communicate their salient feelings through nonverbal cues and ther -
apists also need to respond to the covert or unverbalized feelings that clients experience 
sometimes (Richmond, McCroskey & Hickson, 2012; Schore, 2012). For instance, the 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  149
therapist in our example might have chosen to respond instead to a salient but more 
covert affect. The therapist could have done this by tentatively wondering aloud , “As 
I listen, it sounds like you’re feeling really discouraged about being a dad right now —
maybe so discouraged that you just feel like giving up sometimes? Am I saying this 
accurately?”
When clients begin talking about what matters most to them, important feelings usu-
ally come up. Such nonverbal affective signs as tearing, sighing, grimacing, or blushing 
are signals to the therapist that the client has entered a significant topic that holds real 
meaning. Responding to these nonverbal cues, the therapist invites the client to share the 
feeling or deeper meaning that this situation holds. For example, imagine that the client 
has been discussing her marital problems:
CLIENT:
 (
grimacing
) I don’t know if I should stay married or not. I haven’t been happy with him 
for a long time, but I can see how hard he’s trying to make our relationship work. And our 
four-year-old son would be devastated if we broke up. I don’t know what to do, and I have to 
make the right decision.
THERAPIST:
 As you speak about this, your face tightens. (
nonverbal communication
). I’m 
wondering what you might be feeling right now as you tell me about this? 
When the therapist responds to the client’s feelings in this open-ended  way that 
invites exploration, it often serves to clarify the client’s key concern. Often, clients will 
respond by expressing more specific concerns. Continuing with the previous dialogue, the 
client may respond:
 /uni25CFI’m so sad about hurting the people I love.
 /uni25CFI’m afraid that everyone will think I’m selfish for leaving, and they’ll blame me for 
the divorce. They’ll think I haven’t been a good mother.
 /uni25CFI don’t want to be alone. I don’t want to be married to him anymore, but I’m afraid 
of leaving and trying to make it on my own.
 /uni25CFI’m furious that I’m the one who has to make this decision. I’m responsible for every 
decision we make, and I always pay for it in the end. It’s not fair!
Throughout each session, clients have emotional reactions to the issues and concerns 
that trouble them most. Sometimes the client’s affect will be presented forthrightly; at 
other times, it will be subtle or more covert. Cultural, class, and gender factors will fur -
ther shape how each client displays affect (Pedersen, Crethar & Carlson, 2008; Sue & 
Sue, 2016). For example, some clients may overtly state their reactions, whereas those 
from other cultural or familial backgrounds may simply divert their eyes or become 
noticeably quieter when certain feelings are evoked. Additionally, when clients from some 
cultures are angry and want to disagree, they feel anxious, become quiet, and shut down 
because it would be disrespectful to express their disagreement. The therapist’s abiding 
intention, however, is to keep giving invitations or open-ended bids to explore the feelings 
that seem most important to the client right now. As the therapist joins the client in shar-
ing and understanding the central feelings that hold the most meaning, it will:
 /uni25CFfacilitate further disclosure from the client,
 /uni25CFhighlight key concerns, and
 /uni25CFprovide a clearer direction or focus for treatment.
The next example illustrates the prototypic sequence we go through with clients. 
It shows how the therapist draws out clients’ feelings and validates them, which leads 
clients to go below the surface and begin clarifying their core concerns, which in turn 
provides a sharper focus for treatment. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

150  CHAPTER 5
Ella is a 20-year-old client who is talking about her on-and-off again boyfriend and 
two-year-old son’s father, Edward.
CLIENT:
 I’m just like my mother...
THERAPIST:
 How so, Ella? You have tears in your eyes as you say that.
CLIENT:
 I choose men who hurt me, dis me, and I can’t seem to leave them.
THERAPIST:
 You see this pattern yet something keeps you going back...
CLIENT:
 Yup, that’s me, I just don’t know what’s wrong with me.
THERAPIST:
 Let’s just be with this and see if we can figure it out together. Maybe if we explore 
how the sequence works we might understand what needs are being met.
CLIENT:
 OK.
THERAPIST:
 Tell me about the last time you and Edward had a problem. What happened? How 
did you feel after it happened?
CLIENT:
 It was my son’s birthday and he didn’t even call to say “happy birthday” to my son, our 
son. So I called him the next day to ask why he didn’t call.
THERAPIST:
 How was it for you on your son’s birthday when you realized that he wasn’t going 
to call?
CLIENT:
 Sad, alone, no support.
THERAPIST:
 Alone, very alone.
CLIENT:
 (
tears
) Yes, I just feel so alone, I do everything alone, I am alone.
THERAPIST:
 You have been alone a lot. I am so glad that you are letting me in on your experi-
ence right now so you don’t have to be alone with your sadness.
CLIENT:
 I think I keep taking him back when he “sweet-talks” me because I’m so afraid of being 
alone. Yet I know he is not right for me. He is so much like my dad. I don’t want to end up 
like my mother, all doped up to deal with the abuse from him.
THERAPIST:
 You are getting help now and that takes a lot of courage. These feelings of being 
afraid to be alone make sense. You have had to take care of yourself for so much of your life 
and have had to do so much on your own. 
This led Ella to talk about her history of multiple foster-care placements during the 
times when her mother was incapacitated by her drug use, which helped Ella recognize 
how her fears of being alone are impacting her willingness to tolerate Edward’s behavior. 
In this way, Ella was able to address her needs and how these affect other relationships.
To emphasize, the therapist wants to find collaborative ways to invite and explore the 
client’s affect. We don’t want to “push” for feelings, of course, or become invested in the 
client having sad, angry, or any other feelings during the session. However, for most/uni00A0ther-
apists in training, the problem usually goes the other way. That is, the client introduces 
a feeling and the therapist does not “hear” it or, even if the therapist does register it, the 
therapist doesn’t approach or respond to it.
All of this may sound easy enough to do, but it is not. Researchers find that even 
experienced therapists often do not approach sensitive feelings and concerns very 
effectively (Hill & O’Brien, 1999). Recalling the discussion of “rupture and repair” in 
Chapter/uni00A02, we have already seen that clients routinely hide or withhold their negative 
feelings and reactions toward the therapist (Regan & Hill, 1992), and that many clients 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  151
leave one or more important things unsaid during sessions (Hill et al., 1993). Similarly, in 
another study, about one-half of the clients sampled had major life secrets that they had 
not told their therapists, even in long-term therapy (Kelly, 1998). They withheld these 
secrets for two reasons. First, they reported feeling embarrassed and ashamed. Second, 
these clients also believed that either they themselves would be “overwhelmed” by their 
emotions or clients worried that their therapists “would not understand” or could not 
handle the disclosure!
Further into therapy, Ella tells the therapist:
CLIENT:
 I have been afraid to tell you about Edward and me having unprotected sex because 
I/uni00A0was afraid you’d think, “How stupid is she.” But I really need help talking to him. I know, 
after all the ways he’s treated me, how could I take him back, and even have sex with him? 
And you know, I didn’t even ask him if he is having sex with other women. I’m afraid if I ask 
him if he is sleeping with other women, he might get mad and, you know, what if he decides 
to leave me?
THERAPIST:
 Being alone is really frightening for you.
 ..
I can see that. You are also worried 
about safe sex
—
 that’s a very reasonable concern, Ella. It sounds as though you’ve also been 
afraid of being judged by me if you talk about how you have managed your relationship 
with Edward.
CLIENT:
 Yeah. I’ve let him walk all over me. And I never used to worry about safe sex before 
but now
—
 since I’ve been talking with you, I want more for myself, and I do worry about my 
son, too. But, I really don’t want Edward to leave me; I don’t want to be alone. I’m ashamed 
to admit that I’m risking getting HIV because I’m afraid to be alone. But when I think about 
it, that I could leave my child with a sick mother
 —
 that would make me just like my mother! 
I would end up sick and unable to be a mom and maybe abandon my child because of 
sickness.
THERAPIST:
 You’ve just said a lot here, Ella. You are afraid of being alone. You want more from 
the relationship than you are getting. And you want to be responsible to yourself, your health, 
and to your child. These are all important, Ella. Your needs and your feelings do matter. I’m 
glad we are talking about these things together.
CLIENT:
 I’m glad you make it OK for me to talk about it. I don’t want to be alone but I also 
don’t want to fail my child. Can you help me find the words to talk to Edward? I want to talk 
to him about having sex only with me, even though I know he could get mad about it. My 
son does need me, and you’re right, my fear of being alone is keeping me from making good 
choices for me and for my son. But I don’t want to end up like my mother
—
 with a disease, 
and my son could end up in foster homes if I can’t take care of him.
THERAPIST:
 How is it for you to be talking to me about this right now, Ella?
CLIENT:
 It’s really helpful.
THERAPIST:
 What am I doing that’s helpful to you?
CLIENT:
 It helps that you haven’t made me feel like I’m a horrible mother. I feel like I can tell you 
things I can’t talk about to most people. They would think I’m just a loser. What should I say 
to Edward?
THERAPIST:
 Let’s think about what you want him to hear and practice that together...
The troubling research findings referred to earlier (that clients fear therapists’ responses 
to their revelations) tell us a great deal about approaching clients’ feelings. Recalling 
Jennie and her client with a breast cancer crisis at the beginning of this chapter, we note 
that therapists often shy away from strong feelings and keep things on the surface by not 
acknowledging or capturing the most significant feeling in what the client just said. Actively 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

152  CHAPTER 5
intending to “hear” and approach the feeling that seems to be most sensitive, meaningful, 
or intense is a new way of responding for most therapists-in-training. For example:
THERAPIST:
 You’re saying so much here. Out of all of this, what’s the most important feeling 
you’re left with right now?
It often feels awkward to approach feelings so directly because it breaks the social 
norms that most of us grew up with— we are not used to talking to friends and family like 
this in everyday interactions. However, with help from supervisors and practice with col-
leagues, new therapists can learn how to approach their clients’ feelings more directly and 
respond effectively to the sensitive material they choose to share.
E/x.sc/p.sc/a.sc/n.sc/d.sc /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc E/l.sc/a.sc/b.sc/o.sc/r.sc/a.sc/t.sc/e.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc’/s.sc A/f.sc/f.sc/e.sc/c.sc/t.sc
Let’s look at open-ended questionsto explore further how therapists can best respond to 
clients’ feelings. At times, it can be helpful to suggest or tentatively name a client’s feeling 
(e.g., by saying, “It sounds like you were just furious” or “I’m wondering if you’re feeling 
disappointed right now?”). However, as a general guideline, a more effective response is 
to give clients a more open-ended invitation to explore the feeling further:
 /uni25CFI’m wondering what you might be feeling right now?
 /uni25CFCan you tell me a little more about that feeling?
 /uni25CFHow do you feel now as you are telling me about what happened with them?
 /uni25CFHelp me understand some of the feelings you’re experiencing as you tell me this.
These open-ended invitations encourage clients to explore whatever it is that they 
feel is central in their affective experience, rather than what the therapist thinks is most 
important (Fitzpatrick et al., 2001). In particular, these open-ended responses also bring 
more immediacy to the therapeutic relationship. That is, clients’ feelings are explored and 
dealt with in the here-and-now with the therapist, which usually intensifies them (Teyber 
& Teyber, 2014).
In contrast, we don’t want to ask too many closed questions, which lead us to get 
all the facts and details about a problem and away from the feelings and what this event 
really means to the client (Barkham & Shapiro, 1986). For example, suppose the client 
says, “I got my chemistry mid-term back.” Much more is gained if the therapist responds 
with the open-ended bid, “Tell me your thoughts about it” rather than with the closed 
question, “What did you get on it?” This takes practice, of course, because most of us have 
not been socially trained to respond in this open-ended, exploratory way that “unpacks” 
or expands the personal meaning this holds.
An open-ended invitation also is more effective than trying to label the client’s feeling 
in an either-or fashion— for example, by saying, “Were you feeling ________ or ________ 
in that situation?” Such a choice may restrict the client rather than invite a free range of 
responses. Clients often experience something that the therapist has not anticipated (no 
matter how much experience we have, clients always seem to surprise us), and the cli -
ent may have several different feelings about the same situation. Thus, open-ended que -
ries are more effective in drawing out exactly what the client is feeling, and are more 
collaborative.
In addition, open-ended responses usually are more effective than asking clients why 
they are experiencing a particular feeling. For example:
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 Why were you so upset and crying? 
CLIENT:
 I don’t know.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  153
Although why questions can be effective at times, as a rule of thumb, therapists are 
advised to minimize them. Clients often don’t really understand why they feel, think, or 
do something. Asking them may only make them feel “on the spot” or defensive — as if 
they are failing because they don’t have the answer. The therapist will usually elicit more 
information and collaboration from clients by offering a more open-ended invitation —
“Help me understand what you were upset and crying about ?” or “Tell me more about 
your feelings of being upset ”— than by asking, “ Why were you upset about that?”  By 
inviting clients to express more fully whatever feeling they are experiencing, therapists 
are giving the message that they are interested in clients’ own subjective experience and 
are comfortable with whatever clients say. As we have seen, clients frequently withhold 
affect-laden material from their therapists. Most clients have not had permission to share 
their emotions so genuinely in other relationships, which is why these open-ended invi -
tations are so important. As they discover that they can be authentic with the therapist, 
and that it is safer than it has been in other relationships to feel whatever they are feeling, 
clients become willing to risk disclosing further, try out new behavior, and invest further 
in the therapeutic relationship.
Giving clients an open-ended invitation to explore their feelings will also help them 
clarify what each particular feeling means to them. Too often, therapists assume that a 
particular affective word, such as “angry” or “sad,” means about the same thing to the 
client as it does to them. Therapists should not assume that they understand a particular 
affective word without clarifying what it means to this particular client. Although this 
may be especially apt when there are cultural differences between therapist and client, 
it applies with every client. In this process of mutual exploration, just as we did with 
empathy as a collaborative exchange in Chapter 2, therapists share their understand -
ing of what the client meant and then encourage clients to refine or further clarify the 
personal meaning that a feeling holds for them. This clarification and mutual explora -
tion is especially important if clients repeatedly use the same compacted affective word 
to describe themselves (e.g., boring, too much). When this occurs, often several differ -
ent and important meanings can be encapsulated within that single affective word. For 
example:
THERAPIST:
 Here again, you’re describing yourself as feeling “erased” and “dismissed.” It’s 
sounding to me like you feel totally insignificant when he does that
—
 that you are completely 
unimportant so nothing you say or do matters. Am I saying that right
—
 or can you help me 
capture it better?
Having the client elaborate an experience in this way — clarifying the subjective or 
personal meaning it holds more specifically — will also safeguard therapists against 
becoming over-identified with the client and misperceiving the client’s situation as being 
the same as their own, as so commonly occurs. When therapists over-identify with clients, 
they are unable to maintain boundaries as participants/observers, and often find them -
selves taking clients’ problems home with them.
Because they are frequently not listened to or are invalidated, many clients do not 
know what they feel. In many families, children grew up learning that it was not accept -
able to have a certain feeling— such as being sad, angry, or even happy. As a result, many 
clients are uncomfortable with, or unaware of, what they are actually feeling. Thus, many 
clients need help to clarify the broad, “undifferentiated” feeling states that they often 
experience (Client: “I don’t know, I guess I’m just mad all the time”). Too often, new 
therapists try to approach or invite their clients’ feelings by repeatedly asking, “How did 
that make you feel?” — which usually leads to a dead end. Instead, therapists can help 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

154  CHAPTER 5
clients learn more about themselves, their own inner life, and the emotional reactions that 
are linked to their problems by asking questions such as these:
 /uni25CFCan you bring that feeling to life for me...help me understand a little better what it’s 
like for you when you’re feeling that way?
 /uni25CFDo you have an image that captures that feeling or goes along with it?
 /uni25CFIs there a particular place in your body where you experience that feeling?
 /uni25CFIs this a familiar or old feeling? When is the first time you can remember having it? 
Where were you? Who were you with? How did the other person respond to you?
 /uni25CFHow old do you feel when you experience that emotion? Can you attach an age to 
it, such as 7 years old or 13 years old?
Some of these exploratory questions will work well with a particular client and not at 
all with another. Following client response specificity, therapists want to assess the client’s 
reactions to how the therapist approached the client’s feelings and discern what types of 
bids work best for a particular client. In general, however, these are all ways of approach-
ing clients’ emotions, entering their subjective worldview, and clarifying the meaning this 
feeling holds for them. These types of bids also tell clients that the therapist is concerned 
about their feelings. Furthermore, they behaviorally inform clients that the therapist is 
different from many other people they have known. The therapist is comfortable sharing 
whatever emotions the client has and, in addition, wants to know the client’s authentic 
experience more fully— as good or as bad as it actually is for them — without minimizing 
or exaggerating it as others have often done. In attachment terms, this highly accurate 
empathy is known as attuned responsiveness.
When the therapist works with clients to clarify their emotions, it creates an oppor -
tunity for the therapist to see and respond to the clients’ most personal experience. This 
also provides clients with the opportunity to knowthemselves, especially when significant 
others have repeatedly invalidated, ignored, or disdained certain feelings that the client 
has had. This occurs, for example, when caregivers say:
CAREGIVER:
 (
invalidating
) Oh, come on sweetheart, you’re not really mad about that.
OR
CAREGIVER:
 (
threatening
) One more look like that, and I’ll give you something to be sad about. 
As old expectations are disconfirmed by the therapist’s empathy and validation, the 
client receives an important, real-life experience of change— a CEE.
Clients Make Progress When They Experience, Rather Than Simply T alk 
about, Their Feelings. As stated earlier, our treatment goal is not to just help clients 
get their feelings out. Venting does not usually help much or lead to behavior change 
(Lohr et al., 2007). On the other hand, however, therapists want to do much more than 
just cognitively label, explain, or interpret a feeling— instead, they want to help clients ex-
perience it more fully in the moment, and then respond in a different and corrective way 
(i.e., schema disconfirming) that provides validation and helps the client feel seen and 
understood. In attachment terms, this is known as containment. Little change will occur 
for most clients until they are able to stop talking about their emotions in an intellectual-
ized manner and actually experience or feel their feelings in the presence of the therapist 
(Carkhuff, 2008).
Gendlin (1996), an early research collaborator with Rogers, has linked treatment 
outcomes with the importance of clients tuning in on their own emotions and their level 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  155
of “focusing” on their own experiencing process (see Hendricks [2002] for an extensive 
research review). With consistent validation and accurate empathy, the therapeutic alliance 
continues to develop, and clients feel more safety. In turn, this interpersonal safetyallows cli-
ents to be able to risk “feeling what they feel” and “knowing what they know”— something 
that often has been too anxiety-arousing and not permitted in the past. The exploratory 
responses we have been discussing, especially the interventions that create immediacy, will 
intensify clients’ experience and allow them to enter their own experience more fully— as 
long as the therapist can contain the affect and doesn’t over-react or become upset, dismiss 
or minimize, or in some other way not be able to modulate his or her own experience and 
be empathically present with the client. In this process, the therapist provides the client with 
a relationship that is characterized by, and cultivates, being reflective (i.e., an increasing 
ability to see things from a variety of perspectives, which is part of helping clients respond 
in new and different ways). That is, the therapist resonates with, is attuned to, and experi-
ences the client’s experience as fully as possible in the here and now, and in doing so pro-
vides a restorative experience for the client (Allen, 2013; Fonagy et al., 2002).
Therapists may also draw out the client’s affect by addressing any incongruence 
that they perceive between the client’s narrative and the accompanying affect. That is, in 
relaying a story that the therapist finds poignant or disturbing, the client may display no 
feeling at all or an incongruent affect, such as laughter. Therapists are subtly but power -feeling at all or an incongruent affect, such as laughter. Therapists are subtly but power -feeling at all or an incongruent affect, such as laughter. Therapists are subtly but power
fully “pulled” by social norms to match the client’s incongruent affect. New therapists, 
in particular, often feel they are violating unspoken social rules if they do not respond in 
kind and laugh— even though the story seemed sad to them. However, clients are usually 
relieved when the therapist risks breaking the social rules and makes a process comment 
by acknowledging this discrepancy between what was said and the feeling that accompa-
nied it. By working with the process dimension and finding a diplomatic way to make this 
discrepancy overt, therapists make an important intervention: they begin to invite clients’ 
true feelings or congruent experience. For example:
THERAPIST:
 I’m a little confused. What you are saying seems so sad to me, yet you are almost 
smiling as you tell me this. What are your thoughts as I share this with you?
OR
THERAPIST:
 You’re telling me how angry you are about this, Lee, but your voice is so pleasant 
as you speak
—
 so soft and quiet. What you’re saying doesn’t seem to quite match the way 
you are saying it. What do you think
—
 is there a discrepancy here that might be telling us 
something?
Our intervention goal here is to provide interpersonal feedback that helps clients reg-
ister the feelings that accompany their actual experience— to become more congruent. So 
many symptoms and problems stem from clients’ inability to feel what they feel: to be sad 
about what was lost or missed, afraid of what really was once frightening, or angry about 
what actually was hurtful. No small intervention, this is about identity, personal power, 
and the capacity to be who you really are. Simply allowing clients to be able to have the 
feelings that are commensurate with what actually happened to them is a lifelong gift to 
many. Recalling the concept of invalidation, it allows clients to reclaim their own experi -
ence. It means nothing less than empowering clients to know their own mind so they can 
live their lives without feeling confused, uncertain, or “mixed up” anymore. 
The very best opportunity to provide a corrective emotional experience and help cli -
ents change occurs at the moment when they are experiencing the full emotional impact of 
their problem. Unfortunately, however, this is also the moment when therapists are most 
likely to feel uncertain about what to do. If therapists can communicate their accurate 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

156  CHAPTER 5
understanding and genuine compassion to clients in the moment, as they are experiencing 
difficult emotions, it will help clients resolve the affective component of their problems. In 
particular, this in vivo relearning changes their expectations of how some others in their 
lives can respond to them, and it changes their selective biases in filtering and distorting 
how others are actually responding to them. However, as the following case example 
illustrates, clients cannot make such progress when they are psychologically alone with 
their feelings or can’t let their true feelings emerge.
During one session, Jean had been telling her therapist about her hopelessness. She described 
her life as a merry-go-round of endless ups and downs that always returned to the same 
discouraging spot. This past week she had dropped out of school, as she had done “so many 
times before,” and had given in to pressure from her self-centered, jealous, and possessive 
boyfriend to let him move back into her apartment again. Jean described her hopelessness 
about ever being able to do or have anything for herself.
The therapist could feel Jean’s despair and was moved by it. The therapist tried 
to work with Jean’s feelings by acknowledging her despondency and validating her 
experience.
THERAPIST:
 You sound sad and hopeless right now
—
 I hear you say how painful it is to feel so 
defeated. You haven’t been able to follow through and do what you wanted to do for yourself 
again, and that feels so discouraging. You are again feeling that you have to go along and 
meet someone else’s needs rather than say no and do what you want for yourself.
As in their previous sessions, however, Jean was not able to let the therapist be emo -
tionally connected to her while she was experiencing this. She talked about these feelings 
but, both agreed, she held the therapist at arm’s length. Because the emotional connection 
to the therapist was missing, it was hard for Jean to use the therapist as a Safe Haven. 
Even though she was talking to the therapist, she was still alone with her feelings and 
hopelessly alone in her life.
Developmentally, Jean had grown up with a self-centered mother whom Jean had 
often found herself parenting. Jean could never take her own needs to her mother— Jean’s — Jean’s —
mother had stifled her ability to launch and enjoy an independent and successful life. 
This had made it difficult for Jean to share her struggles or concerns with her mother (or 
anyone else) because her mother regularly used these to highlight why Jean should live at 
home and attend the local college, and in other ways foiled Jean’s trajectory toward inde-
pendence. Jean’s inability to stay in school, or to set boundaries with her boyfriend, were 
thus part of her struggle with making choices for herself because her mother often called 
her “selfish” when she began to make choices that were for her own advancement. How-
ever, when Jean acted on others’ behalf and squelched her own needs — as her mother 
dictated— she experienced depression and feelings of hopelessness, such as she was now 
experiencing. Separation guilt kept her from advocating on her own behalf, yet, compli-
ance kept her disempowered and depressed. Clearly, Jean was stuck.
The setbacks of the previous week had intensified Jean’s distress. The therapist 
recognized that this crisis provided an opportunity to be more connected to Jean in her 
distress— as she was feeling her feelings— for the first time:
THERAPIST:
 Jean, you’ve dropped out of school and let Josh move in. Right now it seems your 
needs have evaporated. It makes sense that you feel discouraged and hopeless.
JEAN:
 (
long pause, nods
) Yes, it seems hopeless. I’m just hopeless—a doormat. I don’t matter.
THERAPIST:
 You feel unimportant...that you don’t matter...too discouraged to even try.
JEAN:
 (
nods
) I always have to do it their way.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  157
THERAPIST:
 This is familiar...
JEAN:
 Yeah, my mother, my boyfriend, even at work—I’m just pathetic...
THERAPIST:
 Yes, you’ve felt this way a lot before. I can see how painful this is for you right now.
JEAN:
 (
looks away, puts hands over eyes
)
THERAPIST:
 I’m feeling with you in your sadness right now...
JEAN:
 Don’t you think I’m just pathetic for letting this jerk move back in with me again?
THERAPIST:
 No, I don’t see you as pathetic or weak. But I do see your sadness right now and 
how much all of this has hurt you. I think you are showing great courage in sharing this with 
me; and I see how hard you are trying to sort out what you need and want—I respect that.
JEAN:
 I just don’t know what to do next, I feel so hopeless...
THERAPIST:
 Yes, it strikes me that “going along” leaves you feeling disempowered—it evokes 
feelings of hopelessness.
JEAN:
 I hate all of this. I wish I felt different...was different.
THERAPIST:
 What would you like to be different? What would you like to change if you could?
JEAN:
 I wish I could tell Josh to just leave but I don’t know how to stand up for myself...and I 
worry about hurting his feelings.
THERAPIST:
 So their feelings matter and yours don’t?
JEAN:
 (
hands over face
) Yes, yes.
THERAPIST:
 You do matter, your needs are important.
JEAN:
 (
pause
)
 It is OK to stand up for myself, isn’t it?
THERAPIST:
 Yes, Jean, it is. I know it has been hard to set limits and it has been hard to let your 
needs be more important than other people’s needs. Let’s spend more time together exploring 
the feelings that come up when you let yourself matter, when you let yourself be a priority in 
your own life. It’s absolutely OK and actually terrific when you stand up for yourself.
JEAN:
 (
looks at therapist and slowly begins to cry
) Well, maybe I’m not completely hopeless... 
I/uni00A0want more for myself. I do want to make more of my own choices. I’ve been worried about 
being called selfish. But I don’t want to live the rest of my life taking care of everyone else and 
feeling so used and depressed...
For the first time, Jean was able to let the therapist be emotionally connected with 
her while she experienced her despondency . The therapist acknowledged the risk that 
Jean had taken, and they went on to discuss how it felt for her to share her sadness, dis -
couragement, and disdain for herself so openly. Jean said that she was surprised to hear 
that the therapist didn’t judge her and still respected her, and that made her feel “lighter.” 
At their next session, Jean said that her depression had been a little better and mentioned, 
almost in passing, that she had told her boyfriend she wasn’t ready to live together yet 
and that he needed to move out.
IDENTIFY THE PREDOMINANT AFFECT
Clients often feel confused by their emotions; their feelings seem to occur for no reason 
and often are stronger than, or different from, what the situation realistically seems to call 
for. Clients’ inability to understand their own emotional reactions undermines their self-
confidence and engenders doubt. Helping clients make sense of their emotional reactions 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

158  CHAPTER 5
is an important pathway to their greater self-efficacy (Bandura, 1997). One way thera -
pists can do this is by working with the client’s predominant affect. As we will see, the cli-
ent’s experience often revolves around a central feeling state, such as being shame-prone 
or guilt-prone, and therapists help when they can identify and highlight this predominant 
feeling.
Clients often enter therapy in response to one of two situations. First, a current life 
crisis echoes an emotional problem that originally occurred years before — the current 
stressor taps into an old wound . Second, clients also enter therapy in response to feeling 
overwhelmed by too many stressors in a short period. These multiple stressors have over-
whelmed the clients’ usual coping strategies, and symptoms such as anxiety, depression, 
sleep disturbances, and increasing conflict in relationships develop.
A/n.sc O/l.sc/d.sc W/o.sc/u.sc/n.sc/d.sc
Many clients enter therapy because of an old wound. For example, a client who has suf -
fered a painful loss through divorce or death will find it more difficult to cope with the 
stress of that loss if it simultaneously evokes unresolved or painful feelings from previous 
losses in the client’s life (compacted grief) (McClure & Teyber, 2003). The current loss 
may be associated with a predominant feeling — perhaps regret, loneliness, or sadness. 
The feeling becomes understandable, and far more manageable, when it can be linked to 
similar feelings that have been evoked by other losses in the client’s life.
For example, Nora entered therapy at the student-counseling center for depression. 
She had been having intense crying spells since her aunt died two months ago — even 
though she hadn’t known this relative very well or been especially close to her. Things 
began to make sense for Nora when her therapist began to ask about other times in her 
life when she similarly felt like “crying all the time.” Nora surprised herself by replying to 
the therapist, “When my Mother died... when I was 11.”
In this way, the therapist is trying to identify the core or primary affect that the 
current crisis has evoked and explore if it might be linked to the original wound. Con -
necting this primary affect to the way clients felt in the past enables them to make sense 
of their seemingly irrational feelings. When this occurs, clients change by feeling more 
accepting or forgiving of themselves (Gilbert, 2010) . They are better able to appreciate 
the bigger problem they are actually dealing with — a story playing in two times — and 
gain a greater sense of self-efficacy. Although this is important in all treatment modali -
ties, it is one of the most significant interventions therapists can make in crisis interven -
tion or short-term therapy.
M/u.sc/l.sc/t.sc/i.sc/p.sc/l.sc/e.sc S/t.sc/r.sc/e.sc/s.sc/s.sc/o.sc/r.sc/s.sc
When his company downsized, Jim was laid off from work. Unable to find a new job 
during the economic downturn, he felt like a failure— but his problems were just beginning. 
As his self-esteem decreased and his financial worries increased, his wife described him as 
“negative” and said he was “impossible” to put up with. His marriage had never been the 
best but now, living all day together at home, day after day, with this increasingly short-
tempered, pessimistic husband became too much for her. Six months after Jim’s layoff, 
she had had enough of his complaining, criticism and irritability and moved out. Because 
his wife had always created their social life, and because he no longer had coworkers, 
Jim became even more isolated and lonely. Eating and drinking too much to cope with 
his anxiety and depression caused Jim’s blood pressure to rise markedly. At his doctor’s 
prompting, Jim reluctantly entered therapy, describing himself as a “loser.”
Most individuals have adaptive coping mechanisms that allow them to manage a 
single stressful event, unless it taps into the type of preexisting vulnerability or old wound 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  159
described earlier with Nora. However, if a second or third stressful event follows from the 
first, as it did for Jim and many others, it becomes much harder for individuals to cope. 
Stretched too thin, the client’s usual coping strategies fail and the cumulative stressors 
precipitate symptoms. In this way, most significant and enduring problems are not caused 
by simple, isolated events. They usually develop over time out of a sequence of events or 
interaction cycles— as they did for Jim.
When subjected to multiple stressors, clients may describe themselves as “over -
whelmed,” “burned out,” or even “broken.” Many repeat a compacted phrase that encap-
sulates their primary emotional reaction to the stressful events:
 /uni25CFI want to go away and just be alone.
 /uni25CFIt’s too much for me; I can’t stand it.
 /uni25CFI don’t care anymore; there’s no point in trying.
 /uni25CFI’ve had it, I’m done, I can’t face any more.
As introduced in Chapter 2, therapists are looking for recurrent affective themes and 
trying to discern the most central or unifying feeling that is encapsulated in these com -
pacted sentences. Underlying each compacted sentence are one or two core feelings that 
keep coming up and capture the essential impact these stressors have had on the client. 
Generally, the various stressors are arrayed around one or two over-riding feelings, like 
spokes around the hub of a wheel. For example, in response to losing too many people or 
things, the client may have an over-riding feeling of being alone or powerless, or the client 
may be afraid of experiencing further losses or changes or taking on new commitments. 
When therapists are able to articulate and capture the underlying feeling that links the 
impact of several different crisis events, clients often feel seen and deeply understood. For 
example:
THERAPIST:
 As I listen to what happened over the weekend, it seems that in each case
—
 with the 
soccer coach, the telephone call from your boss, and then the argument with your husband
—
you were not heard. It seems like you became so upset because you were never really being 
listened to
—
 that you weren’t being taken seriously.
When the therapist has been accurately empathic in this way, and able to identify and 
articulate the integrating theme, a measure of hope and security may be engendered. In 
response to this attunement— which many clients have not found elsewhere — their moti-
vation to explore and risk in treatment increases and they invest further in the therapeutic 
relationship. To succeed in short-term treatment, therapists need to develop the skill to 
make this type of engaging empathetic connection, relatively consistently, early in treat -
ment in order to establish credibility and initiate a working alliance. Of course, this abil -
ity only comes in time with supportive training and the benefit of observing role models; 
it is not a realistic goal or expectation for beginning therapists.
A C/h.sc/a.sc/r.sc/a.sc/c.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/o.sc/l.sc/o.sc/g.sc/i.sc/c.sc/a.sc/l.sc A/f.sc/f.sc/e.sc/c.sc/t.sc
As clients relay their narratives, the therapist’s intention is to try to discern and respond 
to the most important or meaningful feeling that clients are experiencing. Therapists can 
also listen for a recurrent feeling that keeps coming up in the client’s life—a character-
ological affect.
As treatment proceeds, and as the therapist is accurately empathic, the therapist can 
often identify a predominant feeling that captures the client’s current conflict and also 
characterizes his or her life more broadly. Clients have long experienced this familiar feel-
ing as nothing less than part of the fabric of their lives; it pervades clients’ lives or returns 
when they are distressed or in crisis. Clients often have one or two of these core feelings 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

160  CHAPTER 5
that have been continuous throughout much of their lives. When the therapist can iden -
tify these core feelings that come up again and again in different situations, clients often 
respond emphatically. For example, they might say:
 /uni25CFYes, that’s how it’s always been for me.
 /uni25CFThat’s what it’s like to be me— that’s my life.
 /uni25CFThat’s me—that’s who I really am.
 /uni25CFThat’s it! That’s just how it is.
 /uni25CFYou’ve got it!
 /uni25CFYes—I often feel inadequate—like I’m an imposter waiting to be exposed.
Clients may describe these core feelings as their “fate,” because it feels as if they have 
always been there and seems like they always will be. One of the most significant inter -
ventions therapists can make is to identify these characterological feelings and accurately 
reflect them to the client. For example, after listening to the client for a while, and grasp-
ing the integrating affective theme, the therapist may respond:
 /uni25CFAs I listen, it seems as if you’ve always felt burdened by all the demands you feel you 
have to meet.
 /uni25CFI’m getting a sense that you’ve always been afraid—I’m getting a sense that you’ve always been afraid—I’m getting a sense that you’ve always been afraid that you live with the fear that 
people are going to find you out and point out your true inadequacies.
 /uni25CFAre you saying that you’ve always felt resentful; that no matter how much you do, 
it’s never enough?
 /uni25CFIt sounds as if you’ve always felt wary...perhaps that others are trying to put you 
down or take advantage of you.
 /uni25CFI’m wondering if you’re worried that if people really knew the true you, they 
couldn’t possibly love or choose you? 
Therapists are holding a sustained intention to hear and respond to each of the vary-
ing emotions that clients present as they relay their narratives. However, therapists will be 
most effective when they can identify one or two feelings that have recurred throughout a 
client’s life and that the client considers to be central to his or her sense of self. This often 
will be one of the most important interventions that therapists can make to establish 
their credibility with clients and strengthen the working alliance — it demonstrates that 
the therapist can help.
Twenty-year-old Jose came to counseling after being mugged. He struggled with 
revealing his characterological affect to others— his lifelong core feelings of inadequacy—
which he repeatedly defended against by presenting as strong.
THERAPIST:
 What do you think I’m thinking as I see you cry?
CLIENT:
 That I’m weak.
THERAPIST:
 I’m thinking how strong it is that you can allow yourself to have such deep feelings.
CLIENT:
 (
silent for a moment
) Most people see the “in control” part of me
...
THERAPIST:
 Yes, I get that...thanks for showing me the feeling part of you.
CLIENT:
 (
crying more
) No one knows this part of me.
..
In public, I only show the social part of 
me, the strong and competent part of me.
..
I just hate being weak...
THERAPIST:
 Yes, in public they see you, but only the social part, yet in private it often seems you 
feel lonely because of these unacceptable feelings of being weak. I’m wondering if you wish 
you could share with some safe people, like you are doing with me right now?...
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  161
CLIENT:
 Yes, it does help to talk about all of this with you. I’d like to be able to be more myself 
with others. I do get along good publicly, yet I go home and I’m all alone. I want to be more 
open with others.
..
I need to do it differently. It’s a lot of pressure to show only the strong  
part of me.
THERAPIST:
 I think it is great that you feel so deeply and want more balance, more 
relationships/uni00A0where you can be open and share more of yourself. We can work on that 
together if you like. Actually, you have already started that process
—
 right here with me. You 
are already sharing more of yourself to a new person, and I’m respecting how courageous you 
are right now.
CLIENT:
 I told my parents how scared I’ve been feeling after being mugged, but they... I don’t 
know...I was hoping for something different from them.
THERAPIST:
 How so?
CLIENT:
 Well, my dad did his usual thing and started talking about being tough
—
 and how tough 
he is. And my mom did her usual thing, and went on and on about how she was scared too. 
And then they started talking about themselves and all the things they always worry about. 
I/uni00A0wished they had listened to me, you know, let me speak more.
THERAPIST:
 That makes sense, you needed to be heard, your fears acknowledged, rather than 
hear about them and their problems?
CLIENT:
 Yes! How did you know? It always becomes about them...
THERAPIST:
 I didn’t know, I was inquiring, wondering out loud with you.
CLIENT:
 That’s exactly what I wanted
—
 them to have just listened to me, to my needs, given me 
the feeling that I could come to them, have a need, and not always seem so much in control; 
that they would just be with me without going into their own stuff so much.
THERAPIST:
 You are putting it so well. You know, here with me, you can say exactly what you 
need. It makes sense to me that you were afraid. Being mugged would make most people 
really afraid
.
 Wanting to be heard and responded to by your parents makes a lot of sense 
to/uni00A0me.
CLIENT:
 I’m glad you understand. (
Tearing up more
) Thank you for not making me feel bad for 
feeling this way. I did need to be heard and not have them go into their stuff or have it be-
come all about them. I feel like I always have to be “in control” and “just fine” even when I’m 
not doing OK
...
This interaction was especially significant because Jose came from a Mexican-Amer -
ican family. Men of Mexican descent are often expected to assume a dominant, strong, 
provider role (sometimes included in the “machismo” definition) in the family. Crying in 
front of others is generally seen as shameful, and sharing or talking about problems can 
also be seen as weak. Thus, while there is variability in men from this culture, many feel 
the need to be on guard and typically present as strong. This means presenting as stoic (“in 
control” for Jose) and not showing vulnerability to others — even in response to violent 
assault (Archineiga & Anderson, 2008; Fragoso & Kashubeck, 2000; Sue & Sue, 2016).
RECOGNIZE THE CONSTELLATION OF FEELINGS 
THAT/uni00A0CLIENTS FREQUENTLY PRESENT
It is deeply rewarding but sometimes challenging to work with the painful feelings that 
clients bring. Some clients want to downplay or avoid their emotions altogether; others 
may be overly preoccupied with them and talk obsessively about the same feelings or 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

162  CHAPTER 5
worries without any progress. When clients are not progressing in treatment, one reason 
may be that therapists have only responded to a single presenting affect. In this section, 
we will see what to do about this by learning about the constellation or sequence of feel -
ings (the “firing order”) that clients often present.
If the therapist acknowledges the client’s current affect and invites the client to 
explore it further, a sequence of interrelated feelings will often occur in a predictable 
way (Greenberg, 2002, 2010). For example, suppose the client feels anger, which occurs 
in response to feeling hurt or sad about something that happened. However, the hurt or 
sad feeling is unacceptable to the client and is dismissed or disavowed because it seems 
“weak” to this client and evokes shame. To ward off the unwanted feeling of shame, the 
client artificially or defensively “restores” self-esteem and a sense of personal power or 
worth by returning to the “stronger” or safer feeling of anger again (which usually was 
an acceptable feeling or even scripted role in the family). As a result, others oftentimes 
perceive the client as being an angry person. This constellation of emotional reactions 
is central to the client’s problems, and each successive affect in the sequence needs to 
be addressed. Although different sequences occur for each client, the therapist can often 
identify a triad of interrelated feelings that cycle repeatedly when clients are distressed. 
Making a similar point, Lazarus (1989) writes informatively about tracking a client’s “fir-
ing order.” The process of change involves coming to terms with each of the feelings in 
this affective triad. In this section, we examine two affective constellations that commonly 
occur. We will see that therapists help clients change by responding to the entire sequence 
of feelings in their affective constellation, rather than just responding to the first or initial 
feeling in the sequence— the client’s primary presenting affect.
A/n.sc/g.sc/e.sc/r.sc-S/a.sc/d.sc/n.sc/e.sc/s.sc/s.sc-S/h.sc/a.sc/m.sc/e.sc
The first affective constellation we will examine consists of anger, sadness, and shame. 
The predominant or characteristic feeling state for some clients is anger. These clients 
often experience and readily express a range of angry feelings including irritation, impa -
tience, criticism, and cynicism. However, the client’s anger is usually reactive; that is, it is 
a secondary feeling that occurs in response to an original experience of sadness or pain.
The therapist needs to acknowledge the client’s anger, collaboratively work to clarify 
more specifically who and what the client is really angry about, and help the client find 
appropriate ways to express it. For example, becoming more appropriately assertive, set-
ting limits, or telling someone what it is that you don’t like rather than losing your tem -
per, yelling, or demeaning someone. This first step is important but not sufficient. If the 
therapist stops at this point, the client may still remain stuck in an angry feeling state and 
more substantial change will not result. Instead, the therapist’s intervention goal is to help 
the client identify and stay with the primary emotional response of sadness or hurt that 
led to the reactive feeling of anger. This primary feeling is more threatening or unaccept -
able for the client than the anger that it prompts.
To reach the original affect, the therapist might wait for clients to express their anger 
spontaneously and, immediately afterward, invite them to attend to what they are feeling 
now. Following the expression of the reactive feeling, there is often a point of entry to the 
primary feeling of pain or sadness. For example:
THERAPIST:
 OK, you’ve just been sharing how angry this made you, and that sure makes sense 
to me. But let’s stop here for a moment and check in on what else you might be feeling right 
now, on the other side of your anger.
Often, the original feeling (e.g., vulnerability, abandoned, embarrassment, helpless -
ness, etc.) will often surface next. By joining the client in this feeling and working together 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  163
to accurately name it, the therapist can often dislodge the client from the familiar (but 
safer and nonproductive) reactive feeling of anger.
Alternatively, if this approach does not work, the therapist can inquire directly about 
the original experience (such as a client’s husband criticizing her in front of friends) that 
led to the client’s reactive or secondary feeling of anger.
THERAPIST:
 Something must have hurt you very much for you to remain so angry. Tell me how 
you felt when that first happened.
If the client again begins to express anger or indignation about what occurred (“It 
really made me mad when he put me down like that...”), the therapist focuses the client 
back on the original experience:
THERAPIST:
 Yes, I can see why it made you so mad, but I’m also wondering how it felt right 
then, when he was putting you down in front of everybody?
CLIENT:
 Well, I guess maybe it hurt my feelings a little.
THERAPIST:
 Yes, it hurt your feelings. Of course it did. I’m so glad you can share that 
hurtful 
feeling with me. You’ve just made a big change, you know: you’ve never been able to 
risk sharing the hurt part of this before. How does it feel to taking that big step with me 
right/uni00A0now?
CLIENT:
 (
emphatically
) I just hate feeling so weak that he can hurt me like that.
Thus, in response to this query, the client’s original feeling of “hurt” was expressed 
for the first time. The therapist responds affirmingly as the client begins to experience 
and share the internal aspect of her problem — that is, the feeling of hurt or sadness that 
is so unwanted or unacceptable for her. Recalling our internal focus for change , it is this 
internal aspect of her problem— her sense of herself as weak or shame-worthy because he 
has been able to hurt her — that has kept leading her back to her safer, reactive feeling of 
being angry all the time. This is a complex sequence for new therapists to follow in the 
beginning; let’s keep going and try to make it clearer.
As we have just seen, when this client experiences hurt or sadness about what hap -
pened, these vulnerable feelings are held away. Although her anger is easily experienced 
and readily expressed, the client has learned that it is not safe to experience or share the 
original hurt or vulnerability. To avoid the original painful feeling, the client defensively 
returns to the reactive feeling of anger in a repetitive manner. Again, this defensive coping 
pattern often leads others to regard this client as an “angry person” — and contributes to 
the problems the client keeps having with others at work and at home.
The goal of the therapist’s intervention is to help such clients experience the sad -
ness, hurt, or vulnerability that precipitates their reactive/repetitive anger. However, as 
soon as the original hurt is evoked, clients now feel ashamed and will defend against this 
unwanted feeling by reflexively returning to the safer expression of anger that, in their 
belief, is “stronger.” Thus, the therapist needs to explore clients’ resistance to the original 
feeling of being hurt. Often, clients avoid the original painful affect because it arouses a 
third, aversive, feeling of anxiety, guilt, or— most frequently— shame, as we saw earlier.
For example, as the therapist inquires about clients’ reluctance to feel the original 
hurt, they will often reveal faulty beliefs and say something like:
 /uni25CFIf I let the pain be there, it’s admitting that he really can hurt me.
 /uni25CFIf I acknowledge that it hurts, it means he won.
 /uni25CFIf I feel sad, it shows that I really am just a baby feeling sorry for myself.
 /uni25CFIf I admit that part of this was my fault, then EVERYTHING becomes my fault!
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

164  CHAPTER 5
Thus, if the therapist draws out the original pain that underlies the reactive anger, a 
third feeling of shame will often be aroused. To defend against the original sadness, and 
the shame associated with being sad, the client has learned to return automatically to the 
“stronger” feeling of anger that is safer or more acceptable for this client to reveal.
Although shame is a common reaction, other clients will experience anxiety or guilt 
in response to feeling the original hurt. For example, some clients will say that if they 
let themselves feel sad, hurt, or vulnerable, then “no one will be there,” “others will go 
away,” or “I will be alone.” These clients feel painful separation anxieties upon experienc-
ing their hurt or pain and avoid this anxiety by reflexively returning to their anger. Still 
other clients will say that, if they let their sadness be real, they would be admitting that 
they really do have a need, which would make them feel selfish or demanding. For these 
clients, guilt is the third element of their affective constellation.
This triad of feelings exists for many clients: Frequent anger defends against unex -
pressed sadness, which, in turn, is associated with shame, guilt, or anxiety. Enduring 
change results when therapists can help clients better come to terms with each feeling in 
the triad. More specifically, clients resolve such conflicted emotions when they can:
1. allow themselves to experience or feel each feeling;
2. share or be able to disclose the feeling with the therapist so they are no longer alone 
with it or hiding it; and
3. with the therapist’s support, be able to stay with the difficult feeling for a moment or 
two (i.e., tolerate, hold, or contain it) rather than have to move away from it, as they 
have in the past.
This is what it means to integrate or come to terms with unresolved feelings.
Clients integrate their conflicted emotions when they can progress through these 
three steps for each feeling in their affective constellation; they are internally resolving 
their conflict. With this resolution, clients no longer need the outdated coping strategies 
or defenses that they have employed in the past. Furthermore, at this point clients are 
prepared to adopt new, more adaptive responses with others in their lives that they were 
previously unable to incorporate. For example, rather than always get mad and alienate 
others, they can opt to respond differently sometimes. In the following example, the client 
is becoming more direct and assertive without elevating:
CLIENT:
 (
to husband
) I’m feeling criticized right now and I don’t like it
—
 I’m asking you to find a 
better way to talk about this.
HUSBAND:
 (
contemptuously
) Umm, I’m not really so concerned about what you think. Why 
don’t you just settle down and be quiet.
CLIENT:
 I’m feeling disrespected right now and it’s not good for me to continue this conversation. 
I’d like to talk about how to manage our money with more civility. Let me know when you 
are willing to hear my ideas without telling me that everything I say is stupid.
Clearly, this affective integration is a pivotal experience in the process of change.
Before going on to examine another common affective constellation, let’s pause 
to highlight further the special role of shame. Although much has been written about 
anxiety, depression, and guilt, shame has long been eschewed in clinical training. Cor -
respondingly, clients could be anxious, guilty, or depressed with their therapists, but not 
ashamed. Thankfully, shame is no longer the taboo topic it has been; indeed, this most 
unwanted and painful feeling state is now regarded by many theorists as the “master 
emotion” (Nathanson, 1987; Scheff, 2000). The cardinal role of shame in most resistance 
and defense, and in so many of the symptoms and problems that clients present, was first 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  165
illuminated by the groundbreaking work of Helen Block Lewis (1971) and later devel -
oped by many others (Tangney & Dearing, 2002; Tracey et al., 2007).
As we began exploring in Chapter 3, new realms of understanding will open up to 
therapists as they allow themselves to begin “hearing” the family of shame-based emo -
tions that pervade many of their clients’ narratives. To feel shame is to feel fundamen -
tally bad as a person — inadequate or worthless in the essence of your being (Dearing 
& Tangney, 2011). Clients directly reveal their shame-based sense of self by repeatedly 
using words such as bad, stupid, worthless, self-conscious, sheepish, embarrassed, low 
self-esteem, humiliated , and so forth. Less direct indications of shame may include the 
repetitive use of words such as should, ought to, must, and perfect.
On an interpersonal level, some clients defend against their own shame, and defen -
sively attempt to restore their injured sense of self, by inducing shame in others. That is, 
these shame-prone clients routinely try to disprove their feelings of shame through rage 
and violent temper outbursts (“You can’t tell me what to do. I’ll show you!”); contempt 
for others or giving strong judgments (“You’re stupid” or “What’s wrong with you!”); 
provocation of others with bravado (“Just try me”); and automatic blame or counter-
criticism of the other— especially in chronic marital conflict (“No, it has absolutely noth-
ing to do with me, it is all your fault”). In contrast, other clients defensively try to restore 
themselves and deny their feelings of shame by rigidly striving for perfection, withdraw -
ing from others or going away inside (e.g., “I just wish I was invisible”), and engaging in 
other avoidant and shame-anxiety cycles (Balcom et al., 1995; Tangney & Dearing, 2002).
When therapists are able to break cultural taboos and begin approaching shame reac-
tions sensitively but directly, significant progress often follows. However, most therapists 
have been socialized strongly to avoid or to rescue clients from these shame-based affects 
(i.e., ignore, make light of, or change the topic). As a result of these social norms, new 
therapists will need the support and guidance of their supervisors, and additional reading, 
to begin responding effectively. Bromberg (2006) writes elegantly about the importance 
of approaching and addressing shame— so it is challenged with empathy rather than given 
legitimacy— in the safety of a supportive therapeutic relationship. In a nut shell, however, 
therapists help clients resolve their shame when they demonstrate compassion for clients’ 
feelings of inadequacy or incompetency, harsh or contemptuous judgments toward them-
selves, and feelings of worthlessness. Often, these shame-based emotions are referred to 
euphemistically as “low self-esteem,” masking the far-reaching emotional wound that is 
actually at hand.
 Therapists help clients resolve such shame-based reactions in two steps.First, by pro-
viding an unambiguously kind and accepting response to clients as they are experiencing 
these feelings of shame, and then following up and processing this with clients by clarify-
ing that the therapist was not feeling judgmental or critical toward them in any way (as 
they expect and typically misperceive).Second, the therapist is working (over time) to 
help clients internalize the therapist’s compassion for their shame and begin to feel the 
same empathy for themselves and their own suffering that the therapist felt toward them 
(Elliott, Bohart, Watson & Greenberg, 2011). In other words, clients break the identifi -
cation with the attachment figure who was rejecting or contemptuous and, instead of 
despising themselves in the same way the caregiver once did, clients come to adopt the 
same compassionate or empathic stance toward themselves and their own humanness 
that the therapist provided. This sequence resolves the internalized contempt at the core 
of shame dynamics (Teyber, McClure & Weathers, 2011). It is very difficult for most of us 
to bear witness to our clients’ shame, especially as we begin our training. With supportive 
supervision and role models, however, therapists can soon learn how to offer clients this 
great gift.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

166  CHAPTER 5
S/a.sc/d.sc/n.sc/e.sc/s.sc/s.sc-A/n.sc/g.sc/e.sc/r.sc-G/u.sc/i.sc/l.sc/t.sc
Whereas some clients lead with their anger and defend against their hurt, others lead 
with their sadness and avoid their anger. This type of client may present with a general 
(“undifferentiated”) feeling state of sadness, helplessness, vulnerability, or depression. 
These clients do not experience or express anger, they avoid interpersonal conflict, and 
they tend to respond to others’ needs at the expense of their own. In addition to this 
caretaking role, some may present as acting like a martyr or a helpless victim. To illustrate 
this affective constellation, we return to the case of Jean (page 156).
Earlier in this chapter, we examined a dialogue in which, for the first time, Jean was 
able to let the therapist respond to her sadness and be emotionally connected to her while 
she was experiencing it. Subsequently, the therapist explored what had made it difficult 
for Jean to share her vulnerable feelings with others. Jean explained that historically her 
mother would listen to her. However, her mother would then tell her she “shouldn’t be 
that way,” especially when Jean tried to assert herself or act on her own behalf. She’d 
tell Jean to be “considerate” of others and put others’ needs first— that doing so was the 
“Christian” thing to do. (Jean subsequently clarified in treatment that she partly agreed 
with her mother and truly desired to be a good Christian, but her mother’s dictum was 
out of balance and led her to deny other important parts of her self —out of balance and led her to deny other important parts of her self —out of balance and led her to deny other important parts of her self it didn’t support 
her wish to honor both God and herself.) Thus, in these ways, Jean had come to keep her 
feelings to herself, because she felt sharing them was no use anyway — she’d just be criti-
cized, told she was being selfish, and in the end, her needs would not be met because the 
needs of others would always be deemed more worthy than hers. Following these early 
maladaptive schemas, Jean had continued in adulthood to reenact the affective themes 
and relational patterns of her childhood in the problematic love relationships she kept 
reconstructing.
Recall that when Jean returned to therapy the following week, she had made a 
significant change: she had told her boyfriend she wasn’t ready to live with him yet. 
Two/uni00A0weeks later, Jean’s boyfriend borrowed her car for the day and arrived late to pick 
her up from work, and this time she expressed her indignation. Further, in an uncharac -
teristically strong move, she told him that she deserved to be treated with more respect 
and consideration and, soon afterward, ended the relationship. Jean had remained 
locked in her sad and helpless victim role, in part, because the direct expression of anger 
and the assertive expression of her own needs were unacceptable — selfish and hurtful to 
others. As often happens, Jean began to claim her own personal power when her feelings 
were expressed and she received affirming responses to them from the therapist. How -
ever, we need to look more carefully at the sequence of feelings (sadness-anger-guilt) that 
unfolded for Jean.
Although Jean began the next therapy session by sharing her good news about end -
ing the problematic relationship, she had difficulty sustaining this stronger stance. As 
the session progressed, Jean retreated from her indignation at how badly her boyfriend 
had treated her, began to feel concerned about how she may have “hurt” him, and won -
dered whether she had been “selfish” to end the relationship because he “needed me so 
much.” However, the therapist’s working hypotheses had prepared her for the possibility 
that Jean would feel guilty upon experiencing her anger, setting limits, or responding to 
her own needs. With this awareness, the therapist was able to recognize Jean’s guilt and 
engage her in questioning its validity. Jean had defensively avoided her anger because it 
aroused guilt, which served to return her to her characteristic affect of sadness and inter -aroused guilt, which served to return her to her characteristic affect of sadness and inter -aroused guilt, which served to return her to her characteristic affect of sadness and inter
personal presentation of helplessness. As the therapist helped Jean identify and consider 
all three of these interrelated feelings, she was able to relinquish her helpless/victim stance 
for increasing periods.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  167
With the therapist’s support, Jean could acknowledge the painful reality of the depri-
vation and invalidation that she had originally experienced in her family. As she stopped 
denying the reality of these painful experiences, she stopped reenacting them in her current 
relationships; she no longer recreated these familiar relational patterns that kept evoking 
the same disheartening emotions. By responding to each feeling in clients’ affective con -
stellations, therapists help clients make sense of themselves and their lives with a new and 
more realistic self-narrative, and change how they respond to themselves and to others.
This is a lot of material for most new therapists to absorb, so let’s pause and try to 
tie things together a bit. Stepping back for a moment, let’s see how the previous topic, the 
predominant characterological affect, relates to a client’s affective constellation. The pre-
dominant characterological affect will typically contain the leading edge of the affective 
constellation or triad. For example, clients who present affectively a predominant sense 
of helplessness can easily access and express sadness, which is first in their triad. Often, 
the first emotion in the triad is the one that was allowed —the first emotion in the triad is the one that was allowed —the first emotion in the triad is the one that was allowed or even prescribed as part of 
the child’s role— in the family of origin. Other feelings became subsumed under this emo-
tion. Often, the second affect in the triad was too threatening to a caregiver — and there-
fore was not allowed to be experienced or expressed. Over time, the client came to see 
these legitimate feelings as unacceptable as well, and the client’s own authentic voice was 
muted. The third affect in the sequence, shame or guilt in the two examples here, is often 
avoided because it is too disruptive or aversive for the client. Hence, the client repetitively 
returns to the first or leading affect that is safer and more familiar.
The therapist’s intention is to validate the legitimacy of each feeling in the affective 
triad and remain empathic or emotionally connected to clients as they are experiencing 
them. This gives clients the experience of expressing themselves authentically without 
receiving the unwanted responses they have come to expect. Meaningful changes are set 
in motion for many clients as they find that their previously unacceptable feelings can be 
shared without the familiar but unwanted consequences occurring. In particular, many 
begin to feel that they can center in themselves and “live inside their own skin,” rather 
than being so anxiously preoccupied with appearances and trying to manage how others 
see and respond to them. This is especially problematic for clients who are shame-prone 
because shame involves such insidious self-consciousness, negative self-evaluation, and the 
fundamental feeling that something is wrong with one’s self, which seemingly is being neg-
atively viewed by others (see Dearing & Tangney, 2011; Parker & Thomas, 2009). Thus, 
outgrowing these limiting familial rules about affective experience and expression— which 
often are embedded within cultural expectations— brings clients into a more coherent per-
sonal identity. Feeling safer and stronger, they are able to risk more with the therapist and 
are empowered to initiate changes in their own responses to others in their lives.
ATTACHMENT THEORY PROVIDES HELPFUL 
GUIDELINES FOR RESONDING TO CLIENTS’ DISTRESS
In attachment terms, the best way for therapists to help clients manage and resolve chal -
lenging feelings is to provide a Safe Haven that contains their distress. Before exploring 
this treatment goal of affective containment, and the interventions therapists can use to 
provide it, let’s refresh and clarify core constructs in attachment theory that help thera -
pists understand and respond to their clients’ emotions. 
Caregivers who provide a secure attachment for their children offer both a Safe 
Haven (consistently respond with empathy and emotional responsiveness to the young 
child’s distress) and a Secure Base (actively support the developing child’s exploration and 
increasing independence). Both are necessary for a secure attachment, but the Safe Haven 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

168  CHAPTER 5
construct is especially apt here and will help us learn how we can help our clients with 
their conflicted feelings. 
Children develop the capacity to successfully modulate or “self-regulate their own 
emotions without defenses or symptoms when they receive attuned responsiveness from 
caregivers who recognize their changing states of affective arousal (Fonagy et al., 2007). 
Children who receive sensitively attuned responses have caregivers who consistently dis -
cern their child’s emotional needs or messages, and respond accurately to what the child 
is experiencing or needing. These children have the experience of, and receive, being pro-
tected, comforted, and supported in times of need. When parents and children function 
in this mutually attuned or synchronous way where they each learn to read and respond 
to the other, children develop the secure feeling that they are seen and understood. They 
also learn that they matter to someone and that their feelings—especially their problems 
or distress—are important and will be responded to.
 Within a well-functioning interactive dyad like this, the attuned parent sees or registers 
the child’s experience and responds to the child’s need before the child becomes overly 
distressed. The parent and child are smoothly coordinated with each other— conflict and 
distress is minimal and readily resolved. This fortunate child is not indulged and does not 
become dependent, but increasingly learns to cope with and modulate distress successfully. 
Researchers find that these Safe Haven features actually make children stronger or more 
resilient (Sroufe, 2005). Experiencing this nurturing and attuned relationship also teaches 
the child that moments of misattunement between them can be overcome. That is, recovery 
from ruptures or miscues is possible in their relationship with caretakers, which often 
makes distressing emotions easier to manage. Indeed, short-term dysregulations (where a 
caretaker and child “miss” each other) can be used as opportunities for repair (e.g., Mom:
You were trying to tell me that you were upset, and I thought you were just being difficult. 
I was in a hurry and wasn’t listening very well. I’m sorry I got so impatient—let’s get back 
on track). In contrast, long-term or chronic states of misattunement, where the attachment 
figure consistently ignores or misreads the child’s attempt at cueing or communicating 
their need or distress, are highly problematic for child adjustment. It results in deficits in 
affect modulation and emotional self-regulation that will come to characterize many of 
the symptoms our clients present in treatment. In the following section and in the chapters 
ahead, we are going to see that attachment researchers identify two broad types of affect 
dysregulation: 
1) Deactivation is where feelings are consistently down-regulated and clients are out of 
touch with their own and others’ feelings. These clients ignore or minimize reality-
based threats in the environment; deny problems, needs, and other negative emo-
tions; and tend to suppress feelings of vulnerability.
2) Hyperactivation is where clients typically escalate emotions or over-react because 
they fear abandonment and ruminate on distressing emotions. 
For children to feel secure or contained, their caretakers need to sustain the consistent 
intention to provide this empathic attunement—characterized by responsiveness to the 
child’s distress and the willingness to engage in repair when misattunement occurs. Parents 
who provide this attuned responsiveness, where children can bring any need or feeling, are 
considered a Safe Haven — which is central to the secure attachment that helps children 
modulate and manage their affects resulting in better mental health and buffering them 
from symptom development such as anxiety, mood disorders, eating disorders, temper or 
rage outbursts, and so forth (Aromur, Elklit & Shevlin, 2011; Bakermans-Kranenburg & 
Van IJzendoorn, 2009; Tasca, Ritchie, Zachariades, et al., 2013).
Why are we emphasizing these attachment/developmental constructs to therapists-
in-training? As already mentioned, there is strong empirical support for them and we are 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  169
going to try and show how therapists can use these attachment concepts to guide and 
inform how they respond to their clients’ emotions. Let’s continue a little further before 
turning to intervention strategies.
To establish a secure attachment, an attuned caregiver who provides a Safe Haven also 
needs to provide the child with a Secure Base from which to venture out and explore the 
world with increasing confidence and autonomy. The child often uses a caretaker’s emo-
tional expressions as a “signal” or reference for what is safe and what is dangerous in the 
environment. When the child feels secure and is “cued” that it is safe (and permitted) to ven-
ture out, he or she is more likely to explore, develop mastery, show flexibility in dealing with 
others and the world, and develop a more integrated identity and coherent self-narrative. 
The child is able to individuate or become more independent and to have a more balanced 
approach to affective experiences. This individual is able to experience feelings without 
being symptomatic—such as frequently losing his or her temper or feeling overwhelmed. 
Thus, full and successful engagement in treatment is associated with clients’ experience of 
their therapists as both Safe Havens (support for their distress and emotional needs) and 
Secure Bases (support for their differentiation and independence) (Parish & Eagle, 2003).
In contrast, clients who have not had secure attachment histories often come to 
therapy having had developmental experiences that were painfully isolating, anxiously 
unpredictable, aggrandizing or disempowering, and so forth — because their caregivers 
did not consistently respond to their fear, problems, or distress with the affirmation and 
understanding that children need in order to learn how to manage or self-regulate their 
own distress (Brisch, 2002; Cassidy & Shaver, 2008). To be more behaviorally specific, 
containment means that the child’s concerns were heard, taken seriously, and understood 
by a caregiver who remained emotionally present and responsive. The child’s distress was 
consistently registered with the caregiver and was taken seriously, without being dimin -
ished or exaggerated. The child who felt secure has learned that the caregiver would 
be “wiser and stronger” and remain available to help manage the problem, if only by 
expressing interest and concern (Cooper, Hoffman & Powell, 2013). The key concept is: 
the securely attached child is secure in the expectation of getting help or being responded 
to when distressed, vulnerable, or in need. It does not mean that the child is indulged or 
spoiled in any way, that the child gains the upper hand in the parent–child relationship 
and can successfully be demanding or manipulative, or that the caretaker can always 
solve the problem. But it does mean that the child is not alone with distress or emotional 
need—there is an empathic connection.
 Before children (and clients) can develop the capacity to manage disruptive feel -
ings on their own and function more independently, someone must first provide this Safe 
Haven or holding context for them. However, student therapists are quickly going to 
recognize that, for most of their clients, this essential developmental experience of hav -
ing a parental Safe Haven to provide them with affect regulation was not provided. For 
example, suppose the child is sad or hurt. In some families, the child’s sadness:
 /uni25CFarouses the parent’s own sadness, and the parent withdraws, which leaves the child 
emotionally alone;
 /uni25CFmakes the parent feel anxious or guilty about not knowing how to respond, and the 
parent denies the child’s sad feelings and tries to cheer the child up, which leaves the 
child confused and alienated from his or her own authentic experience; or
 /uni25CFmakes the parent feel inadequate as a mother or father, and the parent responds 
punitively or derisively toward the child’s sadness, which leaves the child ashamed of 
his or her vulnerability.
In such commonly occurring scenarios, the child’s sadness cannot be heard and 
responded to; as a result, these feelings cannot run their natural course and come to their 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

170  CHAPTER 5
own natural resolution. Young children cannot contain strong, painful affects —such as 
fear—by themselves without support from an emotionally available caregiver. As a result, 
children will have to find ways to deny or avoid this painful feeling (deactivate) or exag -
gerate the feelings to get the caregiver’s attention (hyperactivate). Years later, when these 
children are adult clients and risk sharing the unacceptable or threatening feeling with the 
therapist, the therapist’s intention is to provide the holding environment or Safe Haven 
that was missed developmentally (Fosha 2003; Johnson, 2004;Fosha, Siegel & Solomon, 
2009). Working within this attachment framework, the therapist’s role is to provide a safe 
harbor for a while. And later, when clients feel “contained” and are functioning better, 
they use this safety to explore—to try out new behavior and allow themselves new emo -
tional experiences (i.e., use the therapist as a Secure Base from which to launch). Provid -
ing clients with this attachment security is so important because it is crucial to the client’s 
affect regulation— that is, the client’s ability to manage anger, sadness, loneliness, anxiety, 
and other disruptive feelings without acting out or developing symptoms such as depres -
sion, over-eating, and alcohol or substance abuse (Shaver & Cassidy, 2008). We have 
already seen two instructive examples of containment in Chapter 2: Marsha’s second 
therapist heard and responded to her experience of “emptiness,” (Page 59) and the thera-
pist of the depressed young mother sensitively articulated the mother’s own “unanswered 
cries” (Page 392). Both therapists successfully provided a Safe Haven , which allowed 
their clients to make important changes in the next few sessions.
C/o.sc/n.sc/t.sc/a.sc/i.sc/n.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc: U/s.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc A/t.sc/t.sc/a.sc/c.sc/h.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc C/o.sc/n.sc/s.sc/t.sc/r.sc/u.sc/c.sc/t.sc/s.sc /t.sc/o.sc G/u.sc/i.sc/d.sc/e.sc  
I/n.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/v.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc 
With Safe Haven and affect regulation in mind, the therapist’s next concern is how to put 
this in practice and respond most effectively. What can we say and do to help our clients 
in these special moments when they are feeling deeply their pain and distress? Perhaps 
nothing evokes the new therapist’s insecurities more than this moment:
 /uni25CFI’m so uncertain about what to do...how can I make him feel better?
 /uni25CFWhat if I make a mistake or say something wrong—and make things even worse  
for her?
 /uni25CFHow can I help with these feelings? I want to help her so much but I really don’t 
know what to do...
As we have just seen, attachment-informed therapists respond effectively to clients’ 
distressing feelings by providing a Safe Haven or holding environment of empathic under-
standing and attuned responsiveness to contain the client’s affect. Therapists provide this 
is by maintaining a steady presence in the face of the client’s distress, and do so with the 
tone of their voice, the way they maintain eye contact, and may even use touch (Levensen, 
2010). The therapist’s verbal and nonverbal communications are:
 /uni25CFI can hear these difficult feelings and register how important they are to you;
 /uni25CFI can tolerate the feelings and stay steady with you without having to minimize your 
distress to keep in my own comfort zone (deactivating therapist) or become over-
whelmed or disrupted myself (hyperactivating therapist);
 /uni25CFTogether, we can get through this; you don’t need to be alone with it; and,
 /uni25CFI understand that this has felt undoing for you. I’m OK hearing it, feeling with you, 
and choosing to stay present and supportive as we explore and clarify further what 
you need and want.
Clients who hyperactivate need help tolerating distress. They have difficulty calming 
or soothing their affect and can benefit from mindful-based approaches like those used 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  171
in dialectical behavior therapy, where there is a focus on the client’s thoughts, beliefs, 
and behavior in a way that validates their experiences with compassion (Linehan, 1993). 
Conversely, clients who deactivate need therapists who can help them identify and 
become aware of their feelings and learn to express their emotions. When these clients can 
process what is threatening about being emotional or have close, intimate relationships, 
they will become less critical of their emotions and feelings of vulnerability. These 
clients need therapists who will use emotion-focused or experiential approaches (Elliott, 
Watson, Goldman & Greenberg, 2004). Clients have a CEE when the therapist responds 
in a new and safer way that resolves rather than metaphorically reenacts old relational 
patterns— especially around affective experiences. As emphasized earlier, however, unless 
the therapist debriefs with the client afterwards and clarifies or makes overt what the 
therapist was thinking and feeling as clients were experiencing or sharing these conflicted 
feelings, many clients will subsequently misperceive the therapist’s response to fit their old 
schemas. Consider the following example of an immediacy intervention:
THERAPIST:
 Right now, as you are feeling so upset about this, what do you think is going on 
inside for me?
CLIENT:
 I don’t know what you mean—what are you asking for?
THERAPIST:
 As you share this with me, what might I be feeling or thinking about you?
CLIENT:
 Well, since you’re a therapist, you have to act nice and supportive so you’d probably 
never say anything. But you’re probably thinking I’m over-reacting again. You know, 
acting/uni00A0like a child, and I should just stop feeling sorry for myself and grow up. Like my 
husband says.
THERAPIST:
 Oh, no, I’m not thinking that at all. Actually, I was feeling how sad it is that this 
has hurt you so much for so long; and that you have had to be alone with it.
Without such exploration and clarification, many clients will settle back into the 
inaccurate belief that the therapist is privately judgmental, disappointed, frustrated, bur -
dened, and so forth, just as significant others have been so many times before. Without 
such clarification, some clients may have difficulty attending the next session.
In sum, as an emotionally responsive and affirming therapist continues to provide 
these CEEs and clients’ feelings are contained, distressed clients will discover that they 
can increasingly restore their own emotional equilibrium. Real comfort comes from 
being seen—empathically understood and validated—and psychologically “held” in this 
way, which leaves clients feeling secure and empowered (Geller & Greenberg, 2012). 
Clients responded to in this way become independent, have greater capacity for self-
reflection and better perspective-taking, can access both positive and negative affects, 
and develop a mature sense of self as they learn how to self-regulate their emotional 
reactions through the experience of feeling containment with the therapist (Greenberg, 
2002; Schore, 2003). We are going to explore how, in the moments following such con -
tainment experiences, clients often step forward and make progress in treatment. For 
now, however, let’s look further at how therapists can provide containment when their 
clients are distressed.
Too often, therapists minimize, reassure, explain, or seemingly don’t hear and simply 
move away from clients’ painful feelings. In so doing, they commonly reenact the clients’ 
developmental problem and again leave clients disconnected from others while they are 
distressed and experiencing difficult feelings. This occurs for many reasons, but one of 
the most common is because therapists assume too much responsibility both for caus -
ing the client’s pain and for alleviating it. Erroneously, new therapists may think, “I got 
the client into this, so now it’s up to me to get him out of it.” Both parts of this belief are 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

172  CHAPTER 5
false. By/uni00A0responding in the ways suggested here, therapists reveal feelings that are already 
present in the client; they do not cause them. Moreover, it is patronizing for therapists 
to think they can “fix” clients. In actuality, the therapist never has the power to manipu-
late another’s feelings in this way, and attempts to do so commonly reenact the caretak -
ers’ controlling or dependency fostering stance with the client. When these ineffective 
responses occur, there is no Safe Haven or holding environment.
 Let’s look more closely at how therapists’ inability to hear and join clients in their 
core conflicted emotions, as reflected in these ineffective responses, often thematically 
replays the clients’ developmental predicaments. For example, by trying to talk her out 
of her feelings, Marsha’s first therapist (page 58) reenacted her experiences in her family. 
Marsha’s first therapist went even further to avoid Marsha’s feelings by, in effect, sending 
her away: When Marsha got near her sad, empty feelings, the therapist suggested that she 
join a group and talked to her about seeing a psychiatrist for antidepressant medications. 
Such referrals are certainly necessary at times, yet in this case they were used more to dis-
tance the therapist from his own discomfort with her feelings. Unfortunately, this occurs 
commonly and, as we will explore closely in the next chapter, is more likely for therapists 
who themselves have a Dismissive attachment style (i.e., avoid commitment in relation -
ships, minimize their feelings and deny their needs, and rigidly prize their self-reliance). 
The therapist’s aim is to welcome the client’s feelings and approach them directly. For 
example, the following responses offer a point of entry and would be more effective ways 
to respond to Marsha’s strong feelings:
THERAPIST:
 I’m glad you’re taking the risk of telling me about these sad and empty feelings. 
Let’s keep talking—I want to understand them better.
OR
THERAPIST:
 I know that talking this way and being together with such painful feelings breaks 
the norms you grew up with, but I appreciate being able to share all of this with you.
Therapists want to find genuine ways to express their care and concern. Therapists 
can do this in words, of course, but what we communicate nonverbally — in our tone of 
voice and our manner — is equally important (Richmond et al., 2012). There are many 
ways to be emotionally present with clients, of course, and much of this communication 
is nonverbal or involves only a few words. Next, we provide some guidance for success -
fully providing the holding environment that gives clients the reparative experience of 
containment. However, therapists will want to tailor their responses to fit each particular 
client and make them congruent with their own personal styles.
Initially, the therapist’s primary goal is to stay emotionally connected or present with 
clients as they are experiencing painful feelings (Geller & Greenberg, 2012). As discussed 
in Chapter 2, the therapist may also want to reflect what clients are feeling and affirm the 
reality of their experience. This can be done just by acknowledging, “You’re very sad right 
now.” With some clients, it may be helpful to further validate their experience by saying, 
“Of course you are feeling mad right now. It hurt you very much when he did that.” As 
an important part of developing their own professional identities, therapists-in-training 
are encouraged to explore and try out their own ways of expressing their compassion or 
concern. Role models are very important, yet instead of trying to be like their favorite 
supervisor or therapist, new therapists are encouraged to find their own style with clients 
in these special moments. For example:
THERAPIST:
 I can see how much you miss your grandfather and how sad you are about his 
passing
—
 he was so important to you. I feel honored that you choose to share such a special 
part of yourself with me
—
 thank you.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  173
To provide a Safe Haven for clients, therapists also want to demonstrate behaviorally 
that they can tolerate the full intensity of clients’ feelings. In other words, they must com-
municate by their manner — and overtly in words with some clients — that they are in no 
way hurt, burdened, or undone by clients’ feelings (as most clients expect).
THERAPIST:
 I’m privileged that you choose to share this with me. I’m with you right now, and 
we’re going to stay together in this until we’ve worked our way through it.
As clients regain their equilibrium from a strong emotion, the therapist may also 
want to clarify how caregivers or significant others tended to respond when they felt 
this way. This is often illuminating as it makes clear to the client and therapist alike how 
it was simply unimaginable for the client, as a child, to take distress to a caregiver. The 
therapist may also want to highlight: 
(1) how their current relationship is different from the client’s relationships with others 
(e.g., the therapist remains emotionally present and affirming rather than becoming 
impatient, withdrawing, minimizing, or making it about him or herself, as others 
have tended to do) and 
(2) that he or she is accepting and welcoming of what the client has just revealed. Again, 
it is essential to debrief clients by asking them how it has been to share these feelings 
or personal disclosures with the therapist. 
As emphasized above, too often therapists miss this important opportunity. 
Genuinely touched by the client, they fail to appreciate that it is at these intense and 
sensitive moments that the client is most likely to misperceive the therapist’s caring 
or affirming response in terms of earlier schemas. They can correct these expectable 
distortions by making a process comment. For example, the therapist might ask cli -
ents what they think the therapist was thinking, feeling, or going through while they 
were feeling sad, angry, and so forth. Early in their training, it can be awkward for 
new therapists to broach this, and it just doesn’t seem necessary to check in with the 
client like this. However, long-standing schema distortions, which also cause problems 
and disrupt relationships with others, can often be identified and disconfirmed at these 
moments. For example,/uni00A0the therapist might clarify the client’s distortion by means of a 
self-involving comment:
THERAPIST:
 No, I wasn’t thinking that you “looked silly” or “sounded weird” in any way. 
In/uni00A0fact, I was touched by how alone you felt in that awkward, embarrassing situation. Your 
feelings sure made sense to me.
When offered sincerely, simple human responses of validation and respect mean 
much to clients and help to restore their dignity and composure. Unfortunately, new 
therapists often believe that they have to do much more than this to respond ade -
quately to clients’ pain. These concerns may reflect the therapist’s own unrealistic 
expectations that there is an absolute right or wrong way to respond. In reality, the 
client does not need the therapist to provide eloquent, crafted responses in a calmly 
self-assured manner. Such perfectionism is as unnecessary as it is unrealistic. It often 
serves only to make therapists more preoccupied with evaluating their own perfor -
mance and less focused on just being present with clients and grasping what they are 
really saying (Greenberg, 2014). As Winnicott (1965) says, the child needs only “good 
enough mothering.” Therapists provide a “good enough” holding environment when 
they find their own genuine ways to enact these guidelines. Clients will be apprecia -
tive of therapists’ sincere efforts and find them helpful, even if they are not always 
expressed articulately.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

174  CHAPTER 5
A S/a.sc/f.sc/e.sc H/a.sc/v.sc/e.sc/n.sc F/a.sc/c.sc/i.sc/l.sc/i.sc/t.sc/a.sc/t.sc/e.sc/s.sc C/h.sc/a.sc/n.sc/g.sc/e.sc /f.sc/r.sc/o.sc/m.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc I/n.sc/s.sc/i.sc/d.sc/e.sc
When clients feel safe, they experience the sense that positive outcomes are possible. In 
this safe relationship, they can bring their needs, clarify their beliefs about themselves and 
others, and begin to forge with selected others the kind of supportive relationship they 
are having with their therapist. Indeed, as a result of clarifying who they are, their likes 
and dislikes, and how they want to be in the world, they are empowered to become their 
own agents— to develop their own voice. The acceptance and safety they experience from 
the therapeutic relationship fosters a sense of who they are in a stable, mature way that 
helps them develop autonomy— where they are now able to embrace all aspects of them -
selves (including their imperfections and insecurities, as well as their strengths). In con -
trast to how they presented at the initial sessions, clients no longer have to be detached 
or cut off from parts of themselves (deactivate), or overwhelmed (hyperactivate). Getting 
the experience that they have access to a supportive other, who provides the safety to sort 
through the feelings, thoughts, and experiences that were previously too threatening to 
explore, experience, and share, is invaluable (Moyers, Houck, Rice et al., 2015). Their 
feelings become more modulated and flexible and can become part of a coherent or more 
integrated personal identity.
Many clients will be profoundly relieved to discover in the therapeutic relationship 
that neither they nor others need be hurt, burdened, or overwhelmed by their feelings. 
When the therapist can encompass clients’ most threatening emotions, and it is made 
clear to the client that the unwanted consequences they expected did not ensue this time, 
clients forge a more authentic connection to the therapist — and to themselves. They dis-
cover that it is safe this time to be seen and known as they truly are. Thus, the feelings 
that previously had to be sequestered away can now be experienced, understood, and 
integrated. Furthermore, when the therapist can hold clients’ threatening feelings and 
allow them to tolerate experiencing and sharing them, they, in turn, will become more 
able to contain these feelings on their own, which greatly changes how they can respond 
to others (Elliott, 2011). This is change from the inside out. This interpersonal process 
often propels a far-reaching trajectory of enduring behavioral, cognitive, and affective 
change, and long-standing symptoms often improve at this point. Ironically, when clients 
risk exposing their pain, vulnerability, or shame, and the therapist responds with compas-
sion, they feel more powerful. They are more flexible, more accepting of their vulnerabili-
ties and imperfections, and approach relationships in a more reflective way, that is, they 
become flexible and can see things from a variety of perspectives (Fonagy et al., 2002). 
Being able to facilitate such self-acceptance and self-efficacy is one of the most satisfying 
aspects of being a therapist.
When difficult feelings emerge, therapists have the best opportunity to help clients 
change. The most important CEEs usually occur around the therapist’s new, more satisfy-
ing response to the client’s emotions. On the other hand, however, familiar but unwanted 
patterns are most likely to be reenacted with the therapist in these affect-laden moments 
as well. Why? Vulnerability activates our schemas or IWMs and leads clients to expect 
the familiar but unwanted response from the therapist they have received in the past. Per 
Beck’s “hot cognitions,” it is when strong feelings have been triggered that clients are/uni00A0most 
apt to distort or misperceive the therapist’s response and slot it to fit old expectations. 
Compounding this situation, the therapist’s own personal issues or countertransference 
reactions are also most likely to be evoked in these affective-infused interactions. Thus, all 
therapists need to pay attention to their own countertransference propensities. To help, 
we turn now to personal factors in the therapist’s own life that can make it difficult to 
respond to clients’ feelings.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  175
T/h.sc/e.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc’/s.sc F/e.sc/e.sc/l.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc/s.sc O/f.sc/t.sc/e.sc/n.sc E/v.sc/o.sc/k.sc/e.sc C/o.sc/u.sc/n.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/t.sc/r.sc/a.sc/n.sc/s.sc/f.sc/e.sc/r.sc/e.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc
Significant feelings about issues in therapists’ own lives are often evoked by the clients’ 
feelings. This is normative and expectable but throughout their careers, therapists need to 
be willing to consider and work with their own personal reactions to the material clients 
present. In much the same way that it is sometimes easier for clients to externalize and 
focus on others rather than themselves, it can be easier for therapists to focus on the cli -
ent than to look within at their own issues and dynamics (Ladany & Inman, 2012). If, 
however, therapists are not willing to work with their own emotional reactions to the 
material clients present, they will tend to avoid dealing with clients’ feelings and engage 
clients only on an intellectual level. 
The purpose of this last section is to help therapists responsibly manage their own 
reactions to the evocative material that clients present by learning how to anticipate or 
recognize their own countertransference propensities, and what to do when this occurs. 
Further, neither a working alliance nor a Safe Haven will sustain unless therapists are 
accurately empathic and can communicate their genuine respect and compassion for the 
affect-laden conflicts their client is struggling with. However, it will be usually difficult for 
therapists to respond to all of their clients’ varying feelings, because all therapists bring 
their own developmental histories and current life stressors to the session. In their fami -
lies of origin and their cultural contexts, therapists often learned unspoken rules about 
which feelings could be expressed, and how, and many were scripted into familial roles 
that now shape how they respond to their clients. Next, we explore how these personal 
factors can keep therapists from responding effectively to their clients’ emotions.
F/a.sc/m.sc/i.sc/l.sc/i.sc/a.sc/l.sc R/u.sc/l.sc/e.sc/s.sc /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc R/o.sc/l.sc/e.sc/s.sc S/h.sc/a.sc/p.sc/e.sc C/o.sc/u.sc/n.sc/e.sc/r.sc/t.sc/r.sc/a.sc/n.sc/s.sc/f.sc/e.sc/r.sc/e.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc P/r.sc/o.sc/p.sc/e.sc/n.sc/s.sc/i.sc/t.sc/i.sc/e.sc/s.sc
Most trainees who are drawn to clinical practice are generous people, genuinely concerned 
about others, and ready to give of themselves. Often nurturing by nature, they can readily 
empathize with others and easily enter their experience. At the same time, however, many 
who choose this work also have strong needs to be liked (Hayes, Nelson & Fauth, 2015). 
Perhaps some grew up with too much emphasis on “appearances” or an anxious preoc -
cupation with what others might be thinking. Other therapists grew up with caregivers 
who were committed and responsible parents but, because of their own upbringing and 
life experiences, were simply too judgmental or critical. Some had caregivers who cut-off 
or disengaged emotionally when they disapproved of the child’s behavior or, most com -
monly, the child grew up anxiously striving to win or earn the attention or affection of 
their well-intended but rigid caregiver. For these and other reasons, such developmental 
experiences lead to too much need for approval—which makes it anxiety-arousing for this 
new therapist to explore resistance and ask about what might not have felt good in the 
session, risk breaking the social rules and venturing a process comment about what may 
be going on between them, or approaching the client’s distressed feelings more directly.
Most new therapists—but especially those with strong needs to be liked—will have 
great difficulty responding non-defensively to clients who present with a provocative, 
angry, or challenging interpersonal style, which these clients have been enacting with oth-
ers in their lives as well. That is, some clients characteristically respond in problematic 
ways to others in their lives who are critical, confrontational, controlling, competitive, 
dominating and so forth — and of course, many will begin to replay these same hos -
tile/alienating interpersonal patterns with the therapist, as well. Researchers report that 
therapists of every theoretical persuasion routinely respond to such “client negativity” 
personally—with their own counter-therapeutic emotional reactions of anger, criticism, 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

176  CHAPTER 5
withdrawal, and, most frequently, a punitive and judgemental response to the client 
(Binder & Strupp, 1997; Gold & Stricker, 2011). Unfortunately, most clinical training 
programs do too little to help new therapists learn how to respond non-defensively or 
constructively to this negativity that trainees are going to encounter. It is especially prob-
lematic for therapists who need their clients to like them.
While some therapists grew up overly concerned about approval or being liked, many 
others fulfilled the role of “caretaker” in their families of origin. Some, for example, are 
drawn to clinical practice in part by their anxious childhood need and family role to 
rescue their vulnerable or distressed caregiver, and later others, from a life of alcohol 
or substance abuse, depression and an unhappy marriage, dependency and a generalized 
anxiety disorder, and so on. In particular, this common countertransference issue of 
parentification makes it harder for therapists to address clients’ vulnerable feelings 
of sadness or hurt. Those feelings can evoke for parentified therapists the familiar 
predicament of needing to protect or take care of their caregiver. Because, in reality, this 
was always an impossible task for children to succeed with, it threatens them once again 
with the painful prospect of disappointing their caregiver (and now their client). These 
therapists often struggle with feelings of inadequacy because they have failed somehow, 
and their anxiety is evoked in much the same way it was when their attachment ties to 
their vulnerable caregivers were threatened because they could not rescue or solve the 
caregivers’s problems.
For these and many other countertransference issues, all therapists need to reflect on 
the roles they played in their families of origin. The issue is not whether therapists have 
their own countertransference tendencies, but how they deal with them . Every therapist 
has certain countertransference reactions — it’s just human. Self-examination on our own 
or with a colleague, with a supervisor, or, when this is not sufficient, with our own thera-
pist, are responsible ways to manage them. What we do not want is for therapists to act 
on their countertransference propensities. Therapists do this when they try to win the cli-
ent’s approval by trying to be a “nice” person and make the client like them, do not risk 
moving beyond the surface and utilize points of entry, or approach difficult feelings, or 
are reluctant to make process comments to sort out misunderstandings or awkward inter-
actions because the therapist wants to avoid interpersonal conflict. On the other hand, 
countertransference is also in play when therapists press clients to enter into, disclose, or 
stay with a certain affect. Instead, therapists repeatedly want to offer invitations or “bids” 
and allow clients to enter and leave difficult emotions as they wish . Rather than press 
clients to express a feeling they are reluctant to share, explore what the threat or danger 
may be for them if they did. For example:
 /uni25CFWhat does it say or mean about you if you feel _______?
 /uni25CFWhat could happen between us, or what could go wrong for you, if you let 
yourself/uni00A0feel _______?
 /uni25CFHow have important people in your life responded to you in the past when  
you felt ________?
 Letting clients have it their own way avoids the issues of coercion/demand and com-
pliance that ruled so many clients in their families of origin, and that people who have 
been marginalized often have experienced in the dominant culture. Therapists provide 
an effective middle ground when they work with clients to understand their resistance or 
reluctance and explore together the threat or danger that once existed. With understand-
ing comes safety, and clients soon will be able to explore feelings that needed to be held 
at bay in the past. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  177
Therapists often assume too much responsibility for their clients’ feelings. When this 
happens, therapists place on themselves the unrealistic expectation that they have to fix 
or solve the problem, and the usual outcome is for therapists to feel inadequate. Or, 
based on family rules (e.g., sadness is weak and unacceptable for males in our family) 
and roles (e.g., mothers have to ignore their feelings and take care of everyone else’s feel-
ings), therapists may have learned to be uncomfortable with their own sadness, anger, 
shame, or other feelings that have been evoked by their clients. When such countertrans -
ference is in play, therapists are likely to respond to clients’ feelings in ineffective ways, 
such as:
 /uni25CFInterpreting what the feelings mean and intellectually distancing themselves
 /uni25CFBecoming directive and telling clients what to do
 /uni25CFReassuring clients that everything is OK or will work out all right
 /uni25CFBecoming anxious and changing the topic
 /uni25CFFalling silent or emotionally withdrawing
 /uni25CFSelf-disclosing or moving into their own feelings
 /uni25CFDiminishing clients by trying to rescue them
 /uni25CFOver-identifying with clients and becoming controlling—Over-identifying with clients and becoming controlling—Over-identifying with clients and becoming controlling pressing clients to make — pressing clients to make —
some decision or take a particular action in order to truncate the therapist’s own 
unwanted feelings
If therapists do not shoulder this inappropriate responsibility for causing or fixing 
clients’ feelings, what should they do instead? The therapist’s response to clients’ feelings 
is threefold: to identify, to join, and to affirm. First, the therapist tries to help clients iden-
tify and express more fully the significant feeling they may be having. Second, the thera -
pist’s intention is to be empathic or emotionally responsive to clients, so that clients can 
share their feelings with a concerned other rather than having to experience them alone 
or have them dismissed, as they often have in the past. Third, the therapist wants to vali-
date clients’ feelings, by helping clients understand or contextualize their feelings so they 
can make sense of why they are experiencing this feeling now in this particular situation 
(White, 2007). In this way, the therapist will be free to respond effectively to whatever 
feelings clients present.
Let’s take this a step further. Even therapists who are well aware of the pitfalls of 
assuming inappropriate responsibility for clients’ feelings are prone to struggle with this 
issue when the clients’ affect becomes intense. When working with the profound emo -
tions that accompany life-threatening health crises, or trauma and abuse, many new ther-
apists struggle with the feeling that somehow they are responsible for causing the clients’ 
suffering, or need to fix or do something to take away their pain. Most commonly, as a 
result, they tend to avoid or explain away these intense feelings (Ladany, Friedlander & 
Nelson, 2005). To prevent this, it is especially important for therapists to consult with a 
supportive supervisor or colleague to help them manage their own exaggerated feelings 
of responsibility at times. Otherwise, these countertransference reactions will stop thera -
pists from responding effectively and providing clients with the validation and compas -
sion they need. One of the most important ways supervisors help their supervisees is to 
explore together and better understand how the supervisees’ emotional responses to their 
clients is affecting the treatment process. Supervisors also help when they provide the Safe 
Haven experience of containment for their supervisees who are trying, in parallel, to pro-
vide this for their clients who are struggling with profound emotional reactions (Falender 
& Shafransky, 2004).
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

178  CHAPTER 5
D/i.sc/f.sc/f.sc/e.sc/r.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/i.sc/a.sc/t.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc T/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc/a.sc/p.sc/i.sc/s.sc/t.sc’/s.sc I/s.sc/s.sc/u.sc/e.sc/s.sc /f.sc/r.sc/o.sc/m.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc’/s.sc
We have explored a great deal of complex and evocative material in this chapter, and 
we are going to end by highlighting a final countertransference issue that is especially 
far-reaching. Early in their training, many new therapists, and virtually all therapists at 
some points, lose their healthy or appropriate differentiation and become over-identified 
with the client. The first way this occurs is when situational stressors in therapists’ own 
lives keep them from providing Sullivan’s “participant/observer” stance and the therapist 
becomes either too distant from, or overly reactive to, the client. 
Focusing first on over-identification, sometimes personal problems in therapists’ 
own lives will be similar to those their clients are experiencing (e.g., experiencing marital 
conflict or divorce, caring for aging or declining family members, coping with financial 
setbacks, dealing with parenting and childrearing problems, facing health crises, etc.). 
When this occurs, some therapists will lose their healthy differentiation and not be able 
to remain both a participant and an observer in the therapeutic relationship. They lose 
their “observing self” and get lost in over-identification with the client—becoming only a 
participating self. This occurs, for example, when the supervisee exclaims to her supervi -
sor, “She’s just like me! She finds out she’s pregnant, and then her husband just got laid 
off too!” Although such similarities or parallels in the therapist’s and the client’s life cir-
cumstances will occur sometimes, very real differences between them also always exist . 
For example, just because the client is a White female and is a psychology major like the 
therapist, their personal histories and other aspects of their lives make them different. If 
these differences are not kept in mind and differentiation is lost, the therapist is likely to 
have difficulty approaching clients’ affect, does not discern what clients just said, and 
cannot be accurately empathic. This may not allow clients to stay with the feelings they 
are experiencing that are uncomfortable for the therapist, and become personally invested 
in the choices or decisions the client makes. 
This lack of differentiation, or difficulty remaining both a participant and an 
observer with the client, is an expectable or normative problem for new therapists. Most 
new therapists will struggle with this at times, and it usually gets better with more expe -
rience. As seen throughout this chapter, however, supervision is the best place to sort 
out the very real ways the client’s experience is both like and different from the thera -
pist’s. With this clarification, the supervisee can return to the next session with a more 
balanced or optimal interpersonal distance. However, taking this further, what if this 
doesn’t occur only with similar situational problems? What if the new therapist has a 
more enduring concern about “taking clients’ sadness home with me”? Here again, the 
therapist is struggling countertransferentially with a lack of self-other differentiation. 
When this situation occurs, commonly, a client’s affect—such as sadness, has evoked 
the therapist’s own longstanding personal feeling of sadness. Therapists like this are not 
being accurately empathic or entering their clients’ pain. Instead, they are experienc -
ing their own personal sadness or pain but not recognizing that they are managing it 
through their clients. Sometimes this can be sorted through in supervision, but often 
the supervisee’s own therapy is the best place to work through this unresolved feeling. 
Learning to set boundaries between what clients share and how therapists respond will 
help therapists move from being a participant to being a participant/observer in working 
with clients. 
Therapy is a deeply human and personal interchange. Therapists’ own personal 
qualities and emotional responsiveness are the greatest asset in helping clients change, 
but they can also be an obstacle at times. Although we have focused on problems stem -
ming from a lack of differentiation here, we prefer to see supervisees working with these 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

HELPING CLIENTS WITH/uni00A0THEIR/uni00A0FEELINGS  179
over-identification issues than supervisees who are too distant or removed in the role of 
therapist, and unwilling to risk entering a relationship and being personally affected by 
clients. It is easier to help supervisees develop differentiation than it is to foster genuine 
empathy or a willingness to engage with clients. If therapists are just a distant observer 
and not emotionally engaged participants, we don’t believe the therapeutic relationship 
will matter much to the client and a reparative relationship or CEE can’t occur.
In sum, countertransference reactions will occur for every therapist—the issue 
is not whether they occur but how they are dealt with (Hayes et al., 2015). When 
countertransference reactions are in play, therapists should consult with a colleague or 
supervisor to understand and manage their own personal reactions. When therapists 
find that they are repeatedly having difficulty with the same type of affect (such 
as shame, anger, or sadness), or when supervision does not help or free them up to 
respond effectively with more neutrality, therapists are encouraged to seek treatment for 
themselves. Because change is predicated on the relationship therapists create with clients, 
therapists are encouraged to make a lifelong commitment to working on themselves and 
their own personal development. Without this non-defensive openness to the possibility 
that their own countertransference issues may be activated, and ongoing willingness to 
work on their own personal reactions to clients, the help therapists can provide will be 
limited (Bromberg, 2006; Robbins & Jolkovski, 1987). Furthermore, therapists who 
are unwilling to acknowledge or work on persistent countertransference reactions are 
those most likely to have a negative therapeutic impact on their clients (e.g., “It’s the 
client’s problem— it doesn’t have anything to do with me”). It is a privilege to be able 
to help people change, and therapists honor that privilege by acknowledging their own 
limitations and personal involvement in the therapeutic process.
CLOSING
An essential component of facilitating change is to help clients resolve difficult emo -
tions by integrating or coming to terms with feelings that have been too painful, shame -
ful, or unacceptable to tolerate in the past . Many clients have experienced tragedies in 
their lives, and painful feelings will be entwined with the symptoms and problems they 
present. The therapist helps clients resolve their problems by providing a Safe Haven 
and containment for feelings that others have not been able to understand, accept, or 
encompass. Perhaps the most important relearning occurs when clients risk sharing cer -
tain feelings and find that, this time, they do not receive the same problematic response 
they have come to expect. A CEE occurs as old expectations and unwanted relational 
patterns are disconfirmed. However, therapists also need to be aware that the biggest 
obstacle to providing clients with a relationship that can produce change will be their 
own discomfort with certain feelings that are based on rules and roles learned in their 
families of origin. Thus, therapists are encouraged to make an ongoing commitment to 
working with their own countertransference propensities and how they influence their 
work with clients.
What’s ahead? In the next three chapters we will focus on case conceptualization and 
treatment planning, and see how therapists can clarify clients’ core problems and better 
understand the key issues that need to change. To do this, we will learn more about how 
clients’ problems originally developed, and how they are being enacted now with the 
therapist and others. For now, this chapter has presented a great deal of complex and per-
sonally evocative information that often takes several years to integrate and make your 
own. This is challenging work— be patient with yourself and find help when you need it.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

180  CHAPTER 5
CHAPTER EXERCISE
Which feeling is most difficult for you to approach in your clients? What makes this feel-
ing difficult to approach? How was this feeling responded to in your own family of origin?
SUGGESTED READINGS
To help student therapists respond to clients’ feelings, see especially Chapters 9 and 10 of 
Clara Hill’s Helping Skills, 4/E, (2014). Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Associa-
tion. More experienced readers are encouraged to read the classic in the field: Greenberg. L.S. 
(2002) Emotion-Focused Therapy. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
Visit CengageBrain.com for a variety of study tools and useful resources such as interac-
tive exercises, flashcards, and quizzes. Also included with this chapter is a video demon-
stration by the authors in which they role-play a therapist responding to each feeling in 
a client’s affective constellation and then debrief by discussing each of the three feelings 
the client transitions through in this sequence.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

181
C/l.sc/a.sc/r.sc/i.sc/f.sc/y.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc’/s.sc 
P/r.sc/o.sc/b.sc/l.sc/e.sc/m.sc /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc D/e.sc/v.sc/e.sc/l.sc/o.sc/p.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc 
/a.sc T/r.sc/e.sc/a.sc/t.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc F/o.sc/c.sc/u.sc/s.sc
CHAPTER SIX
Familial and Developmental Factors
CHAPTER SEVEN
Inflexible Interpersonal Coping Strategies
CHAPTER EIGHT
Relational Themes and Reparative Experiences
III
PART
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

183
CHAPTER 6
Familial and 
Developmental Factors
CONCEPTUAL OVERVIEW
The previous chapters in Part I and Part II focused on the interaction between the thera -
pist and the client, and provided guidelines for working with the process dimension. In 
Part III, the next three chapters will explore more fully how therapists can better clarify 
or conceptualize their clients’ problems and develop a more specific focus for treatment. 
We are trying to become more specific in our thinking about just what the central prob -
lem really is for a particular client, and clarify the focus for treatment that will pro -
vide the most help. Therapists are more effective when they can formulate an accurate 
assessment of the problem or case conceptualization that leads to specific treatment plans 
(Levensen, 2010, Chapter 4). To do this, therapists seek to understand:
 /uni25CFHow clients' problems originally developed (Chapter 6);
 /uni25CFHow these developmental problems are being played out now in problematic inter-How these developmental problems are being played out now in problematic inter-How these developmental problems are being played out now in problematic inter
actions with others and amplifying current symptoms and problems that clients are 
bringing to treatment (Chapter 7); andbringing to treatment (Chapter 7); andbringing to treatment
 /uni25CFHow clients’ problems with others are brought into the therapeutic relationship and 
played out along the process dimension or way in which the therapist and client 
interact together (Chapter 8).
The more specifically therapists can clarify their thinking and understand their clients 
in these three ways, the easier it will be to formulate the treatment focus therapists need 
to help clients change. We find, however, that new therapists have had little training or 
experience conceptualizing clients, and this is the most undeveloped and challenging new 
skill for most student therapists. Early in their training, it is difficult to clarify a focus 
to guide treatment—that is, to identify the core problem and understand where they are 
trying to go and what they are trying to accomplish or do with each client . To help, 
guidelines for meeting these professional demands are provided in the next three chapters.
In this Chapter, we will see that one important component for helping therapists 
conceptualize clients and formulate treatment plans is to recognize the familial, cultural, 
and developmental antecedents of clients’ problems. In particular, therapists earn credibility 
with their clients, and help them engage in treatment, when they can provide empathic 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

184  CHAPTER 6
understanding that helps clients grasp why certain situational problems or seemingly modest 
stressors can become amplified and engender more significant symptoms or distress than 
the current situation seems to warrant. We value and utilize a developmental perspective 
to shed light and help us better understand current problems and maladaptive relational understand current problems and maladaptive relational understand
patterns, rather than to gain psychodynamic insight. Although we are exploring and trying 
to assess what has gone well and what has been problematic in family interactions, we 
do not seek to blame or “bash” parents, or make caregivers responsible for clients’ own 
lives and choices, as is so commonly misunderstood. We begin with the rapidly expanding 
literature that utilizes attachment theory to inform clinical practice.
ATTACHMENT STYLE AND CLINICAL PRESENTATION 
IN ADULT TREATMENT
In previous chapters we have introduced basic constructs in attachment theory such as 
attachment styles in children, Safe Haven/Secure Base, affect regulation, reflective capac -
ity, hyperactivating and deactivating coping strategies, and attuned responsiveness. A 
rich empirical literature is now linking attachment theory to clinical research and prac -
tice with adult clients and helping therapists understand therapeutic relationships (for 
research reviews see Cassidy & Shaver, 2008; Daniel, 2006; Gold, 2011; Obegi & Berant, 
2009; Shaver & Mikulincer, 2010). John Bowlby launched a generation of research in 
1988 when he wrote for the first time about therapists serving as reparative attachment 
figures—providing many clients with a relationship, for the first time, that offered the 
Safe Haven and Secure Base experiences they had missed developmentally. In this way, 
he viewed the therapeutic relationship as having the potential to be a far-reaching and 
corrective attachment relationship, rather than merely a teacher-student, coach-trainee, 
or instructional relationship (1988). An important caveat: this reparative relationship is 
not “re-parenting” and does not give clients what they missed emotionally from their 
caregivers. Instead, it helps them develop a more realistic narrative for their lives, develop 
self-compassion for what they wanted and did not receive developmentally, expand rigid 
IWMs that are limiting and disrupting current relationships, and develop the skill and 
capacity to establish new and more satisfying relationships in their current lives.
With an integrative approach, psychotherapy researchers and practitioners from 
every brand of treatment are drawing on strong empirical support for utilizing attachment 
theory to guide treatment and provide a foundation for therapeutic relationships 
(Mallinckrodt, 2010). For example, researchers find that establishing a secure relationship 
with the client first will then allow behavioral, cognitive, and other active interventions 
to become more effective (Connors, 2011; Gold, 2011). More far-reaching, many posit 
that effective therapists across diverse treatment approaches are working in the first 
stage of treatment to develop Security—both a Safe Haven and a Secure Base—within 
the therapist-client relationship. In the second stage of treatment, therapists are utilizing 
this CEE, and the new relational skills developed from establishing it, to transfer this 
experiential relearning and expanded social skills with the therapist to others in their 
daily lives (Mallinckrodt, 2015). 
In this way, the therapist and client are working to develop Security within the 
client-therapist relationship. Fostering change via this “earned security” occurs as the 
therapist consistently  facilitates (1) CEEs that provide the experience of a Safe Haven 
when the client is vulnerable and distressed (this is not a one-time, dramatic, or peak 
experience but a dependable way of relating that characterizes their ongoing interaction), 
and (2) a Secure Base that sustains a watchful eye for points of entry to support the 
client’s exploration and autonomy, recognizes and highlights their personal strengths, 
and celebrates their successes (Feeney & Van Vleet, 2010; Mallinckrodt & Joeng, 2015; 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  185
Sroufe, 2005). Having first struggled to achieve some measure of security in the therapist-
client relationship with individuals who usually begin treatment with limited experience 
and capacity for establishing relationships with these adaptive features, we are going 
to see that treatment then often enters a second (and usually easier) phase. Here, the 
therapist draws on the client’s experiences of change; to help the client understand that 
some people can respond to the client in different and better ways than before. Having 
experientially  disconfirmed the schema or expanded the IWM in the client’s real-life 
relationship, the therapist works actively to help the client transfer or generalize these 
new and more effective ways of relating to others. In this way, multiple sequences of 
CEEs occurring in and out of treatment contribute to successful outcomes (Holtforth 
& Fluckiger, 2012). This integrative and experiential model of change is the relational 
treatment approach developed and illustrated throughout. 
We begin this chapter with the research on four categories of adult attachment. This 
discussion will (a) describe how these four different types of adult clients will present 
in treatment and interact with the therapist, and (b) provide guidelines for developing 
a treatment focus and intervening with each. Be patient as you begin reading—complex 
ideas need to be introduced before we can illustrate how they can be applied to help with 
your current clients. 
F/o.sc/u.sc/r.sc C/a.sc/t.sc/e.sc/g.sc/o.sc/r.sc/i.sc/e.sc/s.sc /o.sc/f.sc A/t.sc/t.sc/a.sc/c.sc/h.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc
Following research by Bartholomew & Horowitz (1991), Mikulincer and Shaver (2007; 
2008) and others, adult attachment researchers measure adult attachment styles along 
two orthogonal dimensions of Anxiety and Avoidance . Fear is the “privileged” or 
primary emotion that attachment-informed therapists are attending to in their clients 
(Slade, 2004). Parallel to children, when adults feel threatened, vulnerable, or distressed, 
they tend to seek comfort or support from their current, adult attachment relationship(s). 
Anxiety over the security of attachment relationships refers to worry or concern about 
the availability and willingness of our significant others to recognize and respond when 
we are injured or sick, threatened or vulnerable, facing loss, or have suffered trauma 
(Janzen, Fitzpatrick & Drapeau, 2008; Shevlin, Boyda, Elklit, & Murphy, 2014). That 
is, clients can be rated high or low on a continuum of Anxiety over the availability or 
responsiveness of their “go-to” person or significant other. 
The other measured dimension is Avoidance of attachment relationships when 
distressed. This refers to a continuum of comfort versus discomfort with intimacy or 
closeness, emotional needs, and commitment in relationships. Individuals rated high on 
Avoidance see themselves as self-sufficient, view others as unavailable or undependable, 
and fear being excessively or arbitrarily controlled. This leads to an avoidance of both 
one’s own—and others’—feelings and needs. These individuals avoid sharing with others 
and emotional engagement, as well as subjectively or privately experiencing their own 
emotional vulnerability or distress (Mallinckrodt, 2010; Marmarosh, Kivlighan, Bieri, et 
al., 2014). The intersection of these two dimensions of Anxiety and Avoidance portrays 
four adult attachment prototypes: Secure, and three types of insecure attachment: 
Preoccupied, Dismissive, and Fearful.
As seen in Figure 6-1, adult clients with Secure attachment styles are low in anxiety 
about seeking help and understanding from others, and low in avoidance of having 
emotional needs of others and relationships. When distressed, these adaptive adults seek 
help comfortably from well-chosen go-to people in their lives. Dismissive clients are low 
in overt or expressed attachment anxiety about needing others (although they experience overt or expressed attachment anxiety about needing others (although they experience overt
high physiological distress or cortisol activation when their needs come into play in 
relationships), and high in avoidance of approaching others when distressed. Dismissive 
clients do not easily seek support when distressed, and cut off from or avoid their own 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

186  CHAPTER 6
and other’s feelings. Preoccupied  adults are high in anxiety about seeking support and 
understanding from others, but are low in avoidance of expressing this need. These clients 
seek support when distressed, but are anxious that the attachment figure will not sustain 
interest in them or remain sufficiently responsive. Finally, Fearful  adults are high on 
both anxiety about expressing their needs for support and avoid and are fearful of being 
vulnerable in attachment relationships. That is, they show intensely conflicted approach-
avoidance. They want relationships, but often because of abuse histories, approaching 
others evokes unwanted or frightening feelings and memories about their unresolved 
trauma or loss, so they simultaneously avoid these relationships. The two-dimensional 
schema in Figure 6-1 is adapted from Bartholomew & Horowitz (1991). We will use it as 
an orienting compass to explore the four clinical subtypes that new therapists are going 
to quickly recognize in their caseloads.
S/e.sc/c.sc/u.sc/r.sc/e.sc A/t.sc/t.sc/a.sc/c.sc/h.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc S/t.sc/y.sc/l.sc/e.sc /i.sc/n.sc A/d.sc/u.sc/l.sc/t.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc  
(Q/u.sc/a.sc/d.sc/r.sc/a.sc/n.sc/t.sc I: L/o.sc/w.sc A/v.sc/o.sc/i.sc/d.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc/L/o.sc/w.sc A/n.sc/x.sc/i.sc/e.sc/t.sc/y.sc, /p.sc . /one.alt/eight.taboldstyle/six.taboldstyle)
Researchers find that Secure clients value close attachment relationships, and provide 
consistent memories and descriptions of their childhoods in undefended ways. These 
coherent “attachment narratives,” which the other three attachment styles do not provide, 
are based on having received a Safe Haven and Secure Base from their caregivers, which 
leads to a more integrated identity or coherent sense of Self. In their Adult Attachment 
Interviews (AAI), which are the most widely used measure of adult attachment styles, 
Low Attachment Avoidance
High Attachment Anxiety
Quadrant I
SECURE
(low avoidance, low anxiety)
Client: I know he’ll be there
when I need him.
Quadrant III
PREOCCUPIED
(low avoidance, high anxiety)
Client: I go to him when I’m
upset, but I’m not sure he
really wants me to do that.
Quadrant II
DISMISSIVE
(high avoidance, low anxiety
expression)
Client: No problem. I can get
along /f_ine without her.
High Attachment Avoidance
Quadrant IV
FEARFUL
(high avoidance, high anxiety)
Client: I really like her, but she
says I get distant or something?
Low Attachment Anxiety
FIGURE 6.1 ATTATTATT CHMENT STYLES IN ADULTHOOD
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  187
Secure clients discuss relationships clearly and openly, exhibit reflectiveness (i.e., the 
adaptive capacity to think flexibly about their own—and other’s—thoughts, feelings, 
and intentions) and show empathy (See Bretherton & Munholland, 2008). Secure adults 
acknowledge the impact of childhood experiences realistically and, when these experiences 
were not positive, they are not denied or glossed over, as Dismissive clients will do as 
they enter treatment. In this way, Secure clients assess reality more accurately. They 
don’t engage in idealization of caregivers (or their therapists), or denial of real problems 
that currently exist or actually existed in the past — which we will see is prevalent and 
maladaptive in the other three types of Insecure clients. 
Sometimes misunderstood (especially by Dismissive individuals), Secure adults were 
not indulged or over-protected in childhood. Their attachment needs were simply met in 
a way that has helped them become more resilient and autonomous in adulthood. Their 
responsive emotional environment included attuned responsiveness. That is, empathically 
seeing and validating the child’s experience—and responsively helping to resolve the 
distress or problem as necessary, has provided the opportunity for the child to remain 
connected to his or her own experience and know him or herself. It has also helped the 
child to develop the significant psychological strengths of emotional self-regulation, 
impulse control, empathy, and agency (Allen, 2012; Fonagy & Target, 1997). Although 
secure individuals will seek treatment at times, they possess a positive IWM of Self as 
being good or worthy of care, and that some carefully filtered Others are positive or 
trustworthy (Agrawal, Gunderson, Bjarne, et al., 2004; Bowlby, 1969). 
 Researchers find that secure adults are more efficacious, more flexible cognitively and 
interpersonally, and more resilient—better capable of dealing with stress than the other 
three attachment styles. Thus, when secure adults enter therapy, they are less conflicted 
about having a problem and seeking help, and are more able to work collaboratively 
with the therapist. Meta-analyses find that Secure clients have the capacity to establish 
a working alliance, possess the psychological resources to enter into exploration of their 
problems with more self-disclosure, feeling, and depth, and are more capable than the 
other three subtypes to risk exploring ruptures and negative reactions toward the therapist 
(Brenecker, Levy, & Ellison, 2014; Diener & Monroe, 2011; Romano, Fitzpatrick, & 
Janzen, 2008; Rubino et al., 2000). 
Perhaps capturing best the adaptiveness of having a secure attachment style, 
researchers find that secure adults are effective in finding trustworthy social supports 
when needed and, especially meaningful, are usually able to avoid, or readily terminate, 
maladaptive relationships  (Mallinckrodt, 2000). So, if one didn’t have the good fortune 
to grow up securely, are these health features unattainable? No, attachment styles do 
have significant continuity, but changes also occur in some individuals over time (Lewis, 
Feiring, & Rosenthal, 2000). Those who did not have secure attachments as children, 
but become secure as adolescents or adults, have addressed their problematic experiences 
realistically and worked through them. These individuals have attained the goal we hold 
for many clients in treatment—achieving or earning security ( earned security). This has 
been achieved through subsequent reparative relationships with others in their lives (such 
as therapists, extended family members, or other corrective relationships) that provided 
the responsiveness they needed. These individuals have “reprocessed” and made peace 
with their challenging childhood experiences (Jacobvitz, 2008; Schore, 2014). 
Thus, as noted in Figure 6-1 (on page 186), the Secure client in Quadrant I is low on 
Avoidance and low on Anxiety. When distressed, these clients do not avoid relationships 
or their emotional needs. Rather, without being dependent, demanding, or needy, they 
appropriately seek out help or understanding in healthy adult ways from a few carefully 
selected significant others who have proven trustworthy over time. They do this without 
anxiety or excessive worry about being controlled, rejected, or abandoned, or other 
threats that the other subtypes will exhibit. In this regard, research finds that accepting a 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

188  CHAPTER 6
degree of dependence and allowing oneself to be comforted and supported by dependable 
others when distressed, paradoxically, allows a person to become more autonomous and 
self-confident (Feeney & Van Vleet, 2010; Mallinckrodt, 2015 ).When working with 
Secure clients, therapists will hear prototypic sentences like these that capture a felt sense 
of trust, safety, and security:
 /uni25CFI know that he will be there when I need him.
 /uni25CFI can trust that she won't hurt my feelings when I get close to her.
 /uni25CFHe is able to comfort me when I'm distressed.
 /uni25CFI enjoy it when she gets emotionally close to me because I feel close to her.
The adult attachment categories that follow reflect the three different subtypes of Inse -
cure attachment (Dismissive, Precoccupied, and Fearful). Recalling affect regulation from 
Chapter 5, one of the key concepts to help therapists understand the symptoms, defenses, 
and clinical presentation that these three types of Insecure clients present is the  Hyperac-
tivating and Deactivating strategies to cope with feelings when distressed. Depending on 
their differing attachment histories and subsequent relational experiences, Insecure clients 
have learned in formative relationships that their attachment needs will not be met and 
that they need to adopt these defensive coping strategies to regulate their affect (Daly & 
Mallinckrodt, 2009).
Clients who use a hyperactivating strategy usually have an IWM of Self as negative—
being fundamentally unlovable and unworthy of others’ love and responsiveness—and a 
more positive but often inaccurate or unrealistic IWM of Others. In contrast, those with 
a deactivating strategy usually have an IWM of Self that is unrealistically  positive and 
competent, and a more negative and inaccurate IWM of Others as hostile and competi -
tive, unavailable, or incompetent/incapable to respond effectively. Those who are Fearful 
alternate between using a hyperactivating and a deactivating strategy, which is confusing 
to themselves, to others in their lives, and often to their therapists. They are fearful of the 
person they want and need to go to in time of distress (the attachment figure who sometimes 
helped them but at other times hurt them in significant ways). So, as they start to approach 
someone they almost simultaneously begin to retreat and avoid—and lead very difficult lives 
as they cycle through this approach-avoid loop repeatedly. Poignantly, they have an IWM 
of Self as negative and Others as negative, and do not have the stable and more adaptive 
coping strategy to cope with anxiety that the Dismissive and Preoccupied client can utilize.
D/i.sc/s.sc/m.sc/i.sc/s.sc/s.sc/i.sc/v.sc/e.sc A/t.sc/t.sc/a.sc/c.sc/h.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc S/t.sc/y.sc/l.sc/e.sc I/n.sc A/d.sc/u.sc/l.sc/t.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc  
(Q/u.sc/a.sc/d.sc/r.sc/a.sc/n.sc/t.sc II: H/i.sc/g.sc/h.sc A/v.sc/o.sc/i.sc/d.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc/L/o.sc/w.sc A/n.sc/x.sc/i.sc/e.sc/t.sc/y.sc E/x.sc/p.sc/r.sc/e.sc/s.sc/s.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc /p.sc . /one.alt/eight.taboldstyle/six.taboldstyle)
Let’s begin with a clinical vignette that describes a prototypic client with a Dismissive 
attachment style. This vignette, and the one to follow in the next section on Preoccupied 
clients, is reprinted from a highly informative study on treatment planning and case con -
ceptualization for clients with differing attachment styles (Daly & Mallinckrodt, 2009).
R is seeking counseling for relationship difficulties. R is very uncomfortable opening up 
to others on a deep personal level and finds it equally uncomfortable when others begin 
to get to close, revealing more personal emotions. This is causing problems in relation-
ships because R tends to back away when relationships reach a certain level of intimacy. R 
feels more comfortable in relationships where there is some distance and it isn’t necessary 
to depend and rely on the other person involved in the relationship. It actually makes R 
nervous to think about having to depend on another. It is difficult for R to rely on others, 
and relationships become draining quickly if partners begin to insist that their concerns and 
needs be met in the relationship. R admits that this pattern of relating to others has evoked 
problems in past relationships and usually results in R being driven away by demands of a 
partner that seem overwhelming.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  189
In contrast to Secure clients, those who are dismissive use a deactivating strategy
and, as noted earlier, have an unrealistically high IWM of Self as positive and competent, 
and inaccurately hold a negative model of Others (under stress, that is, the Dismissive 
client will characteristically distort  the Other as being controlling, hostile, intrusive, 
or undependable). Their learning histories have taught them that other people do not 
offer help very often or well. As young children, their caregivers consistently ignored 
and rejected their overtures and withdrew when they showed distress—and this pattern 
typically continued throughout their development (Ainsworth et al., 1978). Their 
internal working model of Others leads them to readily slot people as being potentially 
harmful or hostile, weak or unreliable, or intrusive, demanding, and controlling because 
this is what they have routinely experienced, year after year, in primary attachment 
relationships. Understandably, this history results in the fixed perception that seeking 
closeness with others is futile, and that it reflects personal weakness to ever have or 
approach others with a need. Seeking support when distressed can be injurious because 
it will allow others to undermine their autonomy and arbitrarily control them, or to 
ignore or even reject them. For a client with this developmental history of emotional 
deprivation and painful aloneness, seeking closeness or sustained intimacy is threatening, 
indeed. Therefore, minimizing or denying any need of anyone is the safest coping 
strategy—they expect rejection and have learned to modulate their distress by ignoring 
and not even recognizing it  (Main, 1995).and not even recognizing it  (Main, 1995).and not even recognizing it
Dismissive clients inflate their self-esteem and competence unrealistically in response 
to threat, and also minimize or deny real dangers that actually exist—these clients do not 
assess the environment accurately (Mikulincer et al., 2003). Further, just as they will not 
register or be very aware of their own fear or distress in current threatening situations, 
they also will divert their attention away from thoughts or memories about disappointing 
or hurtful experiences with their attachment figures (Mallinckrodt, 2010; Mikulincer & 
Shaver, 2007). Thus, we are going to see that Dismissive clients (the adult version of the 
Avoidant child) damp down or minimize their anxiety and distress with a deactivating 
strategy. And, in turn, tend to show less sensitivity, empathy and nurturance toward 
others and are averse to intimacy (Simpson & Rholes, 2010).
Early in treatment, it doesn’t usually work well for therapists to ask very directly or 
often about Dismissive clients’ childhood or familial experience. These clients may be 
unwilling to share, and often are unable to remember specific aspects of their childhoods, 
saying:
Dismissive Client:
 My parents...my family...I don’t know—I don’t remember much about growing up…
When they do speak about developmental and familial experiences, they will usually 
present their childhoods in overly ideal or positive terms or, occasionally, a few may be 
overtly derogating. Consider these responses:
Dismissive Client:
 I had a great family—yeah, everything was just great. 
OR
Dismissive Client:
 I didn’t need them—they were useless. I managed just fine on my own.
 When the Dismissive client does briefly allude to childhood experience, however, it will 
readily become apparent to the therapist that everything really wasn’t “great.” Therapists 
need to pay close attention to the details or behavioral specifics of what others actually 
said and did when these clients communicated to a caregiver that they were distressed or 
had a problem . Typically, careful listening reveals a different and painful narrative that 
caregivers were unresponsive, overtly rejecting, or sometimes even physically abusive. 
For Dismissive clients, however, these painful, shaming, and anxiety-arousing experiences 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

190  CHAPTER 6
are held away or defended against by being cognitively and affectively minimized or 
dismissed. This may serve as a point of entry for therapists to explore the behavioral 
specifics of how others responded—what was actually said and done. For example: 
T
HERAPIST
:
 What was the tone of voice, or expression on her face, as you were telling her that? 
Like the Avoidant children they often once were, Dismissive clients fundamentally 
do not trust others. Their experience repeatedly has been that emotional or social 
support will not be available when they need it (Connors, 1997, 2011). Therefore, the 
defensive interpersonal presentation is usually one of pseudo-independence or complete 
self-sufficiency, always appearing “strong” and never “weak.” Many of these clients will 
be seeking dominance and control in relationships. The mantra their therapist will hear 
about almost any situation is, “No problem.” These painful developmental experiences, 
that consistently received no validation, compassion, or assistance from caregivers, are 
the basis for their signature detachment from their own feelings, blunted empathy for the 
experience and feeling of others, and their limited capacity for emotional closeness and 
commitment in relationships (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2007). However, it is also the basis 
for the central importance of the therapist’s empathy and willingness to continue working 
to engage these clients in a new and different way. The central theme for these counter-
dependent clients is that sharing vulnerability with anyone or expressing a need (or even 
just internally or privately experiencing their own pain or distress in response to highly 
stressful circumstances) is unacceptable and seen as being shamefully weak. These clients 
are often initially resistant to treatment and commonly refuse help when it is offered 
(Dozier, 1990; Dozier, Lomax, Tyrrell, & Lee, 2001). 
If you are seeing a Dismissive client in therapy, and you are not dismissive yourself, 
you may initially feel bored with him or her in sessions. Of course, just as these clients 
avoid closeness in relationships and look down on reliance on others, they will minimize 
the significance of the therapist as well (which is challenging for most new therapists, 
and for Preoccupied therapists, who need and seek approval). Dismissive clients minimize 
the therapist’s importance by missing sessions, coming late, and generally just not 
allowing the therapist to become someone who matters much. They will keep therapy 
superficial by avoiding pain and real exploration of problems, remaining “compulsively 
independent” and not utilize the therapist as a source of support or for exploration in 
treatment (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2007). 
Therapists should not give up on these non-responsive, difficult-to-engage clients 
when they do not talk much about themselves, may be intellectualizing or speak 
in global or terse ways that communicate little, and are reluctant to disclose or share 
feelings. We can help by joining them where they are—letting them have the interpersonal 
distance they need in the beginning of treatment, but watching for points of entry 
where we can respond when they bring up seemingly small problems, disappointments 
or dissatisfactions, or when any slight wish or motivation for something to change is 
voiced. Therapists generally do not want to adopt a directive stance, assign homework 
assignments, press clients to share feelings or disclose further, and so forth. Despite the 
therapist’s best intentions, Dismissive clients are likely to regard such responses, which 
may work well with other clients, as familiar, expectable, and unwanted control. Many 
Dismissive clients are oriented to attaining power and control in relationships and, in 
turn, they will expect the therapist to be dominating and controlling (Bartholomew & 
Horowitz, 1991; Chen & Mallinckrodt, 2002). Their competitiveness and orientation to 
power and control hierarchy is often difficult for new therapists, who will need support 
from their supervisors. These clients sometimes seek to gain the upper hand in interactions 
with the therapist or to diminish or dismiss the therapist, just as they do with spouses, 
partners, coworkers, and others in their lives. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  191
So, with all of this counter-dependency, what would bring dismissive individuals to 
treatment? Their partner/spouse may be threatening to leave them because they cannot be 
intimate or responsive to the feelings and concerns of their partner or make a commitment 
to the relationship (i.e., keeping themselves “independent” and not controlled). Their 
spouse/partner also may be threatening to leave them unless they enter treatment because 
they are being too controlling, dominating, or possessive in their relationship (Levine & 
Heller, 2010). Additionally, we find that Dismissive clients need help grieving successfully. 
They struggle when facing loss—sadness is simply an unacceptable “weak” feeling. 
However, when a parent or loved one dies, their feelings of loss can be too intense and 
topple their deactivating defenses. Amplifying their predicament, their childhood feelings 
of deprivation—what they wanted but did not receive—often emerge when parents or 
other attachment figures die, leading some to enter treatment at this point. Research 
also suggests that affective disorders such as depression may be seen in individuals with 
a dismissive style (Fonagy et al., 1996; Patrick et al., 1994; Tyrrell, Dozier, Teague, & 
Fallot, 1999). This makes sense in that they will not seek support during times of distress. 
Additionally, while they invest in work and may be successful professionally, when 
stressed they are vulnerable to alcohol abuse and addictive disorders—a coping strategy 
that is non-relational (Connors, 1997).
When these or other problems lead them to therapy, Dismissive clients will still want 
to focus on others’ problems rather than their own at the beginning of treatment. These 
clients will not want to use the therapist to work on themselves — that is, they will not 
look within and explore with much depth, and want to externalize rather than consider 
their own contribution to problems. Thus, therapists should anticipate that they often 
will be feeling a strong pull to join in blaming or criticizing others. Researchers find this is 
especially problematic when the therapist shares a complementary dismissive attachment 
style and too readily settles for the surface dialogue and externalization of problems 
that is being elicited (Tyrrell, et al., 1999). This poor therapist-client match makes sense 
because these clients deny their need for help and their therapists remain in their comfort 
zone by joining in this defense and avoiding real engagement and pain ( Dozier, Lomax, 
Tyrrell, & Lee, 2001). However, we will see that treatment can also fail if the therapist 
goes too far the other way and presses too hard for closer personal engagement, and does 
not allow Dismissive clients to have the dismissive defense they need and allow them to 
be as distant as they need when they initially enter treatment. 
 Within clients who fit a dismissive category—and within each of the other two 
Insecure attachment styles to follow—therapists will meet a wide range of differing 
individuals. Therapists do not want to compartmentalize and respond to their client as 
merely a “Dismissive client,” of course, but first and foremost as a unique person with 
diverse qualities and experiences that we want to get to know. Like any classification 
system, these attachment features will help therapists form working hypotheses and clarify 
important aspects of their functioning. However, putting this client into a dismissive box, 
or any other classification system, will never really capture the full person. Attempting 
to do so, ironically, will actually be a dismissive response itself! With this caveat in mind, 
the extent or severity of the client’s dismissiveness will vary widely along a continuum 
of severity. For example, therapists are going to see high-functioning clients, like “R” in 
our introductory vignette, who cope well in many arenas of life but not with intimacy or 
in committed relationships. In particular, mid-range dismissiveness includes many self-
centered clients with Narcissistic features, as well as some with Obsessive-Compulsive 
and even Paranoid features. Moving further toward more severe psychopathology, a 
dismissive state of mind is often associated with Antisocial Personality Disorder and 
criminality (Allen, 2012; Allen et al., 1996; Mikulincer & Shaver, 2008). Additionally, 
Dismissive clients will often be described as having Authoritarian personalities and, as we 
will see in the next section, be authoritarian parents. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

192  CHAPTER 6
Looking back at Figure 6-1 on page 186, the Dismissive client in Quadrant 2 is high on 
Avoidance (i.e., the client avoids his or her own emotional needs and avoids seeking help 
from others) and low on Anxiety (i.e., he or she does not present with OVERT anxiety or 
concern when faced with real problems, although physiological measures of distress are 
measured). They are out of touch with fear and other vulnerable feelings. In this way, these 
clients are blocking out their own, and others’, attachment thoughts and feelings. When you 
are working with Dismissive clients, you are going to hear prototypic sentences like these:
 /uni25CFI don't care if she doesn't love or want me.
 /uni25CFI don't tell him when I'm upset because I take care of my feelings myself.
 /uni25CFI’m used to doing things on my own, so I don’t ask for help.
 /uni25CFI can get along just fine without him.
 /uni25CFNo problem. Everything's fine.
In response to these prototypic comments, it’s not so useful to ask Dismissive clients, 
“How do you feel?” As treatment progresses, they can do more with this invitation, but 
not in the beginning. Instead, therapists are encouraged to be listening for points of entry 
where any conflict, need, or distress is even minimally expressed, and then trying to make 
modest empathic bids, such as:
 /uni25CFIt seems as though you've had to do a lot on your own.
 /uni25CFI’m wondering if, just sometimes, it might have been a little hard for you to be so 
alone with your problems?
 /uni25CFMaybe others tried their best, but haven't always been able to be so helpful to you, 
or responded quite in the ways that might have worked best for you?
 Why are empathic bids—small but consistent attempts to provide empathic 
understanding—, prioritized in this way? After all, these clients are not going to welcome 
or accept them initially. They are going to dismiss them, and sometimes the therapist 
as well. Therapists want to be mindful to not respond counter-transferentially—that is, 
to take personally the client’s dismissive rejection of the empathic bid or dismissal and 
respond defensively with criticism, judgement, withdrawal and so forth (as others in the 
client’s life have done). Instead, a new and different response with this client is to stay 
steady, and continue to look for points of entry when the therapist can venture another 
modest empathic bid, or tentatively venture a process comment and inquire about what 
others tend to do when the client responds in this dismissing way.
 Why is this intervention plan important or more effective? The primary treatment 
goal with Dismissive clients is to provide a CEE by repeatedly facilitating the Safe Haven 
experiences they missed. Typically, these clients had better developmental experiences with a 
Secure Base (exploring on their own with few supports and “miscuing” their caretakers about 
their seeming lack of need for help). That is, they defensively conveyed to their caretaker seeming lack of need for help). That is, they defensively conveyed to their caretaker seeming
they didn’t need help when they actually did, and pretended they could handle everything 
on their own. An example would be a student going off to college and needing help from a 
caretaker but, anticipating rejection or lack of assistance or a non-response, communicated 
that he or she can handle it alone. As children, Dismissive clients were too alone with their 
feelings when fear and pain was evoked (they lacked a Safe Haven). So, learning that their 
caretakers were consistently unresponsive to their emotional distress, —they managed on 
their own and conveyed that they didn’t need help (Hoffman, Cooper & Powell, 2013). 
 Providing such empathy is not just a nice thing. It goes right to the core of Dismissive 
clients’ central problem: the lack of attunement, validation, or empathic understanding that 
once was so profoundly lacking. But now, sensing when these clients are distressed or have 
a problem, therapists will actually “hear” it and consistently join these clients in a validating 
and supportive way—perhaps for the first time in their lives. This provides a CEE that, if 
ongoing, will expand Dismissive clients’ rigid IWMs and limited interpersonal capacities. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  193
Therapists will be most helpful when they can: provide clients a place where they 
can develop trust by finding empathy and understanding; explore what clients need and 
clarify how their attachment experiences inform their current problems; help clients 
identify when and how they are being dismissing toward themselves and others; and help 
clients change their dismissive behavior by rehearsing and practicing together new and 
better ways of responding. Dismissive clients are ready for termination when they are 
able to be more emotionally engaged and capable of expressing a need; first, with their 
therapists and then, with a few carefully selected others in their lives.
P/r.sc/e.sc/o.sc/c.sc/c.sc/u.sc/p.sc/i.sc/e.sc/d.sc A/t.sc/t.sc/a.sc/c.sc/h.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc S/t.sc/y.sc/l.sc/e.sc /i.sc/n.sc A/d.sc/u.sc/l.sc/t.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc  
(Q/u.sc/a.sc/d.sc/r.sc/a.sc/n.sc/t.sc /i.sc/i.sc/i.sc: L/o.sc/w.sc A/v.sc/o.sc/i.sc/d.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc/H/i.sc/g.sc/h.sc A/n.sc/x.sc/i.sc/e.sc/t.sc/y.sc)
As before, let’s begin by reading a clinical vignette that describes a prototypic client with 
a Preoccupied attachment style (also reprinted from Daly & Mallinckrodt, 2009).
J is seeking counseling for relationship concerns. J has always feared abandonment in rela-
tionships and usually experiences a lot of anxiety even at the slightest sign of rejection or 
loss. In fact, J has pretty much been in a relationship since adolescence and often feels inse-
cure and unsettled when not involved in a romantic relationship. J is beset by constant wor-cure and unsettled when not involved in a romantic relationship. J is beset by constant wor-cure and unsettled when not involved in a romantic relationship. J is beset by constant wor
ries of being alone. J constantly has the feeling of not getting enough from partners and tries 
to get closer and closer until the point of being completely merged with the other person. J 
becomes angry and frustrated when partners do not show enough interest, are unavailable, 
or disregard J’s emotional needs. J resents it when partners desire time apart. J invests ev-
erything in relationships and just wishes partners would provide the same commitment and 
reassurance that J needs and is willing to give. However, J admits that the continuous desire 
to be close and connected in relationships often scares and drives others away.
The defining feature for a Preoccupied client is a hyperactivating style with an 
exaggeration of emotional needs. These highly anxious clients often are suffering 
significantly in their daily lives. They are highly insecure about the availability or 
responsiveness (i.e., the Safe Haven) of their relational ties. In treatment, they frequently 
will be worrying about being left or unwanted, and anxiously pursue closeness with 
others in order to evoke as much attention, responsiveness, and reassurance as possible. 
Therapists can readily observe that Preoccupied clients will: magnify expressions of 
distress (often creating drama in their lives for the purpose of eliciting reassurance or 
as a strategy to reestablish closeness with their partner); be vigilant and over-reactive to 
potential signs that the therapist—like their romantic partners and significant others—
is about to leave them or become unavailable; and can be clinging or demanding of 
further time and attention from the therapist and others (Brennan, Clark & Shaver, 1998; 
Mikulincer & Shaver, 2007). 
Adult clients who are preoccupied tend to be entangled in angry, idealizing, or 
worrisome preoccupations about others in current and past relationships. Also many are 
characterized by a rambling style of speech that goes on and on and are seemingly unable to 
finish a sentence or complete a thought (Dozier, Stovall-McClough, & Albus, 2008). They 
are often preoccupiedwith whether their significant others will be reliably available and will 
not leave them or otherwise disappoint or let them down. Typical statements can include: 
P
REOCCUPIED
 C
LIENT
:
 Why won’t he text me back? I haven’t heard from him since lunch!
OR
P
REOCCUPIED
 C
LIENT
:
 I just can’t stop thinking that she might be cheating on me!
These clients’ anxious preoccupation with issues related to the dependability or 
availability of their significant others is so all-encompassing that they don’t seem to have 
room in their minds for their own mind—room in their minds for their own mind—room in their minds for their own mind their own thoughts, goals, and interests (Wallin, 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

194  CHAPTER 6
2007). Worries and concerns about what is going on with the other person and what he or 
she may be thinking or feeling about them dominates these clients’ subjective experience, 
often leaving them feeling overwhelmed.
In addition, Preoccupied individuals lack self-confidence and doubt their own 
abilities. They perceive themselves as weak and believe neither in their own capacities 
to cope nor in others’ ability to help in a trustworthy and reliable way (Mikulincer 
et al., 2003). They also see themselves as vulnerable and unlovable. This neediness in 
Preoccupied clients comes from having caretakers who were often self-absorbed or 
preoccupied themselves. As a result of their own self-preoccupation, these caregivers 
could not keep their child’s “mind in mind.” They responded to their child unpredictably 
or inconsistently, when it crossed their mind, rather than when their child was trying 
to communicate distress. There is a confusing ambivalence here which serves to keep 
these clients embroiled or enmeshed with their caregiver. Contrary to the way that the 
Dismissive client had consistent unavailability—at times the caregiver of the Preoccupied 
client could be responsive and loving (Ainsworth et al., 1978). This caregiver’s self-
absorption and inconsistent, unpredictable responsiveness resulted in children exhibiting 
intense neediness and developing the coping strategy of maximizing their emotions in an 
attempt to get through to their caregiver (Main, 1995). 
The cardinal fear for Preoccupied clients is losing relationships, and these 
abandonment threats readily disrupt Preoccupied clients and consume their lives with 
drama-laden crises. They will often enter treatment in response to a recent breakup, the 
inability to end a relationship that is highly problematic, or the inability to get over a 
relationship that ended long ago. In fact, their relationships often end because of their 
extreme neediness, jealousy, and dependence on partners (Feeney & Noller, 1990). More 
than most, Preoccupied clients are often self-absorbed and vacillate between a self-
centered obliviousness toward others and, at other times , an intrusive and demanding 
over-involvement with others that elicits the withdrawal they fear. Many Preoccupied 
clients grew up enmeshed (and often parentified) with an unpredictable parent who was 
too often caught up in his or her own emotional upheavals to be a reliable Safe Haven and 
provide containment and affect regulation for the child (Fonagy & Target, 1997). And for 
some, when the caregiver did initially respond to the child, a confusing role reversal may 
have subtly transpired where the caregiver’s need for a confidant` or emotional support, 
and not the child’s need, was actually met.
If you are seeing a Preoccupied client, he or she will often be intense and engaging 
in the initial session with you. There will often be a high level of communication and 
emotional expression as part of a strong press to engage and “feel close” with the 
therapist. These clients readily feel overwhelmed and they can feel overwhelming to 
the therapist, just as they tend to overwhelm others in their lives. Although they will 
often engage in considerable self-disclosure, it may be almost too indiscriminant or too 
unfiltered for someone they have just met—they are “too friendly” (Chen & Mallinckrodt, 
2002). During treatment, they will often want to rely heavily on the therapist, just as they 
want to rely excessively on others. Similarly, these clients will often press the therapist for 
reassurances rather than joining with the therapist and going to work in earnest on their 
problems. Because of their insecurity about the therapist’s responsiveness as well, they 
will focus on the therapist (anxiously extending or entertaining to ensure the therapist 
remains interested and engaged with them) at the expense of their own exploratory work.
 In sum, these Preoccupied clients will have overly intense reactions to perceived 
threats, pervasive fears of abandonment, and paradoxically, even though they are often 
communicating a high degree of distress and need for reassurance, can simultaneously 
resist the help they are actively eliciting and cannot easily be contained or helped (e.g., 
Client: “Yes, but...”). Although this doesn’t make sense to our supervisees at first, 
researchers find that Preoccupied clients are harder to treat than Dismissive clients 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  195
(Fonagy et al., 2006; Levy, Ellison, Scott, & Bernecker, 2011; McBride et al, 2006). This 
client, who can seem so appealingly communicative, engaged, and responsive as treatment 
begins—especially to a Preoccupied therapist—can soon evoke counter-transferential 
feelings of frustration or incompetence in new therapists who, understandably, have high 
needs for their clients to find them helpful.
Thus, in Figure 6.1 on page 186, the Preoccupied client in Quadrant III is low 
on Avoidance and high on Anxiety (i.e., he or she does not avoid emotional needs or 
avoid seeking help from others, although he or she is overtly anxious and worried when 
approaching others with problems or concerns). As we have seen, these clients may engage 
in excessive or inappropriate self-disclosure, lean heavily on others, or share strong emotions 
with others to be their Safe Haven and Secure Base (Bartholomew & Horowitz, 1991; Chen 
& Mallinckrodt, 2002). This is the adult version of the Anxious/Ambivalent child. If you are 
working with a client who is Preoccupied, you are going to hear prototypic sentences like 
these:
 /uni25CFI can't get along without him, even though being with him isn't working.
 /uni25CFI’m often wondering whether she really cares about me or not.
 /uni25CFI often feel really dependent on him for emotional support.
 /uni25CFI find it hard to forgive her when she lets me down.
 /uni25CFI turn to him when I'm upset, but it doesn't really help me feel much better.
In response to prototypic statements like these, which Preoccupied clients often make, 
therapists may find the differentiating, boundary-setting reflection below to be helpful 
because it goes right to the core problem of not having room for a mind of one’s own:
THERAPIST:
 Shanika, it’s almost like all the people in your life sort of fill up or take over your 
thoughts so much that there isn’t room for your own mind. You know, like you’re so caught 
up in how other people are seeing you, what they might be thinking about you, or if your 
boyfriend is going to return your call soon enough, that there isn’t room in your head for your 
own thoughts. Why don’t we get those others out of your mind for a while and set them aside 
while you’re in here with me? Let’s draw an imaginary golden circle around you—a protective 
boundary that keeps out what others are doing or thinking about you, and let’s focus instead 
on what it is that you are thinking and feeling and wanting. How does that sound to you?
PREOCCUPIED CLIENT:
 (slow deep breath and relaxing sigh)
 Ahhh, I really like that. It makes 
me feel like I can let down and just breathe .
As within each of the attachment styles, there is a continuum of preoccupation for 
clients with this insecure attachment style. The neediness and dependency seen in more 
seriously Preoccupied clients makes it harder for them to use therapy productively 
(Dozier, et al., 2001; Levy et al., 2011). While it is hard for Dismissive clients to enter 
therapy, once they do and begin to develop a working alliance, they get to work—perhaps 
because therapy helps them connect to their missed emotional experiences. In doing so, 
they become more capable of connecting to others. In contrast, Preoccupied clients enter 
treatment more easily, but their ongoing cycles with patterns of abandonment fears and 
anxious pursuit leave them in frequent crises. Seemingly entrenched in their enmeshed 
relationships, they struggle to step back and reflect on their own feelings or behavior—
making it difficult to see and change what is not working for them. Thus, they tend 
to do less well in therapy than clients with a dismissive style because of the variable 
reinforcement schedule they grew up with, and their less reflective or perspective-taking 
capacity—both with themselves and with others. Preoccupied clients also have more 
symptoms and are more unresolved with regard to their attachment figures, with whom 
they have such mixed emotions (Agrawal, Gunderson, Holmes, & Lyons-Ruth, 2004; 
Daniel, 2006; Weston, Nakash, Thomas, & Bradley, 2006). Being highly ambivalent 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

196  CHAPTER 6
about a primary attachment figure- having occasional closeness which is also paired with 
more conflict, seems to leave clients more stuck and makes it harder for them to make 
progress in treatment (Benjamin, 2006).
Moving out further on a continuum of severity, individuals who are Preoccupied 
may have more trauma and abuse in their history and under distress may move toward 
the Fearful category. Also, they often are anxiously preoccupied with anger, especially 
with their partners for not being sufficiently available and responsive. However, this 
anger is simultaneously anxiety-arousing for them as it creates their basic fear: driving 
away the go-to person they feel so in need of. Thus, they often present with high rates 
of internalizing problems such as affective disorders (e.g., Dysthymia), internalizing 
forms of anxiety such as generalized anxiety and, most seriously, symptoms or features 
of Borderline Personality Disorder with confusion and fearfulness (Bernier et al., 2005; 
Fonagy et al., 1996; Larose & Bernier, 2001; Patrick, Hobson, Castle, Howard, & 
Maughan, 1994). When relationships end, individuals with a preoccupied style may 
threaten suicide—perhaps from depression or from dramatic attempts to re-engage a 
departing partner (Adams, Sheldon-Keller, & West, 1996). Some studies also suggest that 
the need for approval, their extensive focus on perfectionism, and difficulty regulating 
affect may lead Preoccupied clients to develop eating disorders (Tasca & Balfour, 2014). 
In contrast, Dismissive clients are found to exhibit more externalizing problems such as 
conduct disorders and substance abuse (Lasca, Mitjavila, Ochoa, & Balluerka, 2015). 
What sorts of therapists would work well with Preoccupied clients? These clients 
need therapists who can provide a Secure Base which will allow them to explore their 
relational patterns, develop more autonomy in relationships where they can have more 
“voice” or assertiveness, and actively support their differentiation and boundary-setting 
via instruction and role-playing with the therapist. They also benefit from therapists who 
can make process comments and talk about their relationship and interaction together. 
This is especially important as therapists need to be able to inquire about and approach 
clients’ negative feelings about the therapy they are receiving, respond to therapist-
client ruptures—such as “needing more” from the therapist—and be empathic and non-
defensive about their contributions to misunderstandings in their relationships with their 
clients. This is not easy, however, because Preoccupied clients are often pleasing and 
do not want to risk “offending” and losing the therapist by talking forthrightly about 
problems or dissatisfactions (Safran, Muran, & Eubanks-Carter, 2011). 
Researchers find better outcomes when Preoccupied and Dismissive clients work 
with Secure therapists because they are more flexible in responding to these differing 
interpersonal styles. Secure therapists are less likely to get countertransferentially caught 
up in either attachment style and over-react to feeling disengaged or enmeshed. Further, 
therapists who can assist both Preoccupied and Dismissive clients develop more reflective 
capacity will lead to more successful outcomes (Fonagy, Gergely, Jurist, & Target, 2002; 
Katznelson, 2014). Clients have more success in relationships when they (a) are able to 
consider their own thoughts, feelings, and reactions flexibly without just acting on them 
or becoming stuck in just one feeling state, and (b) become more interpersonally aware, 
empathic, or better able to envision others’ possible mental states in terms of intention 
(i.e., the ability to consider what the other person might be experiencing, needing, or 
wanting). To illustrate, effective therapists foster this reflective capacity and help clients 
adopt this perspective-taking by asking:
T
HERAPIST
:
 What do you think he was intending when he did that?
OR
T
HERAPIST
:
 Yes, that’s one good possibility for what was going on for her in that situation.  
Can you think of other possibilities that might explain this as well? 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  197
Initial research by Dozier and colleagues had suggested that non-complementary 
client-therapist attachment styles yielded better outcomes. That is, a Dismissive client 
was thought to do better with a Preoccupied therapist and, in parallel, a Preoccupied 
client was thought to do better with a Dismissive therapist (Dozier et al., 1994; Tyrrell, 
1999). The rationale was that therapists with a non-complementary style address 
and are responsive to what was missing in these clients’ histories (Bernier & Dozier, 
2002). The issue of having therapist and client have non-complementary attachment 
styles for Preoccupied clients suggested that these clients benefit from a therapist who 
will use a structured approach that does not further entrench them in their emotional 
preoccupations, while Dismissive clients may benefit from therapists who will challenge 
them to become more emotionally available and empathic (i.e., if Dismissive therapists 
can tolerate Preoccupied clients’ neediness and dependency, and Preoccupied therapists 
can manage to “hang on” with Dismissive clients who are hesitant to self-disclose or 
engage with the therapist).
 Recent research, however, does not support this. Instead, the idea of “optimal ther -
apist-client distance” is a better predictor of successful outcomes (Daly & Mallinckrodt, 
2009; Marmarosh, 2015). That is, Preoccupied clients need a therapist who is not threat-
ened by or over-reactive to their intense attachment anxiety. Being able to tolerate their 
need for a strong early connection helps them successfully enter treatment. Having met 
these clients on their terms, however, the primary treatment goal is to gradually challenge 
them toward increasing interpersonal distance and autonomy over the course of treatment. 
Similarly, therapists who can meet clients who are dismissive “where they are” and pace 
the therapeutic distance—beginning with greater distance, but looking for points of entry 
when they can make bids to move toward greater vulnerability and emotional engagement 
at a pace the client can manage—will do best (Mallinckrodt, Choi & Daly, 2015).
How do we know when it is time to consider termination with clients who have a 
preoccupied style? We know this when clients are less afraid of interpersonal conflict, 
when they can self-regulate their emotions, create less drama or crises when they have 
a need, can manage increased therapeutic distance where they are less dependent on the 
therapist—and subsequently with others—and act more independently rather than being 
anxiously preoccupied about the availability of others (Daly & Mallinckrodt, 2009). 
F/e.sc/a.sc/r.sc/f.sc/u.sc/l.sc A/t.sc/t.sc/a.sc/c.sc/h.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc S/t.sc/y.sc/l.sc/e.sc /i.sc/n.sc A/d.sc/u.sc/l.sc/t.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc  
(Q/u.sc/a.sc/d.sc/r.sc/a.sc/n.sc/t.sc /i.sc/v.sc: H/i.sc/g.sc/h.sc A/v.sc/o.sc/i.sc/d.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc/H/i.sc/g.sc/h.sc A/n.sc/x.sc/i.sc/e.sc/t.sc/y.sc /p.sc . /one.alt/eight.taboldstyle/six.taboldstyle)
Some Preoccupied and Dismissive clients may present with serious problems, but their 
deactivating and hyperactivating coping strategies are “good enough” defenses that allow 
many of them to function with only modest symptomatology. With the Fearful client, in Fearful client, in Fearful
contrast, we see more vacillating coping strategies that are less adaptive. These clients are 
over-represented among psychiatric clients (Dozier et al., 2008; Shevliv, Boyda, Elkit, & 
Murphy, 2014). As children, there was no patterned defense structure or stable coping 
strategy: the “Disorganized” child becomes the Fearful adult who now alternates between 
the two dismissive and preoccupied coping styles—which frustrates and confuses these 
clients and others in their lives. Therapists are going to see a wide range of symptoms 
and contradictory or back-and-forth/approach-avoid behavior in Fearful clients. Main 
& Hesse (1990) highlight the key dilemma: the caregivers of disorganized children are 
simultaneously viewed by their child as both a source of security or help at times, while 
also viewing them, realistically, as a threatening source of danger at other times. Disturb-
ingly, these Disorganized children describe their caregivers as Frightened (e.g., moving 
away from their young child and saying “D-don’t come to me”), Frightening or threaten-
ing (e.g., hovering over their child), Dissociative (e.g., talking to the child in a “haunt -
ing” voice), Sexual (e.g., overly intimate in their touching or caressing of their child), and 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

198  CHAPTER 6
simply responding to the child’s movements or behavior in disorganized or strange ways 
that are not understandable (Fonagy & Target, 1997; Main & Hesse, 1990, 1998).
 All of this results in the child being affectively labile, relationally unstable, lacking 
in empathy, and having a diffuse identity, characteristics often noted in clients with 
Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD) (Herman, Perry, & van der Kolk, 1989; VanDijke 
& Ford, 2015). Further, some researchers describe clients who were Disorganized in 
childhood, and now fearful as adults, as having multiple IWMs of Self: Self as frightening 
to Others, rescuer of Others, loved child, and rejected or hated child. They also may have 
multiple models of their highly contradictory caregivers: Caregivers as helpless victims, 
angry or exploitative perpetrators, and as competent or helpful. These markedly disparate 
relational experiences from the same caregiver make integration of a Self difficult and 
treatment challenging (Liotti, 2004). 
Sadly, with Fearful clients we are in the realm of maltreatment and abuse where two 
themes predominate. First, many Fearful clients suffered significant parental hostility and 
overt rejection (e.g., I wish you were never born. ..you are ruining my life…we just hate 
you). Second, some clients with a fearful attachment style have suffered sexual abuse and/
or witnessed or experienced physical abuse (Fonagy, Leigh, Steele, et al., 1996) but have 
not resolved or come to terms with their maltreatment or traumatic loss (again, this is the 
adult version of the Disorganized child, also referred to as “Category D”). These clients 
can be incoherent in their speech when recalling trauma or loss. They may also exhibit 
disorientation and intense fear when distressed, as a result of having experienced their 
caregivers, confusingly, as sometimes frightening and sometimes helpful or benevolent 
(their attachment figures often have their own unresolved trauma and are most likely 
to be frightening to the child while dissociated or under the influence of alcohol/drugs) 
(Fonagy, 2001; Solomon & George, 1999).
 Understandably, these clients often struggle with serious psychopathology, including 
intense anxiety, PTSD, acting out symptoms such as criminal behavior, substance abuse 
and addiction, or self-injurious behavior such as cutting. Some also will experience altered 
states such as dissociation or depersonalization as a result of trauma and abuse (Carlson, 
1998; Stovall-McClough & Cloitre, 2006). Therapists will observe that these significant 
symptoms are especially likely to occur under conditions of attachment stress (e.g., when 
a relationship is ending via an important person moving away, dying or abandoning). 
Frightening memories or feelings about their unresolved trauma or loss also occur when 
cued by the smell of alcohol on someone’s breath or the threat of invasive medical 
procedures. Because these painful events happened and the child received no help with 
the maltreatment(e.g., compassion, validation of their experience and useful explanations 
that helped them understand what occurred; coupled with realistic expectations for what 
is going to occur next; and overtly alleviating any self-blame for maltreatment or loss 
that occurred), these experiences remain unresolved and contribute to significant adult 
pathology such as frequent episodes of Major Depressive Disorder (Dozier et al., 2008). 
These findings suggest that fearfully attached clients may present with both externalizing 
symptoms (like criminal behavior) and internalizing diagnoses (like Major Depression 
and BPD) as well as with dissociative symptoms (Lyons-Ruth, et al., 1997, Ogawa, Sroufe 
Weinfield, et al., 1997; Sroufe, 2005).
Fearful clients are challenging in treatment because they often evoke strong 
countertransference reactions in therapists, and because therapists may need to manage 
acting-out behavior to keep these clients safe. They often need longer treatment for 
improvement because their experience has led them to feel others, including the therapist, 
may be rejecting, unavailable, or threatening (Reis & Grenyer, 2004). These clients 
certainly can be helped in treatment, but are not appropriate for new therapists.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  199
In treatment, clients with Fearful attachment styles avoid close involvement with 
an intense fear of rejection. They are low in self-disclosure, emotional engagement, and 
reliance on the therapist and others. Often, they have a stubborn, recalcitrant distrust
of others, and also view themselves as unlovable and unworthy of care. Although they 
are interested in approaching others and in having closeness, they behaviorally avoid 
relationships for fear of rejection (Bartholomew & Horowitz, 1991). Thus, they see 
both themselves and others negatively and, confusing to themselves and others, are 
simultaneously both high on avoidance of attachments while still wanting them but also 
highly anxious while approaching others. These clients cannot easily use the therapist 
as a Safe Haven (to bring their distress to) or as Secure Base (for working-through and 
exploring new ways of relating), and the reason they tend to move slower in treatment 
is because they cannot easily trust. Highly shame-prone, they possess a sense of personal 
unworthiness and interpersonal insecurity that leads them to mis-hear the therapist’s 
benevolent responses through this distorting lens of expecting to be rejected or exploited.
 Key to understanding Fearful clients is their shifting or alternating presentation from 
a Preoccupied to a Dismissive coping style. These clients can look similar to a Dismissive 
client at times and temporarily avoid relationships but, at other times, confusingly, may 
look preoccupied as they become immobilized by intense anxiety at the prospect of being 
rejected or exploited again upon approaching an attachment figure. Under stress, some 
Preoccupied clients with sexual abuse histories could develop more serious dissociative 
symptoms, and some Dismissive clients could seem depersonalized in their extreme 
disconnection from their own experience as they talk about a traumatic experience such 
as physical abuse. Although trauma, abuse, neglect, and unresolved loss may be found 
within any of the four attachment categories (including secure), it is central in the fearful 
attachment style. These clients need therapists who can manage and tolerate the shifting 
and contradictory presentations they exhibit.
Thus, in Figure 6.1, the Fearful client in Quadrant IV (page 186) is high on Avoidance 
and high on Anxiety (that is, these clients avoid their own emotional needs and they 
present with overt anxiety when they approach attachment figures). If you are working 
with Fearful clients, you are going to hear prototypic sentences that communicate their 
profound shame — the legacy of their rejection and abuse histories, and the maddening 
double binds they have been struggling to decipher, such as:
 /uni25CFThere's just something wrong with me.
 /uni25CFI’m losing it—m losing it—m losing it I can’t live without her, but I’m not sure I can live with her either.
 /uni25CFI don't matter— I just hate myself.
 /uni25CFThey wouldn't want someone like me, although I sometimes wish they would.
In treatment, therapists are going to observe Fearful clients enact their core 
conflict— a maddening double bind that leaves them stuck in a seemingly unresolvable 
approach-avoidance conflict. The Fearful client has often grown up with the childhood 
dilemma of sometimes being genuinely helped by the same person who, at other times, 
is frightening and rejects or betrays them (Main & Hesse, 1990, 1998). Fearful clients 
want to approach others at times but are quickly made anxious (or terrified) by the fear 
of further rejection or abuse, and this back-and-forth will play out with the therapist as it 
does with others in their lives. Thus, they cannot get close and they cannot get away, and 
so live their lives in a constant state of stress and physiological arousal (adrenal fatigue), 
leading them to suffer from all of the medical and psychological problems engendered 
by this “fear without resolution.” To capture their difficult lives most simply, the rigidly 
controlled Dismissive client holds fear of connection, the impulsive Preoccupied client 
holds fear of differentiation, and the Fearful client fears both.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

200  CHAPTER 6
How will we know when Fearful clients are ready to terminate therapy? They will have 
resolved their inability to manage trauma and loss. This often means letting the bad news 
of their developmental history be as painful and real as it was—and being able to tolerate 
the feelings (experience and express them) that once accompanied their maltreatment. 
They will have developed the reflective ability to view events and experiences from a 
variety of perspectives (i.e., not slot varied experiences into the same schema) and be able 
to regulate their affect rather than acting out on it, even under stress. Finally, they will be 
able to tolerate both connection and autonomy in a flexible way. Usually, this will occur 
first with their therapist, and then (with the therapist’s guidance) with selected individuals 
outside the therapy setting. In other words, they will have achieved “earned security.” 
This will best be accomplished through experiential relearning with therapists who can 
provide a relationship that serves as a reparative attachment. 
C/o.sc/n.sc/c.sc/l.sc/u.sc/d.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc T/h.sc/o.sc/u.sc/g.sc/h.sc/t.sc/s.sc /o.sc/n.sc A/d.sc/u.sc/l.sc/t.sc A/t.sc/t.sc/a.sc/c.sc/h.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc S/t.sc/y.sc/l.sc/e.sc/s.sc
Attachment styles teach therapists much about their clients but, like all classification 
systems, they also have real limits. Rather than thinking of your clients as pure types or 
attempting to fit them neatly into one category, it is best to appreciate the variability that 
stems from many factors: clients will have these attachment styles to different degrees—
they occur on a spectrum of severity; there are several different subtypes within each of 
the four primary attachment categories presented; many clients will share characteristics 
of more than one attachment style; and some children and adults simply do not fit any 
category (Cannot Classify). Thus, some clients will present Dismissive or Preoccupied 
features in different relationships and at different points in their lives. These presentations 
are also influenced by cultural features such as ethnicity, religious background, having 
multiple caregivers, and how autonomy is viewed and encouraged in different cultural 
contexts (Fiori et al., 2009; Keller, 2013; Wang & Mallinckrodt, 2006). When distressed, 
however, many individuals are going to present with one predominant style of attachment 
in their most important relationships.
Having a secure attachment style is a profound buffer or resiliency factor, but it does 
not mean that securely attached adults will not have symptoms or problems that result 
from challenging life circumstances. However, having secure attachments in childhood 
does mean that you are protected from real threats and buffered from real dangers in the 
world in a way that the three types of Insecure children are not. Children simply grow 
up safer when they have a responsive caregiver to go to when distressed. In contrast, 
children with Ambivalent/Anxious, Avoidant, and Disorganized attachment styles are 
less protected and more vulnerable to peer pressure and invitations from predators, and 
are more likely to miss danger signs in the environment that can lead them to walk too 
readily into threatening situations and relationships that hurt them. (Excellent reviews 
of the attachment literature can be found in Cassidy and Shaver, 2008; and Obegi and 
Berant, 2009.)
PARENTING STYLES
In addition to the attachment experiences already described, another dimension of parent-
child interaction that significantly influences children and the symptoms and problems 
adults later present in treatment are parenting styles (see Baumrind’s research: 1971, 
1991). In this section, we discuss the child-rearing practices children have experienced 
that shape their presentation when they enter therapy. Baumrind and others (for example, 
Bender et al., 2007; Berk, 2005; Slicker and Thornberry, 2002) have conducted extensive 
research programs on the impact of different parenting styles on children’s self-esteem, 
development of autonomy and initiative, social and communication skills, and so forth.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  201
To better understand the different styles of child-rearing that parents use, and how 
many adult clients’ problems originally developed, consider the dimensions of Control and 
Affection that are diagrammed in Figure 6.2. As reflected on the horizontal axis, parents 
can vary along a continuum from firm discipline (high control/structure) to permissive or 
lax discipline (low control/structure). The vertical axis represents how parents can vary 
on a continuum from much warmth, emotional responsiveness, and communication (high 
affection/support) to little approval, acceptance, or interest (low affection/support). Using 
the high and low points along these two dimensions, parents typically discipline their 
children using one of four approaches. The first three that we will discuss are problematic 
and the fourth is effective: Authoritarian (strict/cold), Permissive (indulgent), Disengaged 
(neglectful), or Authoritative (loving and firm).
/one.taboldstyle. A/u.sc/t.sc/h.sc/o.sc/r.sc/i.sc/t.sc/a.sc/r.sc/i.sc/a.sc/n.sc P/a.sc/r.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc
One of the most common but ineffective methods of discipline is the Authoritarian 
approach, which is controlling and often punitive (see Quadrant II: high control, low 
affection on page 188). These parents are low in warmth, communication, and emotional 
responsiveness but high in control and demands. They are strict disciplinarians who 
give children clear expectations about what behavior is acceptable and unacceptable. 
Parental rules and expectations are clear and the consequences for violating them are 
consistently enforced. Authoritarian parents are demanding and have high expectations 
High Parental Affection
High Parental Control
Quadrant IV
PERMISSIVE
(low control, high affection)
Parent: “Oh, come on,
sweetheart. Won’t you
please stop?”
Quadrant I
AUTHORITATIVE
(high control, high affection)
Parent: “I love you, and that’s
why you are going to do what
I ask.”
Quadrant III
DISENGAGED
(low control, low affection)
Parent: “Go away—just
leave me alone.”
Low Parental Affection
Quadrant II
AUTHORITARIAN
(high control, low affection)
Parent: “Don’t ask me ‘why.’
You’ll do what I say or else!”
Low Parental Control
FIGURE 6.2 FOUR STYLES OF PARENTING
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

202  CHAPTER 6
for their children to behave in a responsible and mature manner. However, they rarely 
engage in mutual, respectful communication that involves explanation for their rules —
their children are simply expected to obey and conform to parental dictates. Children are 
also expected to be competent and perform up to their abilities, and to be responsible and 
contributing family members.
 However, without the emotional support and affection so important to the develop-
ment of a sense of belonging and security, especially during moments of distress, children 
of authoritarian parents learn to hide any signs of vulnerability from their parents and, 
sadly, eventually from themselves as well. While many are able to attain success in school 
and later in their chosen careers, they tend to keep people at a distance and their own emo-
tions under tight control. Experiencing vulnerability of any kind may activate fear or a 
Disapproval/Rejection schema, something these clients have often struggled with through-
out their lives. They often internalize anger and have difficulty coping with frustration and 
may respond with angry outbursts. Because they do not have close, affectionate relation -
ships with their strict and rather cold caregivers, unless they have compensatory adult men-
tors, they will lack healthy role models with whom to identify. Given the extent to which 
their emotional needs were not of importance in their families of origin, they often become 
detached from relationships or appear pseudo-independent and some may end up with 
Avoidant attachment styles in childhood or dismissive styles as adults.
Authoritarian parents’ control is on a continuum from being simply strict and firm 
to using harsh, intimidating discipline. Thus, in addition to a lack of emotional support 
or warmth, these parents often instill a fear of rejection in their children by their methods 
of discipline. These children regularly hear their parents make statements such as, “Don’t 
ever ask me why you can’t go out. I am your father, and you’ll do what I say or else !” 
Children are not encouraged to suggest alternatives or to explain their side of the story. 
These parents are often committed to the parenting role, however, and usually provide 
an “instrumental” form of love in the sense that they responsibly feed and clothe their 
children, help them with their homework, and may play sports or games with them. 
Authoritarian parents mean business, and their children know this and behave in their 
parents’ presence. The threat of parental power and the fear of rejection keep children 
in line, especially while they are young. This strict, no-nonsense approach is better for 
children than having no discipline at all, but it has major drawbacks. These children 
are obedient and achieving, yet they are also anxious, depressed, and often insecure; 
they comply out of fear (Gerlsma et al., 1990; Kerig, Ludlow & Wenar, 2012; Sakado 
et al., 2000). Often, lack of parental nurturance results in children and adolescents who 
are uncooperative and immature compared to their peers who are raised by warm and 
protective families. Similarly, other data supports the findings that children who grow 
up in over-controlling, non-nurturant families are more likely to be anxious, depressed, 
engage in self-defeating behaviors, have low self esteem and feel inadequate (Fryers et al., 
2012; Love & Thomas, 2014; Uji et al., 2014). Further, this subjugation can also lead to 
eating disorders, such as anorexia, as one of the few avenues for control (Enten & Golan, 
2009; Haycraft & Blissett, 2010). Although most children remain intimidated by their 
authoritarian parents and live anxiously with little positive self-regard, some become 
aggressive and defiant as they grow older and more verbal. Authoritarian children are 
socialized to endorse traditional gender roles where men are seen as dominant and stoic, 
and women as emotional, submissive and dependent (Peterson & Zurbriggen, 2010).
Another drawback to the authoritarian approach is that it limits the growth of 
children’s critical thinking abilities. When children are not given reasons to help them 
understand why parents have set certain rules and are not encouraged to suggest 
alternatives or compromises, they do not learn to exercise their language and reasoning 
skills and exhibit less cognitive development and achievement (Hamre & Watkins-Lewis, 
2012; Kathleen et al., 2012; Sternberg et al., 1994).
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  203
In contrast, within healthy families, children learn to obey without sacrificing their 
own initiative and positive self-regard. Healthy children become self-controlled and self-
reliant without losing their sense of being prized by their parents. However, for children of 
authoritarian parents, the trade-off between acting on their own wishes and maintaining 
parental approval is too severe. Because authoritarian parents provide too little nurturance 
and affection, too much of their children’s initiative and positive self-regard is lost in order 
to try to win parental approval. These anxious children are worried about doing everything 
right and never making a mistake, in order to ward off parental criticism and painful 
disapproval. By the time the children are of school age, these relational patterns with the 
authoritarian parent have been internalized as a cognitive schema: What was originally an 
interpersonal conflict becomes an internal conflict that shapes subsequent relationships 
with other adults, and with themselves, in problematic ways. More specifically, these well-
behaved, insecure children become harsh, critical, and demanding toward themselves, 
just as their parents have been with them. Many will seek therapy as adults, presenting 
with symptoms of guilt, depression, unassertiveness, anxiety, and low self-esteem. These 
personal and emotional problems will be present even though many of these clients are 
responsible, hardworking, and successful adults—they suffer internally.
Having come from families with this strict, cold environment, therapists’ treatment 
goals will be to:
1) Validate and affirm these clients’ experiences because they have been so deprived of 
empathy and understanding that they will be out of touch with their own feelings, 
including bodily experiences;
2) Provide choice and help them develop their own voice, which they missed 
developmentally;
3) Help them lead and initiate in the therapy hour and actively teach and support more 
assertive responses to the therapist and others because they have been subjugated 
and will have either aggressive or compliance propensities;
4) Be a Safe Haven that provides compassion and warmth for their distress which 
they have not experienced before, and will increase their capacity for empathy and 
success in relationships;
5) Help them to develop communication skills so they can become emotionally 
intimate with others (especially with their partners/spouses and own children) and 
become more assertive and exert more control over their lives so they don’t need to 
exert excessive self-control via disordered eating.
/two.taboldstyle. P/e.sc/r.sc/m.sc/i.sc/s.sc/s.sc/i.sc/v.sc/e.sc P/a.sc/r.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc
Although authoritarian parents recognize that children need to know the rules and that 
the consequences for violating them will be enforced, their discipline is rigid and their 
parenting lacks empathy. In contrast, other parents may err on the side of permissiveness 
and lax control. Although Permissive parents are often warm, nurturing, and 
communicative, they do not place appropriate expectations for mature or independent 
behavior on their children. Most importantly, they are also indulgent and set few rules, 
and when they do, they fail to follow through and enforce them consistently (see Quadrant 
IV: low control, high affection on page 197). Children in these families make their own 
decisions and receive too little age-appropriate guidance from their parents. 
Permissive parents’ inability to take charge and discipline effectively, which causes 
so many significant problems for children and later adults, may occur for many reasons. 
Some permissive parents may falsely believe that if they are firm they are acting harshly 
and, in their own minds, being just like their own (authoritarian) parents, who were 
too harsh or intimidating (e.g., Adult Male Client: “ My father was a tyrant, and I knew 
when I was 10 years old that I wasn’t going to be anything like him ”). Or, sadly, some 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

204  CHAPTER 6
insecure parents (often Preoccupied) fear their children will not love or be close to them 
if they say “no” and/or tolerate their child’s disapproval if they follow through. Still other 
parents (often Fearful), perhaps so invalidated and disempowered by their own parents 
in childhood, don’t really believe they have the right to be the one in charge or to instill 
their own values and standards and teach their children how they want them to behave 
or act in life.
 For these and other reasons, the balance of power has tipped in Permissive families, 
and children wield too much control in the parent-child relationship . Permissive parents 
often feel disempowered vis-à-vis their children and may be heard negotiating, bargaining, 
or even pleading with their children to behave (“ Oh, come on, sweetheart, won’t you 
please stop?”). Parent and child both begin to suffer when control shifts from the parent 
to the child in this way. These children don’t learn how to self-regulate as they have had 
no guidance in setting limits. Problems begin to develop early as these young children 
become bossy toward other children, angry with playmates when they can’t dominate, 
and are argumentative and disrespectful toward adults when they don’t get their way. 
And years later, too often, these same relational patterns will be tested in the therapeutic 
relationship, as these clients will try to evade limits and rules and try to manipulate and 
control the therapist— as they once learned to do with their caregivers.
Children of Permissive parents do not know what behavior is expected of them or 
what will happen if they violate parental norms. These children learn that they do not 
have to obey because their parents will not consistently enforce the rules. Without parental 
expectations that they perform to the best of their abilities, children do not develop the 
skills or internalize the discipline necessary to succeed on their own. While these children 
can at times exhibit self-confidence and initiative—like children raised by authoritative 
parents (Shaw et al., 2004)—they are routinely viewed as self-centered, dependent, and 
demanding (Baumrind, 1991; McCrae & Costa, 1988). In addition, they often become 
less engaged with school over time, and it is also common for these children to become 
involved in school misconduct (Steinberg et al., 1994). Lacking the guidance to develop 
appropriate self-regulation, they also may become involved in drug and alcohol use 
(Lamborn et al., 1991), and engage in disordered eating behaviors (Coccia et al., 2012; 
Haycraft & Blissett, 2010). Behavior problems may develop involving school authorities 
for truancy, the police for reckless driving, or drugs and alcohol. In addition to being 
demanding, selfish, and angry, these children are likely to fail with peers and friendships, 
and to report lower levels of well-being (Love & Thomas, 2014).
Children and adolescents with permissive parents are right in knowing that they 
are not safe and cannot be protected by a parent who cannot say “no” to them, cannot 
tolerate their disapproval, or gives them too much power and control over the parent-
child relationship. Underneath the demanding, angry and manipulative presentation is an 
anxious child who can benefit from clear boundaries, limits and predictability . Children 
do not respect parents (or, later, therapists) whom they can manipulate or who cannot say 
“no” and discipline effectively because they need the child’s approval.
Later, as adults when they enter treatment, they continue to be self-centered, 
demanding, and dependent in their relationships, and less capable of making commitments 
and following through responsibly on obligations. Often, these clients will be mandated to 
treatment by judges and courts and will be seen in alcohol and substance abuse treatment 
programs. Therapists working in Employee Assistance Programs will also work with 
these clients. Typically, they will be referred for treatment by a supervisor at work who is 
dissatisfied with their inability to be a good team player and get along with others in their 
work group. When seeking therapy as adults, they tend to avoid taking responsibility for 
themselves and try to blame others for their problems. They also have learned that they 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  205
can break the rules and escape the consequences of their own behavior by manipulating 
others. Of course, these same interpersonal themes that are causing problems with others 
will appear in the interpersonal process they begin to play out with the therapist, usually 
within the initial telephone contact or first session.
Finally, in one subtype of Permissive families, parents are acting more as friends 
than as parents to their children. In this subtype, clients may describe their family of 
origin as a group of siblings living under the same roof—signaling the absence of clear 
intergenerational boundaries. When parental guidance or help is required, such parents 
may appear inept or even incompetent. To remain attached to these parents, children 
in these families become parentified and take on an adult role. During emergencies, for 
example, these parents may fall apart, requiring the children to come to their assistance. 
Children in these families become responsible for the emotional (and sometimes physical) 
well-being of one or more parents. In families with more serious problems, children may 
be given the role of “rescuer” in a family where one parent is physically abusing the 
other parent. Children may receive love and attention in the form of gratitude; however, 
the love is conditioned on the child’s ability to aid the parent. It is a “binding” love that 
ultimately smothers children and prevents them from developing a secure attachment, a 
viable identity, and the ability to differentiate from the parent and successfully emancipate 
from the family and establish their own independent adult life (Teyber, 1983; 2001).
As adult clients, they may superficially present as self-confident but, having had no 
limits and guidance and being indulged, they will lack emotional regulation. As a result, 
they typically will be demanding and lack perspective for the impact of their behavior on 
others. Therapist can help these clients by:
1) Having clear limits and expectations (e.g., coming to sessions and paying fees on 
time; having limits on missed sessions, cancellations, and re-scheduling; taking 
responsibility for their behavior; attending sessions sober and not intoxicated) that 
are consistently enforced;
2) Assisting them to de-center and become more aware of the impact of their behavior 
(especially of their demandingness) on others (such as their spouse or their own 
children);
3) Without being judgmental or critical, consistently clarify that in real life, people are 
not going to respond to them and/or meet their needs automatically;
4) Teaching them about the importance of reciprocity in relationships, and looking for 
opportunities to address this when it is occurring in your current interaction with 
clients;
5) Encouraging them to develop self-control and emotional regulation by highlighting 
both the triggers and consequences of their behaviors;
6) Giving them the sense that as they learn self-control and emotional regulation, their 
problem behaviors such as temper outbursts, lack of follow-through, disordered 
eating, and alcohol and drug difficulties will diminish; and
7) Providing a relationship where clients gets the sense that the therapist is genuinely 
concerned about their well-being yet is not afraid of their disapproval, and clear 
therapeutic boundaries will be maintained but without being shaming or punitive. 
/three.taboldstyle. D/i.sc/s.sc/e.sc/n.sc/g.sc/a.sc/g.sc/e.sc/d.sc P/a.sc/r.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc
The third parenting style is Disengaged (also termed Neglectful) parenting. Especially 
problematic, these caregivers are disengaged from their children (Quadrant III: low 
control, low affection on page 193). Looking at Figure 6.2, one sees that these uninvolved 
parents are low on both axes — they are doing little for their children. Whether passively 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

206  CHAPTER 6
unresponsive or overtly rejecting, this neglectful parent says in word or deed, “Go away—
just leave me alone.” These parents have little investment in their role as caretaker and 
engage in inconsistent and erratic discipline. Within different subtypes of Disengaged 
families, children may be rejected, suffer neglect, be physically or emotionally abandoned, 
and some will end up in foster placements. For some, their very existence seems to 
irritate or burden their parents. In order to adapt to these painful situations, children 
of Disengaged or Neglectful parents often learn how to hide and not make waves, often 
limiting their ability to form a personal identity.
How does this disengaged/neglectful parenting style come about? Often caught up in 
their own drug or alcohol abuse, disengaged parents may be too self-absorbed to attend 
to their child’s needs and may expose their children to predatory individuals in their own 
homes. Another type of disengaged parent may be chronically depressed and unresponsive 
to children, who grow up unnoticed, and in later years describe themselves in treatment 
as having been “invisible.” Still other children may have grown up with a caregiver who 
had a Narcissistic, Borderline, or Paranoid Personality Disorder, and may be overtly 
rejected (e.g., “I wish you were never born !”). These children may also be pushed away 
by an angry parent, or blamed for all of their parents’ problems. Not surprisingly, these 
children are less mature, less competent in all spheres of life, and are more troubled when 
compared with children raised by authoritative parents (Lamborn, Mounts, Steinberg, & 
Dornbusch, 1991; Steinberg et al., 2006).
 The research further indicates that children from disengaged/neglectful families have 
more problems with substance abuse, report lower psychological well-being including 
higher rates of depression (Rothrauf, et al., 2009), and that these problems are evident 
across all ethnic groups, SES levels, both genders (Steinberg et al., 1994, 2001), and across 
cultures (Ozer et al., 2011). This lack of parental care can result in the child being uncoop-
erative, having problems with authority, and with developing personality disorders such as 
Antisocial Personality Disorder (Carter et al., 2001). Unsupervised and unwanted, this disaf-
fected child becomes at risk for many different problems, including antisocial behavior and 
the peer influences of drugs, delinquency, and early sexual contact. These clients are often 
in the child welfare system, frequently being seen in group treatment homes and juvenile 
probation programs. Because they have not had a caregiver who monitored them and tried 
to keep the child’s “mind” in mind—that is be aware of their needs, activities, and decisions, 
they are less socially competent, have more accidents, are unprotected from exploitative 
individuals in the environment, and too often suffer sexual molestation and physical abuse 
(Allen, Fonagy, & Bateman, 2008; Benbassat & Priel, 2012; Katznelson, 2014).
These at-risk youth bring strongly held schemas for rejection and distrust to the 
therapeutic relationship. In therapy, they will present as though they need no one because 
they expect the therapist to reject or be disinterested in or disdainful of them, and see 
them as unworthy of the therapist’s attention, as they were in their family of origin. The 
therapist, working with clients from this background, needs to:
1) Establish a working alliance based on showing genuine personal interest and giving 
these clients a sense that the therapist finds them worthy of attention and takes 
pleasure in being with them, in order to build trust;
2) Validate the reasons for their lack of trust and difficulty establishing a relationship 
with the therapist by “getting” their developmental history; 
3) Work with the clients’ understandable anger and the underlying shame of not being 
chosen or prized by their family of origin;
4) Help them establish an attachment to the therapist—primarily through empathic 
understanding—and then to seek selective others in their lives who may be able to 
assist them in learning prosocial values and making better life choices;
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  207
5) Work with them to understand both the triggers and the consequences of their 
problematic behaviors; and
6) Assist them in developing reflective functioning skills which include the capacity 
for self-awareness and self-understanding that leads to emotional regulation (the 
intrapersonal aspect), and to see events, situations, emotions, thoughts, and needs 
from others’ perspectives ( the interpersonal aspect of reflective functioning). 
/four.taboldstyle. A/u.sc/t.sc/h.sc/o.sc/r.sc/i.sc/t.sc/a.sc/t.sc/i.sc/v.sc/e.sc P/a.sc/r.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc
Finally, the Authoritative child-rearing style is most effective and produces well-
adjusted children (see Quadrant I: high control, high affection on page 186). The 
authoritative approach combines firm limits and reliably enforced rules with affection 
and communication. These parents are sensitive and responsive to their children’s needs. 
These positive caregiving experiences facilitate the development of children’s emotional, 
cognitive, and brain development, and contribute to their academic success and social 
competence (Morgan et al., 2012; Piko & Fitzpatrick, 2013; Roisman & Fraley, 2008; 
Spieker et al., 2011; Sroufe et al., 2005). These parents establish relationships with 
their children that involve clear communication and clear guidelines, and they provide 
explanations and reasons for parental rules and decisions. Parents have high expectations 
for responsible and mature behavior, and where possible, give the children the opportunity 
to be involved in decisions and have choices. This process helps children become confident 
independent decision makers themselves. In addition, because these parents set reasonable 
limits and are actively engaged with their children in warm and mutually respectful ways, 
this positive parenting is associated with secure attachment. Children who grow up in 
households such as this are more likely to adopt and internalize their parents’ morals and 
values, and behave in prosocial ways (Schroeder & Mowen, 2014).
Thus, while authoritative parents believe in discipline and responsible behavior, unlike 
the authoritarian parents, they combine this with physical affection, spoken approval, 
and explanations for their rules. For example, authoritative parents expect good behavior 
yet also tell their children stories, roll with them on the floor, hold them in their lap, 
praise them when they do well, and look in their eyes and say, “I love you .” Children 
more readily cooperate with requests from an affectionate parent than from one who is 
threatening or distant.
Authoritative parents tell their children what they would like them to do and explain 
why certain behavior is encouraged or discouraged. They also encourage children to 
offer alternatives or compromise solutions. In contrast, the authoritarian parent provides 
clearly defined and enforced limits but with no room for compromises, alternatives, or 
explanations. While permissive parents may offer reasons, explanations and compromises 
to lessen their children’s disapproval, they ultimately do not take a firm stance or 
convincingly enforce limits. 
Clearly, the authoritative parent exercises a wide range of parenting skills. Although 
many parents falsely believe that they have to be either strict or loving (i.e., authoritarian 
or permissive), authoritative parents are more effective because they have the flexibility 
to be both at the same time . The data is consistent: Authoritative parenting fosters self-
reliance, a sense of competence, achievement motivation, academic success, and the 
ability to socialize more effectively than non-authoritative parenting (Henderson et al., 
2006; McKinney & Renk, 2008; Rothcrauft, Cooney, & An, 2009; Schroeder & Mowen, 
2014; Steinberg, 2001). Children who grow up in authoritative homes report greater 
psychological well-being, exhibit greater success, and engage in less substance abuse than 
children from non-authoritative homes (Hoeve et al., 2009; Morgan et al., 2012; Pico & 
Fitzpatrick, 2013; Shah & Walter, 2000). 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

208  CHAPTER 6
As therapists listen to their clients’ narratives and learn more about their 
developmental histories, they will hear relational patterns and themes derived from 
authoritarian, permissive, and disengaged parenting styles. But what about children of 
authoritative parents — is this a “perfect” family without any problems? Parenting and 
development are always challenging, even in the best of circumstances, and conflict-
free families and individuals are a myth. On average, however, children of authoritative 
parents are better adjusted and, like Secure clients, they will be less likely to be seen in 
treatment for enduring problems. They will be more likely to seek help in crisis situations 
(such as a child’s major illness) or when negotiating developmental hurdles (such as 
seeking premarital counseling). And because they have learned that some others can 
respond responsibly to their emotional needs, they are able to seek help, enter treatment 
when necessary, and utilize it effectively.
In thinking about these four different styles of child-rearing, we also need to 
recognize the enormous complexity of raising children and all of the different factors 
that contribute to family interaction. For example, birth order, gender, and temperament 
greatly influence how parents respond to children. Family functioning is fundamentally 
shaped by cultural values and beliefs, as all child-rearing practices are embedded in a 
social context (Domenech-Rodriquez et al., 2009; Huntsinger & Jose, 2009). Because 
of these and other influences, the four parenting styles we have discussed become far 
more complicated in everyday life. For example, some children grow up with two parents 
who have conflicting styles (e.g., authoritarian father and permissive mother), and 
children may learn that they can escape consequences—to their detriment—by playing 
one parent off against another. Or, to illustrate this complexity further, in a different 
family children may do well with an authoritarian and a permissive parent—because in 
combination the children are receiving the warmth and communication they need from 
one parent, and clear limits with expectations for mature and responsible behavior from 
the other. Suppose, however, that these two parents divorce, and the authoritarian father 
does not sustain an active parenting role in the years following the divorce. Now, the 
children have lost their source of discipline and are raised primarily by their permissive 
mother. Typically they will stop functioning as well (unless this mother grows through 
the experience of divorce and becomes better able to tolerate her children’s disapproval 
and discipline them more consistently) and the children will become more demanding, 
angry, and less achievement-oriented (Teyber, 2001). As a rule, authoritative parenting 
(a combination of limits and warmth) is best for all children and disengaged parenting 
yields the worst outcomes.
LOVE WITHDRAWAL AND CONDITIONS OF WORTH
Many caregivers who are not authoritative often employ discipline techniques based on 
love withdrawal. Instead of communicating that they disapprove of the child’s behavior, 
these parents respond with anger or rejection and communicate disapproval of the 
child’s basic self. While disciplining, these parents withdraw their warmth and child’s basic self. While disciplining, these parents withdraw their warmth and child’s basic self emotional 
connection to the child, engendering in the process the anxiety of an attachment 
disruption (even though the parent and child are not physically separated). This parental 
communication is often nonverbal; the withdrawal of love from the child is expressed as 
much by tone of voice and inflection, gesture, and facial expression as in words. Parents 
who use psychological control in this harsh way have children who suffer negative 
consequences and even increase the likelihood of their children becoming delinquent 
(Hoeve et al., 2009). Central to his theory, Carl Rogers (1959, 1980) referred to this far-
reaching developmental issue as conditions of worth— what children learned they had 
to do to maintain their parents’ approval ( e.g., be perfect, achieve and be a star, remain 
dependent and child-like, take care of their parents’ emotional needs).
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  209
Parents respond with love withdrawal to punish the child and communicate their 
anger — which too often is accompanied in tone and expression by the more deeply 
wounding affect of contempt. They may say with disgust, for example, “Get out of here! 
I don’t even want to have to look at you. What’s wrong with you, anyway ?” Better-
functioning parents may respond in these hurtful ways occasionally, when they are tired 
or upset, and may later apologize or clarify that they have over-reacted (“ Daddy got too 
mad and shouldn’t have said that. I’m sorry”).
In contrast, for some parents, withdrawal of love and emotional disengagement 
occurs routinely, and the child’s emotional ties to the parents are disrupted regularly (van 
Zeijl et al., 2006). For example, the parent may say overtly, “I can’t stand to be around 
you. Get away from me. ” In contrast to these overtly rejecting messages, caregivers 
may emotionally withdraw in more covert ways. For example, martyrish parents may 
say nothing, sigh painfully, and turn their backs and walk away from the child, silently 
shaking their heads in disappointment and disgust. The child develops symptoms and 
defenses to cope with the painful separation anxieties and the shame-based sense of self 
that these attachment disruptions engender. For these children, self-schemas develop that 
leave them shame-prone throughout their lives as they come to believe, I’m a bad boy , 
There’s something wrong with me, I need too much, or Mom doesn’t want me. Everything 
changes—and gets better, when whatever just happened can be acknowledged or spoken 
about—rather than having to act as if nothing significant just occurred.
Whereas authoritarian and disengaged parents tend to use love withdrawal 
disciplinary techniques frequently and create insecure attachments and separation 
anxieties in their children, permissive parents, in contrast, often become emotionally 
entangled or overinvolved with their children. At times, they will smother them with 
unwanted love and attention, which is better described as aggrandizement, specialness, 
and indulgence. This strategy is to draw the child closer to the parent, but often with the 
purpose of making the parent, not the child, feel better. 
 Love withdrawal techniques and conditions of worth, like all of the parenting 
attributes we are presenting, occur on a continuum of severity. In some families, disruption 
of ties from love withdrawal may not be severe. Or, as noted earlier, they may occur 
infrequently — only when caregivers are stressed or fatigued. If love withdrawal does 
not occur routinely, and if other opportunities for emotional connection are available, 
ties can soon be restored. Although the anxiety may still be painful, the child can often 
fashion a reconnection through compliance and taking full responsibility for causing the 
disruption. For example, the child of a disengaged parent may adopt the interpersonal 
coping strategy of being quiet and “going away inside” so she needs nothing from her 
parent. Or, the child of an authoritarian parent may learn that by compulsively achieving 
or anxiously attempting to be perfect, this coping strategy will help preserve as much as 
possible of their insecure attachment. As new therapists gain more clinical experience 
working with diverse clients, they will begin to recognize the varied coping strategies their 
clients adopted as children to employ in their efforts to restore ruptures and maintain ties 
to attachment figures. Such interpersonal coping strategies (or rules of attachment) may 
sound like one of these statements: It’s my fault they’ve “had it” with me. I’ll be OK if I 
could just:
 /uni25CFPlay baseball better;
 /uni25CFBe nicer all the time;
 /uni25CFDo more for my mom; 
 /uni25CFAlways get As in every class; 
 /uni25CFBe thinner and look prettier;
 /uni25CFHelp my dad stop being so unhappy;
 /uni25CFBe quiet and not ask for anything.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

210  CHAPTER 6
Why is it helpful for therapists-in-training to learn about all of these developmental 
issues in order to clarify the client’s problem and develop a treatment focus? As we will 
see in Chapter 7, these attempts to win attention or affection and gain more security 
often become a pervasive coping style that clients continue to use with others throughout 
their lives. That is, these developmental coping strategies come at a significant personal 
price, and they become central to the symptoms and problems that clients subsequently 
present in treatment. Furthermore, because of the schemas that have developed from these 
childhood experiences, these clients also are going to believe that they similarly have to 
elicit, or be responsible for, the therapist’s interest in them—as they have with caregivers 
and others in their lives.
In families that are more dysfunctional, however, the attachment disruption will 
occur more often and more severely. In daily interactions around discipline and control, 
children in these families will be exposed regularly to experiences of interpersonal loss 
and emotional isolation, even though the parent and child remain in physical proximity .
As we move further along this continuum, ridicule and rejection occur more overtly. In 
disengaged families, gross neglect and even actual abandonment may ensue. In highly 
authoritarian families, these behaviors may erupt into physical abuse. In these painful 
situations, children experience their parents’ anger and contempt as assaults on their 
basic sense of self, leaving them ashamed of who they are and psychologically alone. It is 
important for new therapists to know that they are going to work with clients with these 
painful developmental experiences, and that they will need to help these adult clients 
who still hold the pathogenic belief that they are somehow to blame for their parents’ 
neglect, rejection, physical domination, and contempt. In other words, as attachment-
seeking children, these clients assumed responsibility and blamed themselves for what 
their caregivers did, said, or thought (and now, as adult clients, they are still doing this 
internally as well) and make self-blaming statements such as: 
 /uni25CFIf I hadn't fought with my brother so much, my dad would have stayed with my 
mom. It's my fault she cries all the time now.
 /uni25CFIf I had done all of my chores, like Mom asked me, she wouldn't have hit me so 
hard. I was bad.
 /uni25CFIf I hadn't dressed like that, he wouldn't have touched me down there. I feel dirty.
In conjunction, when caregivers act irresponsibly in these ways, routinely they overtly 
blame the child for their own inappropriate behavior. Compounding this, unfortunately, 
the attachment researchers suggest that this sense of shame and feeling blame-worthy 
are adaptive if these children are to experience some sense of psychological control in 
their lives (Janoff-Bulman, 1979). Clients hold on to such false beliefs tenaciously because 
the unwanted alternative would be to view their caretakers more realistically as rejecting 
and punitive, which would leave the child feeling even more unattached, unprotected and 
alone. In sum, when the child experiences significant love withdrawal as a disciplinary 
technique and conditions of worth, it is the genesis of a shame-based and blame-worthy 
sense of self, with presenting symptoms of anxiety and depression.
Mystification Amplifies Problems. Love withdrawal as a method of discipline 
and conditions of worth occur in many ways and in different types of families. In these 
moments of parental love withdrawal, we see that the child’s emotional connectedness 
to the parent is temporarily broken, and the child’s attachment ties are situationally 
disrupted—engendering separation anxieties (and often shame) until the child can find a 
coping strategy, such as compliance, to restore the tie.Of course, all children’s ties to their 
parents can be threatened at times. However, significant problems occur when disruption 
of ties is more severe and so frequent as to characterize the relationship.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  211
Let’s add another dimension here and take this an important step further. The child’s 
long-term problems are greatly amplified when these rupturing interactions are disavowed 
by the parent. That is,  the parents act as if nothing significant happened — even when 
intense temper outbursts, hitting walls, or domestic violence just occurred . Rather than 
acknowledging the behavioral reality, that something frightening just occurred, the parent 
avoids saying, “I’m in a really bad mood today, and I got way too upset just now; that 
was my fault, not yours.” The result leaves the child mystified: confused, disempowered, 
and—left more vulnerable to anxiety, depression, and identity diffusion by having his or 
her own experience and perceptions invalidated so profoundly (Laing & Esterson, 1970; invalidated so profoundly (Laing & Esterson, 1970; invalidated
Schatzman, 1974). In this way, therapists often will find that clients who grew up with 
these more serious problems lived with a covert or unspoken family rule that hurtful 
interactions like these could not be talked about —interactions like these could not be talked about —interactions like these could not be talked about named or made overt —named or made overt —named or made overt as if the child 
could not say or even know what just transpired. Just as therapists and clients need to do 
in the therapeutic relationship, parents and children need to be able to acknowledge, sort 
through, and restore ruptures in their relationships.
 Unfortunately, new therapists are going to find that many of their clients were 
unable to do this in their families. This is one reason why working to restore ruptures 
in the therapeutic relationship, and validating the client’s experience, can provide such a 
profound CEE for clients with these undoing developmental experiences. Developmentally, 
even when there was a highly significant interpersonal problem, there was no way to 
reconnect. For some others—usually children who grow to become Fearful clients—there 
could not even be overt acknowledgement of what was painfully occurring.
Finally, a constellation of significant emotional reactions occurs when parents cut off 
their emotional connection to children in anger or disgust (Johnson, 2008). As we are see-
ing, even though the caregiver is physically present, the child is psychologically alone and 
suffers painful separation anxieties. This withdrawal also stifles the child’s sense of self-
efficacy and gives rise to feelings of helplessness and hopelessness because the child in this 
predicament cannot really win or earn the parent’s love and remains helpless to reconnect 
until the parent initiates “normalcy.” The child is angry at being abandoned and wants 
to protest, of course, but this reaction would only elicit further domination or intimida -
tion from the authoritarian parent or ostracization and further isolation in other families. 
Through power assertion, the authoritarian parent usually does not allow the child to 
disagree, let alone find appropriate means of expressing anger. The child may be told, for 
example, “I’m your father. You are never angry at me. Do you understand that? Look 
at me and say, ‘Yes, sir.’” Thus, the child cannot protest behaviorally, or even experience 
anger internally, because such reactions will further threaten already tenuous ties to the 
parent. As a result, this child often becomes intra-punitive by turning the anger inward—
and then frequently struggles with a low frustration tolerance and difficulty controlling 
anger outbursts. This tendency toward punitive self-blame is exacerbated as children 
commonly adopt the same critical or contemptuous attitude toward themselves that the 
parent originally held toward them—which often becomes a primary treatment focus.
Just as this type of parent loses touch with the child’s feelings or experience in these 
angry moments, the child, in turn, loses the clarity and authenticity of his or her own 
internal experience. Such children also lose touch with important aspects of themselves 
and become “incongruent” in Roger’s term. When authoritarian parents are rigidly 
demanding of conformity and obedience, permissive parents over-react to success or 
problems, and disengaged parents are so invalidating or non-empathic to their children’s 
feelings and needs, children soon lose touch with what they feel and believe internally. 
Years later, as they present in adult treatment, some may not have much clarity about 
simple aspects of their subjective experience, such as what they like and dislike, and 
may even be uncertain about what does or does not feel good to them. Commonly, their 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

212  CHAPTER 6
own subjective experience can be so completely over-ridden that they have no basis 
for developing their own belief systems and clarifying their own spiritual, political, or 
sexual values, or formulating occupational/career interests in late adolescence and young 
adulthood. In other words, they haven’t been allowed to develop an identity or, more 
basically, a Self(i.e., have their own mind or voice). New therapists will find themselves 
working with many clients with these identity problems that stem from varying degrees 
of these developmental experiences. 
 Taking this one generation further, even now as adults, the clients who grew up with 
caregivers who used severe love withdrawal and conditions of worth may continue to be 
subjected to the same ongoing threats and controls they experienced as children. Even 
in their current adult lives, if they do not comply with what parenting figures are now 
demanding, they will (seemingly) destroy the relationship. Thus, therapists will hear these 
clients present with crises such as these: 
 /uni25CFIf you marry him, we won't come to the wedding or visit you anymore.
 /uni25CFIf you get a divorce, we are going to disown you and take you out of the will.
 /uni25CFIf you do that, no one in this family will ever speak to you again.
The theme here is that caregivers who use severe love withdrawal techniques to 
control their children are not just setting limits on unacceptable behavior, as authoritative 
parents do; they are instead threatening to cut off fundamental relational ties . As 
attachment-seeking children try to cope with the intense anxiety this arouses, compliance 
becomes a generalized trait, pervasive personality constriction and inhibition occur, and 
obsessive/compulsive symptoms and other control issues, such as eating disorders and 
alcohol/drug abuse, often develop.
With these clients, the therapist’s initial treatment goals are:
1. to validate their subjective experience, which has been so pervasively invalidated;
2. to encourage their initiative, which has been undermined—for example, by following 
their lead in treatment and supporting their own initiative with others; and
3. to provide a treatment focus that helps them clarify their own preferences, pursue 
their own interests, and act on their own goals whenever possible.
GUIDELINES FOR RESPONDING TO CLIENTS WITH A 
DIVERSITY OF PARENTING AND ATTACHMENT STYLES
The meaning in concepts like Early Maladaptive Schemas or Internal Working Models is 
that roles, expectations, and relational patterns learned in repetitious, affect-laden familial 
interactions don’t just dissipate or go away when late adolescents and young adults move 
out on their own. Thus, new therapists will find themselves working with many clients who 
are still struggling with aspects of the problematic developmental experiences discussed here. 
For therapists who themselves enjoyed better developmental experiences with their own 
Authoritative or Secure caregivers, it may be hard to appreciate: the emotional severity and 
blunting rigidity of highly Authoritarian parenting; the anguish of rejection in Disengaged 
families; the aloneness, marginalization, and crippling anxiety in severe love withdrawal; 
the painful self-consciousness and identity confusion of growing up with caregivers who 
fostered a Preoccupied attachment style; or the lack of a coherent sense of Self and the 
propensity to feel immobilizing terror and dread that has been engendered in Fearful clients.
 Early in their training, these more fortunate therapists may wonder how the osten -
sibly normal and, in many other aspects of their functioning, genuinely decent parents 
of these clients can be so rejecting or obliviously self-centered on occasion, and can 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  213
have caused such profound insecurities or even self-hatred in their clients. Other stu -
dent therapists may have difficulty engaging and being fully present with these clients 
because they evoke the therapists’ painful feelings and unwanted awareness of their own 
developmental experiences and how they were raised. Clearly, these issues can be chal -
lenging to approach and enter because they routinely evoke such strong countertransfer -
ence reactions in many new and experienced therapists . Thus, therapists-in-training need 
sustained empathy and overtly expressed support from their own classmates, practicum 
instructors, and clinical supervisors to help them respond effectively to their clients, 
understand themselves better, and find more self-compassion (Angus & Kagan, 2007; 
Teyber & Teyber, 2014). 
From this starting point of an empathic stance toward the new therapists’ changing 
worldview, increasing awareness of the pervasiveness of these problematic developmental 
issues in the human experience, and the countertransference reactions they normatively 
evoke in the first years of training, let’s turn to intervention. How can therapists explore 
and assess parenting styles and attachment histories with their clients, and find ways to 
utilize this developmental understanding to help with their clients’ current presenting 
problems? As a rule of thumb, it usually doesn’t work well for therapists to try and 
lead clients back to developmental/familial issues. It just doesn’t seem relevant to most 
clients or meaningfully linked to helping with their current problems. Instead, a far more 
productive approach is to watch for points of entry when the client has initiated something 
that directly connects to or seems somehow related to a childhood/familial experience . 
With this approach, the client has ownership of this topic and leads the therapist to it, 
and the therapist is merely joining and expressing interest by: reflecting the key word 
or phrase the client just used; offering an open-ended bid to explore this further; and 
becoming a collaborator who facilitates the client’s own exploration and agenda. In most 
cases, this interpersonal process is best. It will routinely lead to meaningful issues that the 
therapist and client can productively use to make sense of and better understand current 
problems.
In the three illustrations that follow, the therapist has just heard and reflected a point 
of entry, and uses this to ask more directly about the client’s developmental experience 
while remaining responsive to whether or not the client is receptive to these invitations. 
For example:
T
HERAPIST
:
 I see, so that’s how you’ve been disciplining your child. {
Responds to point of entry
} 
I’m wondering how your parents usually responded to you when they were upset with or  
disciplining you? 
C
LIENT
:
 I’m not sure what you mean.
T
HERAPIST
:
 What did each parent tend to say and do, and how did that usually leave you feeling?
OR
T
HERAPIST
:
 Both dating partners you just told me about minimized your feelings. {
Responds to 
point of entry
}That makes me wonder, how did you expect your parents to respond to you 
when you were distressed or needed help? Would you seek help from your parents and talk to 
them when you had a problem? 
C
LIENT
:
 No, not really.
T
HERAPIST
:
 Help me understand your reluctance to go to them. What were they likely to say or 
do that you didn’t want to occur again?
OR
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

214  CHAPTER 6
T
HERAPIST
:
 I’m so happy for you. This promotion at work is a really meaningful success— 
something that you ought to fee really happy and proud. {
Responds to point of entry
}  
Did you share this with your mother or father and if so, how did each respond?
C
LIENT
:
 Uh, I don’t think so.
T
HERAPIST
:
 Uh huh, let’s try a thought exercise together. Will you close your eyes for a moment 
and visualize the biggest success experience of your childhood. Now imagine sharing this 
success with them, and describe the look each of them would have on their faces, and what 
they might say to you?
Especially in response to point of entry bids, but also in response to more direct 
queries at well-timed moments, many clients will relay narratives of troubling parent-
child interactions that include themes of anxious love withdrawal, painful isolation, 
invalidation, fear, and shame. To emphasize, therapists can anticipate that often their 
clients will be able to remember and talk about these difficult or even disturbing 
interactions, yet the painful feelings that accompany them are unavailable. In particular, 
therapists will hear that many clients learned not to ask for or expect help and, after 
a while, didn’t even think of seeking assistance with substantive problems from their 
caregivers as an option or possibility. To return to the heart of the attachment story: They 
were not secure in the expectation that their caregiver would be their ally when they were 
distressed and try to help them with their problem , even if that meant only to hear their 
concern and be with them in it. 
A/d.sc/d.sc/i.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc/a.sc/l.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/n.sc/i.sc/c.sc/a.sc/l.sc G/u.sc/i.sc/d.sc/e.sc/l.sc/i.sc/n.sc/e.sc/s.sc
Parenting is probably the most challenging task in life. The influential family therapist, 
Salvador Minuchin, says, forgivingly, that parenting has always been more or less 
impossible. Almost all parents are trying to do the best they can for their children. Even 
many of the highly ineffective parents we have been discussing, who do indeed engender 
significant, lifelong problems for their children, are not cruel or ill-intended people in 
most cases. In child-rearing, as in other aspects of personality, people are uneven in their 
development. Most of these parents do other things well for their children, live by certain 
moral standards or codes, believe they are trying to do what is best for their children 
much of the time, and usually are treating their children better than they themselves were 
treated. Although children certainly are hurt by such developmental experiences, almost 
universally they still love their parents and seek their approval.
Therapists will do well to appreciate adult clients’ willingness to give their 
caregivers another chance and their lifelong efforts to improve or repair these flawed 
but all-important relationships (Sampson, 2005). The therapists’ aim is to help clients 
realistically assess whether or not caregivers have changed over the years and to what 
extent they are capable of responding better now than before. Some caregivers have 
gotten better and can respond more constructively now than when clients were young, 
whereas others continue to respond in the same problematic ways. The therapist’s goal is 
to foster realistic expectations in their clients and help the current relationships between 
adult clients and their own aging caregivers become as good as they can be. In treatment, 
therapists encourage clients to express the full range of their positive and negative feelings 
toward their caregivers, and aim to be equally receptive to both. However, therapists can 
foreclose on this process by quickly echoing and remaining stuck on just the negative 
or positive aspects of the caregivers. This bias will rob their clients of the important 
experience of integrating and more realistically coming to terms with both the beneficial 
and the problematic aspects of their attachment figures and, in turn, reworking the IWMs 
that are shaping the relationships they have been choosing and co-creating. Over the long 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  215
term, clients who cannot resolve their ambivalence and integrate both the rewarding and 
the problematic aspects of their relationships with their caregivers will also have difficulty 
accepting the good and the imperfect parts of themselves— and of their own children.
As family theorists underscore, the therapist’s role is to understand, not judge or blame 
(Satir & Bitter, 2000), and to help clients formulate a new narrative for their lives that 
more realistically fits what they have experienced (White, 1997). Thus, on the one hand, 
the therapist’s role is not to foster splitting defenses by bashing parents who have been 
hurtful and making them bad, taking sides, or encouraging clients to reject attachment 
figures and break off contact. This problematic approach is often accompanied by a subtle 
inducement for clients to replace parental figures with idealizations of the therapist. Nor, 
on the other hand, is the therapist’s aim to deny or in any way to minimize the real impact 
of hurtful interactions that have occurred. This is most commonly acted out by pressure 
from the therapist (or the family of origin) to forgive. Although this may sound resolving 
or healing in the abstract, too often the subtext really means just deny and forget. This 
leaves the client vulnerable to ongoing mistreatment from the same caregiver in their 
current relationship, or giving in to family pressure to “stop making trouble” and failing 
to protect the client’s children now from the same people and problems that the client 
once suffered. Instead, the therapist’s treatment goals are to:
1. Help clients come to terms more realistically with the good news and the bad news 
in their family of origin, and formulate a more accurate or realistic narrative for 
their shaping life experiences;
2. Help clients change their own responses to problematic others in current relation-
ships; and
3. Actively coach and facilitate clients’ current attempts to establish new relationships with 
others that do not repeat the problematic relational patterns that have come before.
Therapists provide a far-reaching CEE for clients who grew up with insecure 
relational ties when they can sustain a working alliance and remain emotionally present 
and available throughout the course of treatment and, of course, especially in those 
moments when clients are distressed or reaching for greater independence. Doing so 
provides many of the clients discussed in this chapter with the Safe Haven and the Secure 
Base they missed developmentally. Such consistent emotional availability usually has 
more effect on client change than do more dramatic but isolated incidents of compelling 
insight, important self-disclosure, or other significant therapeutic interventions (one 
trial learning versus a dependable pattern) (Holtforth & Fluckiger, 2012). However, 
countertransference derived from the therapist’s own family of origin commonly makes it 
challenging for therapists to provide this consistent, corrective presence.
The clients whom we have been discussing share the experience that caregivers 
withdrew from them in one way or another, or were not emotionally available to 
them at important times of need. This developmental deficit — and the maladaptive 
relational patterns that result from the clients’ childhood attempts to cope with these 
circumstances — can readily yet subtly be reenacted in the therapeutic relationship. For 
example, some therapists may have trouble being emotionally responsive to clients’ pain 
and vulnerability. They may not be able to remain present with certain affects, such as the 
clients’ raw shame or intense sadness, and move readily to problem-solving, reassuring, 
or other distancing defenses. The clients’ healthy individuation may make other therapists 
uncomfortable because autonomy was not supported in their own development or 
because the clients’ success evokes the lack of fulfillment in their own work or marriage. 
As clients improve in treatment or progress toward termination, other therapists may 
feel loss or anxiety about losing the caretaking role they were scripted to assume in their 
family of origin.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

216  CHAPTER 6
 Most important, perhaps, as supervisors we watch many videotaped interactions 
where therapists disengage or give up on clients when they don’t change or somehow 
disappoint the therapist, or become frustrated by clients’ ambivalent, mixed signals 
to the therapist. This occurs, for example, with Preoccupied or Fearful clients who 
simultaneously resist the help they actively seek (e.g., Client: “Yes, but…). Therapists 
too often give up on this back-and-forth client—routinely saying that “the client wasn’t 
ready to change yet,” rather than making a process comment and talking with the client 
about their current interaction. Therapists may feel they are failing or being controlled 
when the client is saying, “Help me,” but not allowing anything the therapist does to 
help. Although from the vantage point of supervisors we often see these ambivalent 
clients subsequently trying to re-engage the therapist they have just succeeded in pushing 
away, rejected therapists often miss this approach side of their ambivalence and respond 
countertransferentially by becoming irritated or blaming of the client and eventually 
withdrawing— which oftentimes reenacts the client’s developmental experience.
When these common types of countertransference reactions occur, clients are again 
left alone and unconnected in their experience. Clients’ pathogenic beliefs or maladaptive 
schemas are confirmed rather than resolved by this problematic interpersonal process. 
When such reenactments occur without being addressed and sorted through, old schemas 
and problematic relational expectations are confirmed by the interaction that is being 
played out in the therapeutic relationship.
In addition to their own countertransference tendencies, certain features in the client 
also make it difficult for therapists to remain consistently available. For example, many 
clients will report that they like and trust the therapist but they may also believe that, 
“if the therapist really knew me,” the therapist would not respect or care about them. 
In line with their faulty schemas and problematic coping strategies, these clients believe 
they have deceived the therapist or manipulated the therapist’s positive feeling for them. 
This is why it is necessary for therapists to help clients adopt an internal focus, and to use 
process comments to draw out the full range of clients’ feelings toward the therapist —
including the clients’ perceptions of the therapist’s reactions to them. For example:
THERAPIST:
 What do you think I am feeling toward you as you tell me this?
Sadly, clients often hold the pathogenic belief that their despised, weak, or otherwise 
unacceptable emotions constitute their real or true self. This far-reaching problem is 
resolved when the therapist sees the vulnerable, dependent, demanding, shameful, or other 
parts of themselves, which clients believe are the damning proof or confirming evidence of 
their basic unacceptability, and still remains affirming and emotionally connected. Clients’ 
encounter with compassion and understanding, rather than the judgment, emotional 
withdrawal, and criticism, that they have learned to expect, is one of the most powerful 
relearning experiences therapists can provide. Thinking about conditions of worth, 
Carl Rogers (1951) emphasized long ago that clients do not change until they accept 
themselves, and that they begin to accept themselves when they feel such acceptance from 
the therapist . By providing a safe holding environment that contains these conflicted 
feelings, as clients are experiencing them, the therapist helps clients resolve them.
Finally, some clients are adept at  eliciting the same problematic responses from 
the therapist that they have received in the past . As we have seen, a basic tenet of 
the interpersonal process approach is that aspects of most clients’ problems will be 
temporarily reenacted with the therapist along the process dimension, and need to be 
identified, made overt, and reworked. It is easy to be empathic, warm, and genuine with 
clients who are usually cooperative, friendly, and respectful. However, it is far more 
challenging for therapists to remain committed to a working alliance with negative clients, 
whose interpersonal coping strategies (e.g., being provocative or dominating, critical 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  217
or controlling, passive or dependent, and so forth) may eventually alienate, intimidate, 
or frustrate the therapist (Najavitts & Strupp, 1994). With these negative clients, it is 
especially important for therapists to formulate working hypotheses about the clients’ 
maladaptive relational patterns (Levensen & Strupp, 2007). Therapists need to keep 
process notes that include hypotheses about what these clients have tended to elicit from 
others in previous relationships, and what they are likely to evoke or “pull” from the 
therapist. When therapists prepare such case formulations, they increase their chances of 
being able to sustain an empathic stance, and are better able to “think before they act.” 
This allows the therapist to provide a CEE, rather than responding automatically to the 
client in the same types of ways that others typically do—which merely reenacts the same 
problematic scenario with which the client is so familiar (see Appendixes A and B). This is 
challenging for new therapists to see and do with their clients in the beginning, so we will 
explore it further in the next chapter. 
In sum, clients will present with a rich diversity of developmental and familial 
experiences, and some clients’ problems will be unrelated to the issues discussed 
here. However, insecure attachments, faulty child-rearing practices, love withdrawal 
disciplinary techniques, and conditions of worth will be heard pervasively throughout the 
narratives clients relay. They will shed light on current symptoms and problems, and help 
both therapists and clients make sense of what is going on in their lives. 
FAMILY INTERACTION PATTERNS
Linking family systems theory with attachment and parenting styles helps therapists 
discern and understand their clients’ central problems and better formulate a focus for 
treatment. S tructural family relations are the relatively enduring patterns of alliances, 
coalitions, and loyalties that exist in the family, and the clarity of intergenerational 
boundaries  between these sub-systems helps shape how families function (Cowan & 
Cowan, 2005). These relationships are the basis for family organization and define how 
the family operates as a social system (Minuchin & Nichols, 1998). Such family patterns 
are strongly influenced by cultural values and beliefs that, in turn, shape norms and 
define acceptable behavior in family functioning. Thus, structural family relations, and 
the cultural context within which they are embedded, influence how members interact, 
as well as family communication patterns and the roles that family members adopt 
(Goldenberg & Goldenberg 2013; Teyber, 2001). 
In families that function well, clearly defined intergenerational boundaries separate 
adult business from child business: that is, roles and responsibilities are clearly 
differentiated between adults and children . This means that adult caregivers provide an 
organized household with predictable daily routines for children, make decisions and 
plans for the family, and set limits and enforce rules (Minuchin, 1984). Although parents 
have legitimate needs for companionship and support, these emotional needs are met 
primarily in same-generational peer relationships rather than through the children. In 
contrast, children will have more problems when adult and child roles are not clearly 
distinguished, when intergenerational boundaries are blurred, and when too many adult 
needs are met through the children (Beavers & Hampson, 1993). With this general 
framework in mind, let’s explore two common problems that new therapists are going to 
see every day in their caseloads: emancipation and parentification (Perrin, Ehrenberg & 
Hunter, 2013). 
Emancipation Conflicts. Many children caught in cross-generational alliances with 
blurred intergenerational boundaries have problems with differentiation—especially 
in late adolescence and young adulthood as they try to emancipate from their family 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

218  CHAPTER 6
of origin, explore career options, and begin making new relational commitments. If 
caregivers have a primary marital/partner coalition, or a single parent has supportive peer 
relationships, children usually have more support to grow up and successfully launch their 
own independent lives. With clear intergenerational boundaries, young adults usually find 
it easier to leave home successfully while still preserving a lifetime of close ties and shared 
involvement with their families of origin. They do not have to disengage emotionally or 
physically break off contact with the family in order to have their own independent life, 
or engage in more risky or extreme behavior such as drunk driving or teen pregnancy to 
separate and “get away.” This is possible because their caregivers do not need them to 
remain dependent or centered on them in order to fulfill their own lives or manage their 
own problems.
In contrast, if there is a primary cross-generational alliance between caregiver and 
child (e.g., mother and oldest daughter), these offspring may feel separation guilt over 
leaving their parent alone or forsaking their parent to the unfulfilling relationship with 
the other spouse/partner (Weiss, 1993). These offspring who lack a Secure Base find more 
sabotage than support for exploration and autonomy, and they are especially likely to 
feel dissatisfied with their achievements, to be unable to establish fulfilling relationships 
or make commitments to others, or to be chronically depressed. Guilt over emancipation 
frequently underlies academic failure in college, as well as many other symptoms and 
problems that late-adolescent and young adult clients present in college counseling 
centers (Teyber, 2001). Thus, when cross-generational alliances become primary, they 
often impose binding loyalty ties that make young adults feel guilty about leaving home, 
pursuing their own career interests, establishing satisfying love relationships, and in 
general, succeeding. Although emancipation conflicts are expressed differently in varying 
cultures, symptomatic guilt and depression often ensue when offspring are not permitted 
culturally sanctioned avenues for individuation and couple formation . This issue is 
especially challenging for many first- and second-generation immigrants whose new 
family and cultural values may differ significantly from those of their adopted country 
(Varghese & Jenkins, 2009).
Many clients, like Anna in Chapter 4, struggle with this binding separation guilt 
that stems from a lack of clear intergenerational boundaries. These clients, who often 
grew up with Preoccupied caregivers, or who are Preoccupied or Fearful themselves, 
may feel guilty about being happy, succeeding in life, or even getting better in therapy! 
It is an important part of providing a Secure Base with all clients, but with these clients 
in particular, it is essential that therapists unambiguously enjoy clients’ happiness and 
overtly express pleasure in their successes . Some trainees are unsure of how to respond 
or what their role is when clients begin the session by saying happily, “I feel really good 
today; I don’t have any problems to talk about right now .” Yes, when that happens, it 
may be a form of resistance, but for many clients struggling instead with separation guilt, 
they are apt to (inaccurately) assume, on the basis of their IWMs, that their happiness, 
success, or independence has somehow hurt the therapist or is unwanted. Other clients, 
who grew up with caregivers with Narcissistic or Borderline features, or in other ways 
were nonsupportive, competitive, or threatened by the client’s differentiation and success, 
may be deeply concerned that the therapist also covertly feels resentful or envious of 
the happiness or success they have just expressed. The therapist provides a CEE and 
disconfirms such clients’ guilt or faulty expectations — and expands the healthier and 
stronger ways in which they can be connected to others — by welcoming the client’s good 
feeling and enthusiastically responding. For example:
THERAPIST:
 That’s great! What’s the best thing going on for you this week?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  219
Without receiving such unambiguous affirmation of the successful aspects of their 
lives, these clients do not find a CEE in their real-life relationship with the therapist. 
Treatment will bog down and become repetitive as clients with these binding developmental 
experiences begin to retreat from their success. In line with their old expectations, they will 
keep sharing an inability to activate or initiate; feelings of discouragement, uncertainty, 
or inefficacy; and a lack of follow-through or inability to complete undertakings. Little or 
no progress in treatment will occur until this re-enactment is resolved.
As we will explore further in Chapter 10, these conflicts over emancipation and 
success often will be activated for clients who grew up with blurred intergenerational 
boundaries and binding cross-generational alliances during the Termination phase of 
treatment. In particular, clients who struggle with separation guilt may feel especially 
bad or worried about no longer needing the therapist and heading off successfully on 
their own. Therapists provide clear and reparative boundaries when they give these 
clients permission not to have to need them, offer support for leaving treatment when 
they are ready to go, and overtly encourage them to be able to enjoy and pursue their 
own successful lives . Although this would be obvious and unimportant to many clients, 
per client response specificity, these are profound and liberating words for clients with 
the developmental experiences we have described. Guilt over growing up and becoming 
stronger, succeeding in work and love, or even surpassing the parent or the therapist with 
more happiness or success is a common issue that many clients will covertly express in 
treatment, although few clients will be able to recognize it on their own. Fortunately, 
it is relatively easy to help many clients dispel these binding guilt-related beliefs by 
communicating repeatedly and consistently in words and behavior that the therapist 
enjoys their success, takes pleasure in their competence, and is in no way hurt or 
threatened by their stronger and more independent stance.
Finally, cultural factors play an especially important role in balancing the complex 
dialectic of emancipation and family loyalty. Family connectedness and enduring family 
ties may be of special concern to clients from strong relational cultures — for example, 
Asian or Latino. Entering the subjective worldview of these clients, therapists can learn to 
appreciate the subtle balance between being loyal to family and culture yet still possessing 
their own authentic self. To become familiar with the culturally sanctioned avenues for 
differentiation and emancipation that exist in every culture , therapists may find it helpful 
to consult with others who are knowledgeable about the client’s cultural context (Jung, 
1998). Similarly, it is important to ask clients how they self-identify, especially because 
variability exists within groups and in ways that individual members relate to their 
families and identify with their cultures (Cardemil & Battle, 2003). With collaborative 
exploration, therapists can help clients find role models within their own extended family, 
or culturally sanctioned ways to differentiate that are acceptable within their own cultural 
context (Pedersen, Crethar & Carlson, 2008). 
Parentification of children. When intergenerational boundaries are blurred and the 
primary coalition in the family is a cross-generational alliance between a caregiver and a 
child, the result is often the parentification of children (Pasternak & Schier, 2014; Perrin, 
Ehrenberg & Hunter, 2013). A role reversal occurs: Rather than adults responding to 
the child’s needs, the child takes on the role of meeting the caregiver’s emotional needs 
(Boszormenyi-Nagy, et al., 1991). That is, when a parent’s emotional needs are not met 
by his or her partner or other (same-generation) peer adults, the caregiver inappropriately 
turns to one or more of the children to meet his or her own adult needs for: affection and 
intimacy; approval and reassurance, or stability and control. Therapists are alerted to the 
likelihood of such parentification when they hear adult caregivers describe their children 
as their “best friend,” “lifeline,” or “confidant” (Teyber, 2001).
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

220  CHAPTER 6
Although this may seem benign on the surface, it is highly problematic for children 
when they become responsible for, or take care of, the emotional needs of their caregiver. 
The problem with this role reversal is that such children must give to their parents 
rather than receive, and their own age-appropriate attachment needs go unmet. Further, 
parentified children often continue playing out this familial role in adulthood, typically 
leading them to feel overly responsible for others, insecure about depending on others, and 
guilty about having any need of their own. As adults, parentified offspring may describe 
themselves as feeling empty or “having a hole inside of me” as a result of the deprivation 
of having given rather than received throughout their childhoods, and as feeling “burned 
out” as they continue in adulthood to excessively prioritize the needs of others over their 
own. Commonly, parentified children initially enjoy having such a special role with their 
caregiver but, as adults, they often come to resent having been deprived of their own 
childhoods. As adult clients presenting in treatment, they often describe being angry and/
or anxious in current relationships because they:
(1) Do not trust that others will be there for them in times of distress;
(2) Are anxiously preoccupied about losing relationships when they cannot meet the 
needs of their significant others; and
(3) Feel resentful about the unfairness of giving and not getting in important relationships. 
This topic is especially important because parentification is pervasive in the back -
ground of therapists as well as clients (DiCaccavo, 2006). Some clients seeking treat -
ment were parentified by Neglectful caregivers who asked them to fulfill adult caregiving 
responsibilities, such as assuming the primary role of feeding and caring for siblings. 
Perhaps more common and subtle, in contrast, Preoccupied caregivers often confused the 
parentified child by being warm and communicative, and seemingly responsive to their 
emotional needs. However, the tables often turned quickly, but subtly, and soon the par-
ent’s need, not the child’s, was being met in their dialogue or interaction. Because their 
basic relational orientation was to take care of others, children who were parentified 
often select careers in helping fields such as nursing, ministry, and counseling that extend 
this caretaking role and fit their childhood script and identity. Although kind and capa -
ble, they often feel guilty about saying “no,” setting limits, and responding to their own 
interests and needs. Because they do not draw boundaries well, they tend to become over-
identified with others’ problems and, over time, become especially prone to experiencing 
burnout in their work. Because they grew up having to take care of their parent, it is now 
threatening to relinquish this exaggerated sense of responsibility and need to be exces -
sively in charge or in control in their current lives. For example, it may be hard for them 
to let willing others share in meeting obligations, even though simultaneously they resent 
having to handle everything themselves. These control issues may also be evidenced in 
symptoms such as airplane phobias, for example, where these individuals must temporar-
ily relinquish control to the pilot, or to another driver. These clients also have problems 
in close personal relationships because it is too anxiety-arousing to relinquish the control 
necessary to be emotionally intimate with someone.
However, in some families—for economic, single-parent, medically challenged, or 
other valid and necessary reasons—one child may temporarily assume a parental role 
with younger siblings. This is not the same as parentification because it remains clear 
that the parent is in charge when the parent is home or present. This child’s role—to 
assist in the functioning of the home in the caregiver’s absence—is temporary or situ -
ational. Furthermore, the child is caring for siblings, not for the emotional needs of the 
parent. This responsible and helpful child, who still remains a child and is nurtured 
and given to without the role reversal that occurs for parentified children, often grows 
up to be an especially resilient and capable person with significant personal strengths. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  221
A cross-cultural example would be children who translate for their parents but don’t 
take over the parenting role.
Parentified clients will be highly sensitive and responsive to the therapist—as they 
once were to their caregiver. Especially for beginning therapists, it can feel great to work 
with these clients in the short run because they astutely discern what they need to say or 
do to help the new therapist feel competent or secure. For example, these clients may talk 
extensively about the positive changes occurring in their lives, and even exaggerate them, 
so that their student therapist’s supervisor, watching on videotape, will be approving of the 
therapist! However, if the therapist does not collude in reenacting this relational pattern, 
clients can begin to explore the far-reaching consequences of having been parentified and 
having missed or been deprived of their own childhoods. The opportunity to provide an 
experience of change occurs when the therapist begins to tentatively wonder aloud or 
make process comments that highlight when this relational pattern may be occurring in 
the therapist-client relationship as well. For example:
THERAPIST:
 I really appreciate the genuine concern you just expressed for me right there—I 
know it’s caring and genuine. But thinking about the caretaking patterns we have been talking 
about, and how much that role has been costing you in your life, it leaves me wondering what 
happens to your needs here if you get oriented to what I may be needing or wanting? What do 
you think—does my concern make any sense?
To further clarify parentification, let’s consider a case study.
Jasmine was a highly regarded psychiatric nurse. An utterly dependable and take-charge 
person, she could seemingly handle every situation that arose. In a hospital emergency 
setting where she had to deal with seriously disordered patients in crisis, her rapid and 
accurate assessments, good judgment, and compassion for patients had earned her the 
respect of the entire staff. Although considered a superstar at work, Jasmine sought therapy 
for her recurrent depression and “burnout.”
Jasmine was a bright and engaging client who was subtle yet adept at getting the 
therapist to lead, talk about herself, and become involved in collegial discussions about 
interesting clinical issues. However, the therapist had formulated working hypotheses about 
this potential reenactment and was usually effective in recognizing Jasmine’s strong “pulls” 
to repeat this pattern with her. Repeatedly, she looked for points of entry to focus Jasmine 
inward by saying, for example:
THERAPIST:
 Help me understand what was going on for you when...
OR
THERAPIST:
 What were you afraid was going to happen if you said no and... ?
In response to these repeated invitations to consider what she was thinking, feeling, or 
wanting, instead of living outside of her own skin and being preoccupied with what the 
therapist might be wanting, Jasmine began expressing that it was new for her to pay 
attention to herself and her inner experience in this way. And, although she enjoyed this 
very much, she also found that it made her feel “uncomfortable.” The therapist did not 
press for this internalizing focus when Jasmine did not want it, but instead asked Jasmine 
on occasion how it was for her to look within at her own experience. It soon became 
clear to both of them that guilt over being “selfish” and shame over being “the center of 
attention” were evoked by this internal focus. Thanks to the therapist’s affirming responses 
to these reactions (e.g., “Oh no, I don’t think you’re being selfish here at all...”), both soon 
agreed that important new material was cohering.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

222  CHAPTER 6
Four weeks into treatment, Jasmine disclosed something that she had never told anyone: 
Her alcoholic stepfather had sexually assaulted her in her early adolescence. Jasmine suc-
cessfully fought him off, although she was scratched, had her blouse torn open, and suffered 
a bloody nose when she literally pushed him away from her. Jasmine recounted her ordeal 
in detail, but with very little emotion, and the therapist responded effectively in caring and 
validating ways. The therapist, herself a mother of two daughters, soon asked the question 
that was burning for her:
THERAPIST:
 You have kept this painful secret for almost 20 years. I’m glad that you can share 
it with me now, but it’s heartbreaking that you’ve had to be alone with this for so long. What 
kept you from telling your mother and asking her for help?
CLIENT:
 I didn’t want to put more on her—her life was kind of overwhelming already. She 
couldn’t have done much anyway, and I didn’t want her to worry.
Jasmine’s poignant response illustrates the plight of the seriously parentified child. As in 
most aspects of her relationship with her mother, Jasmine’s own profound needs for protec-
tion and comfort were set aside in order to meet her parent’s need. Here again, we are see-
ing the heart of the attachment story. Jasmine, like all Insecurely attached children, cannot 
even imagine the possibility of taking her problem to her attachment figure for help, not 
even problems as significant as this.
Therapists will see the problematic consequences of these structural family 
relationships with blurred intergenerational boundaries and cross-generational alliances 
operating with many of their clients. This is one reason why therapists need to honor 
treatment parameters and provide these clients with a CEE by maintaining clear 
therapeutic boundaries. It is especially valuable for new therapists to have their supervisors 
actively help them monitor this process dimension of clear therapeutic boundaries with 
their clients.
CLOSING
The developmental issues presented in this chapter offer many important parallels to the 
relationship between the therapist and client. Effective therapists want to be a Safe Haven 
where clients feel safe bringing their problems and vulnerability. Then, when provided 
with this safety, clients will be able to utilize the therapist as a Secure Base to explore and 
try out new ways of responding to themselves and others. We believe this sequence leads 
to deep exploration in treatment and meaningful change in their lives. Thus, the personal 
challenge for every therapist is to examine their own capacity to provide both a Safe 
Haven and a Secure Base to their clients—which has been shaped in their own families 
of origin. We encourage trainees to strive to be non-defensive and challenge themselves 
to expand the interpersonal spheres that are anxiety-arousing for them, and to sustain a 
lifelong intention to broaden their own interpersonal range so they can respond to the 
wide range of problems that clients present. 
We have also addressed the common misconception that adopting a developmental 
perspective focuses on obtaining psychodynamic insight, and is used to blame parents as 
“bad” or to make them responsible for clients’ lives and choices. Instead, the intention 
is learning more about what’s really troubling clients and gaining a richer context for 
understanding what isn’t working in their lives. The far-reaching characteristics of 
family life presented here will inform therapists and clarify a treatment focus, helping 
them make sense of their clients’ current problems and maladaptive patterns. Student 
therapists frequently ask their supervisors, “What should I do?” However, supervisors can 
offer only broad and general guidelines that are of limited usefulness, until they begin to 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

FAFAF MILIAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL FACTL FACTL F OACTOACT RS  223
contextualize clients’ problems in a broader developmental/familial/cultural perspective 
that sheds light on the harder question that needs to be explored first: “What does this 
mean?”
Finally, for some trainees, it is disruptive to read this developmental material because 
it violates familial rules and cultural prescriptions to question or examine what transpired 
in their families of origin. Further, some readers are parents or grandparents themselves. 
As these readers learn more about family functioning, parenting practices and, especially, 
their own attachment styles, unwanted guilt may be evoked. Never helpful, this guilt 
may result from recognizing the previous limits of their own parenting skills, and the 
problematic consequences that ensued for their own children and loved ones. We hope 
that such readers will be able to relinquish unrealistic expectations for themselves, and 
forgive themselves, for not knowing more about child-rearing than they did at the time.
CHAPTER EXERCISE
What i s your current style of adult attachment? If you grew up with an Insecure 
attachment style, have you been able to make progress toward earned security? If so, 
what were the experiences or relationships that helped you? If not, what kind of help 
might you need, or what kind of experiences might you seek, to facilitate greater earned 
security?
SUGGESTED READING
Therapists interested in learning more about working with Preoccupied and Dismissive 
clients, and in preparing case formulations and treatment plans from this relational/
attachment perspective, are encouraged to read Daly & Mallinckrodt (2009), 
“Experienced Therapists’ Approach to Psychotherapy for Adults with Attachment 
Avoidance or Attachment Anxiety,” Journal of Counseling Psychology 56, 549-63
Visit CengageBrain.com for a variety of study tools and useful resources such as interac-
tive exercises, flashcards, and quizzes.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

224
CHAPTER 7
Inflexible Interpersonal 
Coping Strategies
CONCEPTUAL OVERVIEW
In this chapter, we continue to help therapists conceptualize their clients’ symptoms and 
problems by focusing on disruptive IWMs and interpersonal coping strategies. They 
highlight the key concerns that pervade clients’ lives and comprise clients’ core conflict. 
They are the hub of the wheel that links the different problems and concerns that clients 
present and provide a focus for treatment.
Clients’ core conflicts arise from the combined effects of insecure attachments, 
problematic child-rearing practices, and faulty structural family relations. When these 
types of problematic interactions with caregivers were repetitive or ongoing, they gave rise 
to disruptive IWMs with pathogenic beliefs about oneself, faulty expectations of others, 
and a narrow or skewed view of what will usually occur in close relationships (Wachtel, 
2008). To cope with the painful feelings, low self-esteem, and interpersonal threats that 
accompany these developmental experiences, clients also develop a fixed interpersonal 
coping style (McCarthy et al., 2008). For example, many clients characteristically: please 
others, strive to be perfect, and are compliant; others repeatedly take charge, seek control 
and power; while others consistently remain invisible, avoid all conflict, and exhibit rigid 
self-sufficiency (Coolidge et al., 2010). The key here is that this interpersonal coping 
strategy is pervasively and rigidly overused — even in situations where it is not necessary 
or no longer adaptive. (See Millon & Grossman, 2007 for a comprehensive overview of 
interpersonal coping styles and their implications for adaptive and maladaptive behavior.)
Defenses such as these are necessary for all people at times — they help us cope in 
difficult situations. Clients will feel deeply understood and “seen” when their counselors 
can grasp and validate how one of these interpersonal coping styles was a necessary and 
adaptive way to cope with reality-based problems at one point in time. For example, 
being pleasing or compliant kept a child from being ignored or criticized by an anxious 
or depressed parent, or withdrawing and not being noticed was an adaptive strategy to 
keep from being hit by an alcoholic parent. The problem for most clients, however, is that 
these coping strategies are no longer necessary or adaptive in most current relationships ,
but they are still being used habitually. These strategies have become ingrained behavior 
patterns and, rather than continuing to help, they now contribute to many of the 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INFLEXIBLE INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES  225
symptoms and problems that clients present in treatment—such as speaking up when 
needed (Baumeister & Scher, 1988; Pezzarossa et al., 2002; and Wei & Ku, 2007). The 
purpose of this chapter is to help therapists recognize and assist clients differentiate 
with whom they are still adaptive and when they no longer help, and clarify this as an 
important treatment goal (Denckla et al., 2015). On the one hand, the counselor aims 
to help clients sort through current relationships where they may still need to respond 
in this pleasing or avoidant way (e.g., with an authoritarian, dominating boss). On the 
other hand, it’s important to discriminate other relationships (such as with a new friend 
or potential partner) where the old coping style (such as always being in control) is no 
longer needed and only serves to create new problems.
To reach this treatment goal, the therapist’s intention is to:
1. identify the formative patterns and painful feelings that make up the client’s core 
conflict,
2. highlight the interpersonal coping strategy the client has learned to cope with these 
developmental and familial challenges,
3. clarify when and how the client’s interpersonal coping strategy is being expressed in 
current interactions with the therapist and others, and
4. begin changing this pattern first in the relationship with the therapist, and then with 
others in the client’s life.
As new therapists become more successful at formulating the client’s core conflict 
and interpersonal adaptation to it, this conceptualization will help counselors recognize 
themes and find organizing patterns in the disparate material clients present (Barber, 
2002; Levensen & Srupp, 2007). As introduced in Chapter 2, client conceptualization is 
an ongoing process that begins with the initial client contact. General hypotheses about 
clients’ problems are formulated early in treatment, and these tentative working hypotheses
are further refined or discarded as the therapist learns more about each client. The key 
concerns that are central to the client’s problems emerge and become clear as the therapist 
focuses the client inward, the client’s feelings emerge, and the therapist works with the 
process dimension to explore the client’s reactions to and expectations of the therapist 
and others. The therapist can then use these key guideposts to clarify central conflicts and 
focus on changing how they are being played out with the therapist and others.
INTERPERSONAL FRAMEWORK  
FOR CONCEPTUALIZING CLIENTS
In this section, we explore an interpersonal framework for conceptualizing the client’s 
core conflict— how it originally developed, the client’s interpersonal adaptation for coping 
with it, and how it is being expressed in current symptoms and problems(Cresswel et al., 
2011; Quirk et al., 2015; Rapee, 1997, 2012; Yap & Jorm, 2015). This conceptualization 
of the client’s problems includes four components:
1. The client’s unmet attachment needs
2. The client’s IWMs and what he or she came to believe about Self and Others based 
on developmental challenges
3. The client’s interpersonal strategy to manage or cope with anxiety
4. An interpersonal resolution of the core conflict
Adapted from Horney’s (1970) interpersonal theory, these four components help 
therapists conceptualize their client problems (see Figure 7.1). After exploring these 
disruptive IWMs and rigid interpersonal coping strategies more fully, we will apply them 
to treatment and illustrate them with three case studies. Below we begin by: (a) exploring 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

226  CHAPTER 7
how enduring problems result when one or more of a child’s basic developmental needs 
go unmet, and then (b) seeing how disruptive IWMs and rigid interpersonal coping 
strategies lead to the symptoms and problems clients present in treatment.
Resolution and Change: Greater
Capacity for Intimacy and Autonomy
Increased Flexibility in
Interpersonal Relating
Corrective Emotional Experience
Internal Working Models
and Schemas Reworked;
Increased Re/f_lectiveness and
Perspective Taking;
Empathy for Self and Others.
Maladaptive Internal Working
Models and Rigid Schemas
Treat Self as
Caregiver Did
Treat Others
as Caregiver
Did
Elicit Same
Treatment
From Others
That Caregiver
Gave
Intra-personal
Consequences
Interpersonal
Consequences
In/f_lexible Interpersonal
Coping Strategies
Moving
Toward
Moving
Against
Moving
Away
Unmet Needs1
Outcomes2
Cost of
Coping and
Con/f_lict
3
3A3A3A3A3B3B
Resolution
and Change5
4
Corrective
Emotional
Experience
Developmental Trajectory
Insecure Attachments
Unmet Needs for Security in Closeness (Safe Haven)
and for Autonomy (Secure Base)
FIGURE 7.1  I NTERPERSONAL MODEL OF THE CHANGE PROCESS
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INFLEXIBLE INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES  227
UNMET DEVELOPMENTAL NEEDS
Figure 7.1 starts at the bottom of the page and flows upward. It highlights young 
children’s emotional needs and their developmental trajectory when these needs for a 
secure attachment are not met. If parenting figures are consistently responsive to the 
children’s bids for comfort when distressed (Safe Haven), and support for exploration 
when curious (Secure Base), children will be able to express these needs freely. Of course, 
as children develop, they benefit from learning to accept limitations on parents’ ability to 
respond and to tolerate delays in parental response. If parents are not usually responsive, 
however, anxiety will soon become associated with the child’s needs.
Children will then develop IWMs based on their parents’ unresponsiveness—which 
continues to shape their feelings and perceptions about themselves and others on into 
their adulthood (Bogels & Brechman-Toussaint, 2006; Quirk et al., 2015). For example, 
consider preschool children whose need for understanding and affection goes unmet from 
disengaged, authoritarian, or even permissive parents. When such children approach their 
caregivers for comfort, their need is often rebuffed with statements such as:
DISENGAGED:
 What do you want now? You always need something—get out of here!
AUTHORITARIAN:
 What’s wrong with you? Stop that crying right now, or I’ll give you some-
thing to cry about!
PERMISSIVE:
 It’s OK, honey. Go ahead and do whatever you want, I’m kind of busy right now.
If these types of interchanges occur repeatedly, or come to characterize parent-child 
interactions, these children will soon learn to anticipate feeling criticized, rejected, or 
ignored, and become anxious whenever emotional needs for comfort or soothing are 
aroused. More enduringly, they will also develop IWMs of Self as unworthy of being 
responded to and Others as being unable to respond—which they will carry into future 
relationships (Wachtel, 2008). 
Children are biologically organized to continue experiencing attachment needs, 
but their direct expression is minimized or denied (defended against) by the parents’ 
unresponsiveness (see Part 1 at the bottom of Figure 7.1 on page 226). The attachment-
seeking child is then compelled to find some way to cope with this painful set of 
circumstances. Although clients will present with a wide range of problems that result 
from the varied developmental challenges presented in Chapter 6, enduring psychological 
problems often begin when basic childhood needs for secure attachments (both 
Safe Haven and Secure Base) are not met. This failure to provide children with clear 
communication and consistent emotional access to their caregiver when distressed, and 
support for autonomy and differentiation when secure, results in adult clients who present 
with problems that involve difficulties with commitment and intimacy, or with self-
direction and autonomy, or both (Otani et al., 2014). As we saw in Chapter 6, children 
who grow up in a predictable environment with both affection and consistent limits have and consistent limits have and
the best developmental trajectory (Kobak et al., 2006; Sroufe et al., 2005). However, most 
children experience anxiety when their emotional needs are consistently not met and, 
later as adults, they also feel anxious when adult versions of these attachment needs or 
feelings are activated in current relationships  (e.g., when clients have a serious problem 
and have difficulty asking a spouse for help or sharing their distress). 
Parts 2 and 3 of Figure 7.1 illustrate IWMs and interpersonal coping strategies. On 
the one hand, clients turn against themselves to minimize the feeling or need that has 
become anxiety-arousing (e.g., “I hate myself. I have such a big mouth — I’m too much 
for everybody”). Simultaneously, clients also implement interpersonal coping strategies 
to manage the unacceptable need and its accompanying anxiety (e.g., “If I just get a little 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

228  CHAPTER 7
thinner, then he won’t leave me”). Part 4 of Figure 7.1 refers to the CEEs that therapists 
aim to provide in the therapeutic relationship, and then generalize to their everyday lives, 
to help clients resolve their core conflicts and live more effectively (Bridges, 2006). We will 
see how clients’ inflexible coping styles are commonly replayed in the current relationship 
with the therapist, just as they are with others in their everyday lives, providing a powerful 
opportunity for experiential relearning.
I/n.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/n.sc/a.sc/l.sc W/o.sc/r.sc/k.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc M/o.sc/d.sc/e.sc/l.sc/s.sc /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc I/n.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/p.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc/o.sc/n.sc/a.sc/l.sc C/o.sc/p.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc S/t.sc/r.sc/a.sc/t.sc/e.sc/g.sc/i.sc/e.sc/s.sc 
In Chapter 2, we proposed three domains for conceptualizing clients’ problems: (1) 
maladaptive relational patterns, (2) rigid schemas or IWMs with faulty beliefs about self 
and unrealistic expectations of others, and (3) core conflicted feelings. All three of these 
domains are intertwined, but the Insecure attachment based on unmet needs in Part 1 
of Figure 7.1 principally evokes the core conflict. As we will see, the faulty beliefs that 
arise from these core conflicts predominate in Part 3A, and the interpersonal strategies 
used to cope with them — which are going to be the primary focus of this chapter — are 
highlighted in Part 3B.
Clients employ two psychological mechanisms to defend against the anxiety 
associated with expressing, or even experiencing, their unmet attachment needs. First, 
clients respond to themselves in the same way that significant others originally responded 
to them (i.e., they develop IWMs that are based on how caregivers treated them; they 
are not simply irrational beliefs unconnected to their learning histories). The IWMs that 
clients develop become enduring ways of believing who they are, how others will respond, 
and regulate their behavior. Second, clients’ inflexible and over-generalized coping style 
is an attempt to diminish anxiety by trying to overcome or manage their personal or 
emotional needs. Clients avoid their unmet attachment needs because they are too painful 
and disruptive to continually experience and address . In treatment, this interpersonal 
coping style often quickly becomes apparent in the way clients interact with the therapist 
(e.g., characteristically pleasing/complying, controlling/competing, or withdrawing). 
These two mechanisms of denying or avoiding anxiety-arousing thoughts, feel -
ings, and needs on the one hand, while trying to overcome them on the other, represent 
attempts to minimize anxiety and provide a modicum of self-regulation, efficacy and 
esteem. They are clients’ solution to their core conflict, and together they generate many 
of the symptoms and problems clients present in treatment. Let’s see how this defen -
sive system once helped clients function better, but now costs dearly and is no longer 
adaptive.
I/n.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/n.sc/a.sc/l.sc W/o.sc/r.sc/k.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc M/o.sc/d.sc/e.sc/l.sc/s.sc S/h.sc/a.sc/p.sc/e.sc S/y.sc/m.sc/p.sc/t.sc/o.sc/m.sc/s.sc /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc P/r.sc/o.sc/b.sc/l.sc/e.sc/m.sc/s.sc
With the limited skills and means available to them, insecurely attached children try 
urgently to get their caregivers to respond to their emotional needs but are unable to elicit 
the help they need. This may be reflected by a general lack of parental responsiveness, 
parents responding on their own timetable rather than when the child initiates contact 
or expresses a need, or a punitive or inconsistent parental response. . To gain some active 
mastery over their helplessness and to ward off the anxiety aroused, such children begin 
to minimize or sequester away their own emotional need in the same way that their 
caregivers originally responded to it (Otani et al., 2014). For example, children may deny 
their need or distress as insignificant and regard themselves as unimportant (“I’m stupid”; 
“I don’t matter”) or may reject it and view themselves contemptuously as demanding 
and dependent (“I’m too needy”). Routinely, counselors will hear clients say the same 
hurtful responses toward themselves that others originally expressed toward them “Why 
are you so bossy!”). In turning against themselves in this way, children are able to ward 
off the unwanted anxiety that would be engendered if they felt that their developmental 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INFLEXIBLE INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES  229
needs were reasonable and legitimate but still viewed as unacceptable to those they need 
and love most— their caregivers. This adaption provides a sense of control and preserves 
attachment ties ( “There’s just something wrong with me”), and allows them to continue 
to view the world and their parents as reasonable and just (Janoff-Bulman, 1979, Weiss, 
1995). In this way, a certain kind of attachment security or safety comes from viewing 
themselves as the problem, rather than the caregiver. This then becomes their IWM for 
viewing themselves and others; by acting accordingly, they elicit responses consistent with 
the IWM. For example, when they ask for something (e.g., a pay raise, a day off from 
work, help on a project) they do it in a way that conveys that they don’t really expect 
that their request will be granted. Consequently, more often than not, their requests go 
unmet. This adaptation where children begin to do to themselves, and elicit from others in 
current relationships, aspects of what was originally done to them also has been referred 
to in different orientations as modeling and identification with the aggressor.
Therapists will often see clients employing three types of disruptive IWMs that help 
avoid anxiety or manage distress, but these defenses subsequently cause further problems 
for them:
1. First, clients respond to themselves in similarly hurtful ways that others have re-
sponded to them. When adult offspring of non-responsive parents feel vulnerable 
or threatened, their anxiety-arousing need for reassurance or affection will still be 
evoked. They will cope with this anxiety by seeing their need as their caregivers once 
did—and respond to themselves in the critical, judgmental or contemptuous way 
that others once did. As adults, their emotional needs will still be unacceptable, and 
they will often say to themselves the same critical or dismissive things they heard 
from others years ago. This may include adopting the exact words and tone— but 
without recognizing the source of these internalized “tapes” as that of their own at-
tachment figures. Further, the judgmental, punitive, ignoring, or rejecting affect that 
clients feel toward themselves as they replay these internalized tapes is the same 
affect that attachment figures originally expressed toward them years before (e.g., 
“You are just a pest!”).
2. Second, clients avoid experiencing unwanted developmental feelings and memories 
by re-creating or reenacting in current relationships the same types of interpersonal 
scenarios that originally caused distress or fear in earlier, formative relationships. 
That is, on an interpersonal level, c some clients will say and do to others what was 
originally done to them. For example, the child of strictly authoritarian or dismissive 
parents may grow up to be a parent who similarly disparages the same emotional 
needs in his or her own children— particularly the child who most resembles the 
parent in gender, birth order, temperament, skin color and so forth. Especially in the 
arena of parenting, clients who have not integrated or come to terms with their own 
conflicted feelings, or clarified a new narrative for their lives that more accurately 
fits what behaviorally occurred, are prone to reenact the same maladaptive relational 
patterns that they experienced in their own childhoods (Siegel & Hartzell, 2014). As 
parents, many clients feel helplessly dismayed as they watch themselves respond to 
their children in the same hurtful ways that their parents responded to them. Despite 
sincere pledges that “I will never do to my children what my parents did to me,” 
variations of the old themes can occur with clocklike regularity. Adult offspring gain 
or “restore” some control over their own dilemma by repeating what was originally 
done to them rather than knowing and experiencing what they once saw and felt.
3. Third, some clients avoid the anxiety they experienced developmentally by making 
it a current issue with others—thereby keep it from being a familial or developmen-
tal problem of their own. They do this by eliciting the same unsatisfying response 
from others in current relationships that they received in their attachment dilemma. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

230  CHAPTER 7
For example, unless children with significantly problematic developmental experi-
ences have other reparative relationships (with aunts and uncles, friends, teachers, 
and mentors) to help them resolve these concerns, they are likely, as adults, to select 
a marital partner who cannot respond well to their emotional needs. In the event 
that their spouse is capable of being affectionate or intimate, they may not be able 
to accept this emotional responsiveness. Why? The possibility of having a response 
to their old, unmet needs— even a well-intended, benevolent response— will often 
arouse the shame or evoke the anxiety of the original deprivation. Following their 
IWMs, such clients also will anticipate that their spouse will reject or control them 
as others have done in the past— even though the spouse has not been responding in 
this unwanted way.
Operating on schemas or IWMs that fit past relationships better than current ones, 
such clients may simultaneously elicit and reject nurturance from their partners. This will 
certainly frustrate and confuse the spouse, especially if these mixed messages activate the 
spouse’s own problematic relational templates, as they commonly do. Unresolvable marital 
conflict that results in emotional gridlock occurs when the partners’ IWMs dovetail and 
each presents the other with a version of their old relational pattern (Hendrix, 2001). 
For example, consider a husband with a Dismissive attachment style who is married 
to a Preoccupied wife. Confirming each other’s worst fears, his lack of responsiveness 
and communication will make her feel even more anxious and alone, while her need for 
emotional support and reassurance will be construed by him as more of the intrusive, 
demanding control he has learned to expect and abhor in relationships. In this mutually 
escalating cycle, potential outcomes include: ongoing and intensifying conflict that erodes 
the rewarding qualities in the marriage; emotional disengagement from each other and 
settling into parallel lives; embroiling children in the ongoing wrangling and pressuring 
them to take sides; or ending in acrimonious divorce unless counseling helps one or both 
partners recognize and change their mutual interaction.
Although one of these three modes may be predominant for a particular client, many 
clients will employ all three mechanisms. In all three maneuvers, however, clients turn a 
passive experience that originally happened to them into an active experience over which 
they now have some control. Therapists can begin to help clients change by wondering 
aloud or being curious about them. 
INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES 
It is important for new therapists to recognize the defensive interpersonal styles that 
clients adopt to cope with their developmental problems. Children’s unmet needs and 
developmental problems do not just dissipate as they grow up (unless their caregivers 
change over the years and begin responding in new and better ways, or they have been 
able to establish reparative relationships with others). These disruptive needs and feelings 
may be denied but they continue to be evoked in adult relationships, especially in the 
adult attachment settings of their own marriages and in parenting . When these needs 
and feelings remain too anxiety-arousing or unacceptable to be expressed or dealt with 
directly in current relationships, clients try to cope with them by adopting various 
interpersonal coping styles. To illustrate these interpersonal coping strategies, we will 
focus on Horney’s three lifestyle adaptations: moving-toward, moving-away, and moving-
against others (Horney 1970). They have been widely adopted by many theorists, and a 
large body of empirical research finds that these rigid coping strategies have been learned 
in problematic caregiver-child and insecure attachment relationships. They provide short-
term benefits but long-term adjustment costs (Hoffman et al., 2013; Rubino et al., 2004; 
Schill & Williams, 1993; Wei & Ku, 2007; Gottman & DeClair, 2001). 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INFLEXIBLE INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES  231
I/n.sc/f.sc/l.sc/e.sc/x.sc/i.sc/b.sc/l.sc/e.sc I/n.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/p.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc/o.sc/n.sc/a.sc/l.sc C/o.sc/p.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc S/t.sc/r.sc/a.sc/t.sc/e.sc/g.sc/i.sc/e.sc/s.sc: M/o.sc/v.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc-T/o.sc/w.sc/a.sc/r.sc/d.sc, 
M/o.sc/v.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc-A/g.sc/a.sc/i.sc/n.sc/s.sc/t.sc, /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc M/o.sc/v.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc-A/w.sc/a.sc/y.sc
Clients adopt a fixed interpersonal style both to reduce the anxiety associated with 
having unacceptable needs and feelings revealed (both to others and to themselves), and 
to find some sense of identity, value or self-worth. Let’s look first at Horney’s three coping 
styles— they can help therapists so much as they try to understand and respond to their 
clients.
1. Moving-Toward: Some clients learned to cope with problematic familial interac-
tions by moving-toward or pleasing people. These clients learned they could earn 
some needed approval, and diminish the threat of further rejection criticism or being 
ignored by excessively complying with their caregivers and being unfailingly good complying with their caregivers and being unfailingly good complying
(e.g., always being helpful and nice, striving to be perfectly well behaved). These 
children are not learning to be appropriately well behaved. Instead, in order to ward 
off anxiety and maintain their vulnerable self-esteem, they are giving up too much of 
themselves and their own identity. In this pervasively pleasing stance of wanting to be 
liked and accepted, clients have lost their own voice and the ability to have their own 
mind (Smith, 2007). Generalizing this coping strategy they have adopted with care-
givers, they carry over to others in adulthood this pattern of relating in which they 
always try to please or accommodate others and avoid disagreements. They don’t 
express their own interests or preferences, or assert their own limits and boundaries. 
These clients have learned to defend against anxiety and win some approval by con-
sistently moving-toward others in a pleasing, servile way. This coping strategy is com-
monly found in counselors, nurses and others who choose a caretaking career.
2. Moving-Against: Other clients have learned that aggression or resistance to paren-
tal wishes, if pursued long enough, is a way to ward off pain or manage insecurity. 
They may have needed permissive caretakers to act more strongly and take effective 
charge of the family so they could feel secure without having to try and take control 
of everything themselves. Or, they may have identified with, or were supported by 
the other parent, in defying a dominating caregiver. These expansive and dominating 
individuals cope by moving-against others. They want to be in complete control of 
themselves and their emotions at all times and, even more problematic, they domi-
nate, intimidate, or try to exert too much control over others. They approach rela-
tionships competitively with the orienting attitude that they must win at all costs, 
and they often assert themselves aggressively for this purpose. Their mindset is that 
they need to prevail in every situation or conflict. Thus, these clients adopt a repeti-prevail in every situation or conflict. Thus, these clients adopt a repeti-prevail
tive interpersonal style of moving-against others to protect themselves from the un-
wanted feelings evoked by needing someone, being in situations where they are not 
in charge. They are motivated more by having power and influence over others than 
by having intimacy or egalitarian relationships (Fetterman et al., 2015).
The beginning therapist may dread moving-against clients because they can be 
challenging or critical of the therapist and may try to control or compete with the 
therapist. Researchers find that many therapists have trouble with clients’ anger toward 
them (Hill et al., 2008) and that these negative, angry, or provocative clients frequently 
disrupt the treatment process (Binder & Strupp, 1997; Matsakis, 1998). Practicum 
instructors and supervisors need to help new therapists prepare for these workable, 
but initially challenging, clients by role-playing and rehearsing effective, non-defensive 
responses to clients who challenge the new therapist’s credentials or competence.
3. Moving-Away: In Horney’s third interpersonal style, clients have learned that the 
best way to reduce the interpersonal threats they have grown up with and cre-
ate some safety for themselves is by moving away from others through physical 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

232  CHAPTER 7
avoidance, emotional withdrawal, or total self-sufficiency. These clients do every-
thing for themselves and do not ask for help, even when that may be necessary and 
appropriate. They move through life having no need of others— they often expect 
rejection or rebuff, and attempt to take care of all their needs on their own. This ten-
dency to move away from people and be avoidant is often shaped by a heightened 
sensitivity to rejection and shame (Millon, 1999; Otani et al., 2014).
Because life is stressful for everyone and all people need defenses, healthy indi -
viduals will also employ these three interpersonal styles at times. When they do not 
become exaggerated or used pervasively, there are adaptive strength features in them 
(Smith, 2007). However, they are not an identity or way of living for well-functioning 
people who use these strategies flexibly to cope with a difficult person or problematic 
situation. With most clients who enter treatment, however, one style has become pre -
dominant or characteristic. It is overused, inflexibly, even in situations where it is not 
adaptive or necessary and is not helping the situation. As we will be discussing further, 
the therapist’s role is to help clients learn to discriminate or assess more realistically 
when and with whom they need to cope in one of these ways, and when and with 
whom they don’t.
R/i.sc/g.sc/i.sc/d.sc I/n.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/p.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc/o.sc/n.sc/a.sc/l.sc C/o.sc/p.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc S/t.sc/y.sc/l.sc/e.sc/s.sc: /a.sc D/e.sc/f.sc/e.sc/n.sc/s.sc/e.sc F/r.sc/a.sc/m.sc/e.sc/d.sc /a.sc/s.sc /a.sc V/i.sc/r.sc/t.sc/u.sc/e.sc
When developmental problems were pervasive or severe, clients often adopt one of 
the three interpersonal styles: moving-toward, moving-against, or moving-away. This 
inflexible coping style is a habitual way of relating to others that is also reflected in 
vocational, marital, and other defining life choices. There are many exceptions, of course, 
but individuals who move toward may find that careers in nursing or counseling are 
a good match for their caretaking skills and needs. Individuals who move against may 
find that careers in law, medicine, or money management are congruent with their 
interpersonal style of taking charge and needing to be in control. Individuals who move 
away may feel comfortable as researchers, artists, technical experts who work alone, or 
individuals with a meditative lifestyle. In their self-concept, Horney suggests many clients 
will privately frame this defensive coping style as a special attribute or virtueand use it to 
feel special and derive some self-esteem or identity from it. However, this unrealistic sense 
of being special is compensatory and often reflects a shame-based sense of self. These 
clients’ self-worth is brittle and vulnerable — it relies too much on their ability to rise 
above or disprove their core conflicts by pleasing others, by achieving and succeeding, or 
by withdrawing and feeling cynically superior.
More contemporary therapists write about the “narcissistic” element in many 
different types of clients who are defending against a shame-based sense of self (Kohut, 
1977; Stolorow et al., 1994). They describe what clients do to “restore” their sense of 
self-worth or power when they (too readily) feel shamed and over-react to feeling rejected 
or diminished by others or that they have failed in some way (see also Thomaes et al., 
2007)— sensitive issues to work with, certainly, yet relieving for clients when counselors 
can take the risk and find respectful ways to broach these far-reaching issues.
Even though moving-toward clients are compliant and submissive, they do not 
experience themselves as servile. Instead, they often feel special— more caring than others 
who are not as compassionate. They accomplish this distortion by perceiving themselves 
as selflessly loving; always altruistic, sensitive to the needs of others, or committed to the 
ideals of peace or justice. In this way, the defensive interpersonal style becomes a way 
to cope with a lack of self-esteem — a virtuous quality that wins needed approval from 
others and wards off anxiety and shame. Because this coping style has worked for clients 
in the past, it can be harder to let go of in treatment.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INFLEXIBLE INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES  233
Similarly, moving-against clients do not see themselves as angry, competitive, self-
centered, or demanding, although they frequently behave in these ways. Instead, they see 
themselves as heroes or heroines — strong leaders entitled to direct others, whom they 
may regard contemptuously as weak, dependent, or incompetent.
Finally, moving-away clients do not regard themselves as emotionally constricted, as 
avoidant and too easily hurt, or as being risk-averse and narrowly limiting their lives. 
Instead, they prize their aloofness, perhaps as evidence that they are more refined, that 
they do not need others, or hold the illusion that they feel or experience things more deeply 
than others. They may be cynical and at some level feel better than the ordinary masses, 
whose involvement in everyday happenings may be seen as mundane and small-minded.
To lessen their anxiety, many clients inflexibly employ these interpersonal coping 
styles that allow them to feel special, gain a sense of identity and self-esteem, and manage 
deprivation or minimize problems that originally led to these compensatory adaptations.
Their self-esteem, however, is brittle and vulnerable. It is based on an unrealistic sense of 
being special rather than learning to value themselves and their own authentic feelings.
Further, clients have often developed significant abilities in the service of their coping 
strategies. For example, many moving-toward clients have not only been able to make 
others like them but have also become genuinely skilled at caring for others. Likewise, 
moving-against clients have often been able to achieve some success and power, and may 
develop significant technical or other abilities along the way. Similarly, although moving-
away clients have often been able to remain safely aloof, they may also have developed a 
rich inner life or been able to cultivate creative or artistic abilities.
On the other hand, however, one of the most important interventions therapists 
can make is to help clients recognize the significant emotional price they pay for their 
interpersonal coping style . Therapists do this cost/benefit analysis by recognizing and 
affirming clients’ strengths and abilities, while also highlighting how their interpersonal 
adaptation is creating stress and limiting their lives now. For example:
THERAPIST:
 You’ve just earned another award at work, where they have nicknamed you the 
“star,” and you do so much for everybody at home. I’m genuinely impressed by how capable 
you are and how much you are always doing for everyone. But I’m also concerned about how 
tired you look and how often you are sick. You often use the expression that you’re “running 
on empty.” I’m hoping that we can begin to listen to that feeling together here in counseling—
I think it’s telling both of us something important.
In this way, therapists both affirm the genuine strengths that clients have developed 
through these coping strategies, but simultaneously help to articulate in an empathic way 
the significant toll they also take. Later in this chapter we will see how clients can retain 
the skills and strengths they have developed in these compensatory modes, but without 
utilizing them in the same inflexible or unidimensional ways as in the past. As before, 
therapists need to help clients honor their interpersonal coping styles and appreciate 
rather than pathologize them. They were absolutely necessary at one time and represented 
the best possible adaptation they could have made at that point in their development. 
Although they are still adaptive in some problematic relationships, they are overused now 
and are no longer necessary or helpful in many current situations. A primary treatment 
goal for many clients is to learn that more flexible or varied interpersonal coping styles 
will serve them better.
To sum up, by turning their defensive interpersonal adaptation into an identity or 
way of being in the world, clients often gain significant secondary benefits and genuine 
personality strengths. It’s no wonder, then, that some clients initially may be reluctant to 
explore this adaptation with the therapist. It has become the basis of their identity, the 
primary source of their self-esteem, and the only way they have had of defending against 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

234  CHAPTER 7
their seemingly unresolvable conflicts. Once therapists fully grasp all that this defense 
has provided for clients, and help clients to appreciate both what it has given and what it 
has cost, both therapists and clients will be less judgmental or impatient with the clients’ 
symptoms. Both will have greater empathy for the clients’ struggles to change and will be 
able to work collaboratively to develop more flexible coping strategies. Understandably, 
clients will not want to risk giving up what they have without having something better 
to replace it. As we will see, however, clients never really succeed in overcoming their 
core conflicts by using these compensatory adaptations. By acknowledging problems and 
addressing them directly, clients can develop a wider experiential/interpersonal range that 
will be an important part of resolving many problems.
S/h.sc/o.sc/u.sc/l.sc/d.sc/s.sc /f.sc/o.sc/r.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc S/e.sc/l.sc/f.sc /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc E/x.sc/p.sc/e.sc/c.sc/t.sc/a.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc/s.sc /o.sc/f.sc O/t.sc/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc
 Following Horney, these interpersonal coping strategies often hold unrealistic shoulds for 
clients themselves, and expectations of others as well. For example, self-effacing, moving-
toward clients hold unspoken expectations of unwavering loyalty and approval from 
others, and they often demand constant reassurances. Expansive, moving-against clients 
claim leadership and control, and they expect deference from others. And, although it may 
look as if detached, moving-away clients place no demands on others, they silently hold 
expectations that others never criticize them or make demands upon them. Of course, 
the world doesn’t respond very well to these covert expectations. They create ongoing 
conflict and leave clients exposed to continuing frustration, as others frequently do not 
accept such unrealistic demands and unspoken expectations.
Accompanying clients’ unrealistic demands on others is a harsh and uncompromising 
set of “shoulds” that they place on themselves; these faulty beliefs reflect their impaired 
self-esteem and diminished sense of self. For example, moving-toward clients suffer under 
the self-imposed demands that they should be the perfect lover, teacher, spouse, or parent. 
They must always be caring and responsive to the needs of others and never feel angry, 
compete, or advocate on their own behalf. moving-against clients demand of themselves 
that they should be able to prevail—overcoming all difficulties and successfully dominate. 
They must win and be on top, control their feelings and be “strong” at all times, and 
overcome personal insecurities, fatigue and even physical illness simply by an act of will. 
moving-away clients pay for their coping strategy by believing that they should be able 
to work tirelessly and always be productive. They demand that they should be able to 
endure anything without becoming upset and that they should never need help from 
anyone. These individuals will not always be able to meet the rigid demands they place on 
themselves, of course, and inevitable failures will occur.
When such failures occur, intense anxiety, depression, and other symptoms often 
result, and some clients will enter treatment in crisis. Clients’ pathogenic beliefs that if  
they are unable to successfully please, achieve or remain aloof then they are not love-
worthy, cannot protect themselves, or are too needy or demanding for others. In particular, 
shame is often evoked when interpersonal coping styles fail — which many clients may 
experience as a “defeat” or present as a “failure experience,” —and contributes to many 
different symptoms and problems that clients bring to treatment (Tangney & Dearing, 
2011; 2002).
As we will see, the “tyranny of the shoulds” is an exacting price to pay for a client’s 
interpersonal coping strategy. One of the most helpful interventions therapists can 
make is to be able to articulate, empathically, how this coping strategy is central to the 
client’s basic sense of self. At the same time, therapists need to help clients appreciate
these interpersonal coping strategies. They do in fact contain real strengths, and 
therapists can help clients recognize how once they really were necessary and adaptive. 
However, overused and overgeneralized now, they are no longer necessary or adaptive 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INFLEXIBLE INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES  235
in many current situations. Therapists help by a) clarifying the unnecessary price in 
symptoms and stress that the client is paying for this unidimensional coping strategy 
and b) helping them discern when and with whom this coping style is still adaptive— 
and when it is not.
RESOLVING THE CORE CONFLICT
Part 4 in Figure 7.1 on page 226 illustrates how the client’s core conflict can be resolved. 
Ultimately, clients’ coping strategies to work around their core conflicts will not succeed. 
These compensatory maneuvers will not resolve clients’ problems — no matter how 
successful the client becomes through these interpersonal coping strategies. The client 
is still defending against the original conflict rather, than understanding and resolving 
it. As they repeatedly employ these interpersonal styles — even in situations where they 
are not needed or are not effective — clients will engender further problems in current 
relationships, and create personal stress that often contributes to health crises. Let’s 
examine why clients’ interpersonal coping strategies and disruptive IWMs will lead to 
further problems rather than resolution, and then explore what therapists can do to help 
the client.
First, the “tyranny of the shoulds” places unrelenting demands on the client. These 
can be heard, for example, when clients enter treatment exclaiming, “I can’t do all of 
this anymore! I can’t be a perfect parent, a great spouse, and the most productive person 
in my office. I can’t be everything to everybody!” Clients’ quality of life is diminished 
by these unrealistic expectations. They are depleting and fatiguing, and diminish the 
potential for personal and professional growth, even if these unrelenting demands clients 
place on themselves (and on others) do not provoke a crisis that brings them to treatment. 
The struggle that comes from not having had a Secure Base to venture flexibly into new 
relationships, is palpable in clients severely bound by “shoulds,” while not having a Safe 
Haven results in clients’ IWMs of Self as deficient, unworthy, and needy. 
Clients’ demanding expectations of themselves and others will usually fail as well. 
For example, pleasing clients will not be able to win the love or approval of everyone they 
need. Expansive clients will not always succeed or be able to make others defer to their 
demands, and detached clients will encounter criticism from others or situational pressures 
that force them to compete. Inevitably, clients’ attempts to compensate for their lack of 
Security will lead to conflict at work and at home. Frequently, the precipitating crisis that 
leads clients to enter treatment is when situational life stressors, developmental transitions 
in adulthood, or aging/illness have caused their interpersonal coping strategies to fail.
Therapists help clients change when they grasp the discouragement and pain that 
occur when these coping strategies fail. Kohut (1977) writes eloquently of the narcissistic 
wound that is so painful to clients’ core sense of Self. Even though the demands that 
clients place on themselves and others are unrealistic, it still can be excruciating when 
their interpersonal coping strategy fails. Tragically, a few individuals will even attempt 
suicide in response to such a failure, and others will contemplate it. Why are some clients 
driven to such an extreme response? In a word, shame. The interpersonal coping style that 
many clients have adopted is a brittle substitute for the genuine self-esteem or Security 
they lack. Although the severity of clients’ interpersonal coping strategies will vary on a 
continuum, from many clients’ point of view, they are their ability to please, to achieve, 
or to remain superior and aloof . Such clients over-react to seemingly insignificant events or to remain superior and aloof . Such clients over-react to seemingly insignificant events or to remain superior and aloof
(e.g., gaining three pounds over the holidays or losing their patience with a trying two-
year-old). This over-reaction occurs because their entire sense of Self is threatened when 
their interpersonal coping strategy fails and their shame-based sense of self is revealed by 
their mistakes— which are often framed more globally and self-damningly as “failures.”
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

236  CHAPTER 7
To illustrate, recall the client who got an A 2 rather than the A he demanded of 
himself and felt like a complete failure. Too often, the therapist’s initial response is to 
challenge these clients’ overreaction to the grade as catastrophizing and provide a more 
realistic appraisal of the situation. This well-intended, reality-based response certainly has 
value, but on its own, it misses the deeper meaning for this particular client. A more 
productive response may be a bid for an empathic connection. That is, wondering aloud 
with skillful tentativeness, and collaboratively seeking client’s participation in capturing 
the real meaning or more life-defining issue at hand, the counselor might ask:
T
HERAPIST
:
 I’m wondering if there is no room for error for you—ever? Does everything always 
have to be perfect or, seemingly, everything is lost and the consequences seem so dire?
In this way, the therapist is trying to discern collaboratively how all-important 
this “failure” or disappointment seems to be from the client’s point of view. With a 
compassionate and curious stance, the therapist continues to invite the client to join and 
explore how this grade seems to indicate something very important about the client and 
who he really is, and who has made him feel that way. In this way, the counselor and 
client often find that this failure experience initially is viewed as “proof” or confirming 
evidence that something bad or unwanted is true, which commonly reveals an attachment 
figure’s expectations and not the client’s own choices. Taking other examples:
CLIENT:
 When 
I got passed over for the promotion, it proved to everyone that I couldn’t make it.
THERAPIST:
 Whose voice do you hear when you say to yourself, “It’s proof that I will never 
make it”?
CLIENT:
 My father always said 
I must be the best or I will just end up a failure
. 
THERAPIST:
 I’m sorry that you had that experience. I’m wondering if it’s possible for you to feel 
differently about yourself than your father did?
OR
CLIENT:
 When 
I 
got frustrated and upset like that, 
I 
knew none of them would ever like or respect 
me again.
THERAPIST:
 With whom did you learn that getting upset could never be repaired or recovered 
from—and damned you to being alone, bad and on the outside forever?
CLIENT:
 Well, if I got upset or mad, my Mother would turn away in disgust and walk out of the 
room.
THERAPIST:
 It sounds like that might leave you feeling painfully alone, and also deserving of that 
unwanted response. Is it possible for you to feel differently about yourself than your mother 
did—to feel some compassion for yourself rather than joining her in disgust for yourself?
In these examples, the therapist and client are trying to hone in and clarify, as precisely 
as they can, what the disappointing grade, missed promotion, or getting “upset”, seems to 
say about these clients and how it defines who they really are. For example, together they 
may find that it proves to the client that he is just an “imposter” who really is inadequate 
and can never do it right, or is letting someone down whose approval he or she “must” 
earn. This pathogenic belief is true, in the client’s mind, despite the client’s Herculean 
efforts to overcome or disprove it by always earning As or always being “nice.”
By exploring and clarifying together how completely clients’ sense of Self depends 
on their ability to achieve or please (which is a different intervention and interpersonal 
process than interpreting, challenging, or reframing), the therapist reveals the anxious 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INFLEXIBLE INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES  237
insecurity and emotional deprivation that originally led to this defensive coping strategy. 
Therapists use this empathic understanding to provide a Safe Haven and share their 
compassion both for the pain of the original problem and the burden of trying to 
overcome or disprove it that clients have suffered with for so long. By being able to help 
clients articulate or clarify this dilemma, therapists behaviorally demonstrate that they 
grasp the real meaning of this prototypic experience that occurs over and over again for 
clients. This validation or experience of being seen and understood helps to disprove 
the pathogenic belief, and therapists will often observe that it diminishes presenting 
symptoms of anxiety and depression as well. Such empathic understanding also provides 
a Secure Base for clients from which they can further explore and question these views of 
themselves and their coping strategy; appreciate how and why they learned it; and start 
to observe when they see themselves employing it in their daily lives. This, in turn, helps 
clients begin to change this pattern of relating — often with the therapist and then with 
others in their lives.
By appreciating the broader life context that gives meaning to a “failure experience”  broader life context that gives meaning to a “failure experience”  broader life context
when clients’ interpersonal defense fails— an impact that has always seemed so irrational 
to others as well as to the clients themselves — therapists understand clients in a way that 
most clients have not experienced before. This empathic understanding is a CEE that 
helps clients free themselves from the tyranny of the shoulds and the unrealistic demands 
they place on themselves, and helps them come to terms more realistically with who they 
are and how they choose to live. 
Therapists can help clients recognize  or start to become aware of when and how 
their IWMs and interpersonal coping strategies are in play. The therapist does this by 
highlighting the themes or patterns  in the interactions that are recurring with others in 
clients’ lives. The therapist also uses process comments that bring into consideration 
how these could be occurring and how they could be changed, right now in the way the 
therapist and client are interacting together. For example:
THERAPIST:
 I’d like to take a risk and share something’s that’s going on for me right now—but I 
wouldn’t want you to hear it in the wrong way. Maybe it’s completely out to lunch, or maybe it’s wouldn’t want you to hear it in the wrong way. Maybe it’s completely out to lunch, or maybe it’s 
telling both of us something important. Can I have your permission to just speak up directly?
C
LIENT
:
 Yeah, that would be all right.
T
HERAPIST
:
 I’m seeing this issue differently than you are, but as I start to share my perspective, I 
feel anxious. Like I shouldn’t disagree with you, or you will somehow withdraw from me—or 
maybe even go away and not come back to our next session. Can we sort this out together? Is 
this just my mistaken notion, or have others said something like this to you before?
CLIENT:
 Well, yeah, I have heard before that I “go away” pretty easily.
THERAPIST:
 I don’t want you to “go away” from me. Let’s talk about this, and find a better way 
in here…
Thus, instead of avoiding their real problems in the two defensive ways we have 
been discussing, the therapists’ goal is to help clients approach them, recognize and 
begin to understand them, and find that in some relationships the unwanted but familiar 
response they received in the past does not occur with all people. The interpersonal 
solution provided by the therapist’s new and different response—the CEE—allows clients 
to integrate other reactive feelings, helps clients disconfirm pathogenic beliefs about 
themselves, and alters clients’ faulty expectations about what may occur in relationships 
with others. Having the experience of change with the therapist also facilitates clients’ 
ability to begin changing their own rigid and ineffective ways of relating with others in 
their lives. Now, in parallel, clients often are able to understand and resolve the original 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

238  CHAPTER 7
developmental conflict by re-evaluating with the therapist what was once so hurtful or 
problematic. For example: 
CLIENT:
 I’m really not being selfish or doing something wrong if I become more independent and 
successful, even though this makes my mom feel sad and withdraw sometimes. 
In this way, maladaptive relational patterns are broken and new, more flexible 
interpersonal styles and IWMs become possible. Therapists’ compassion and validation 
also comprise a new and reparative response that disconfirms these faulty beliefs and, in 
turn, allows clients to be more accepting and forgiving of themselves. Clients can now 
integrate the previously unacceptable parts of themselves and can better accept both 
the good qualities and the limitations in other relationships that have been important 
but conflicted. As this occurs with the therapist, clients are able to begin generalizing 
this experiential relearning with the therapist to others in their lives. With the therapist’s 
coaching, clients can begin to respond in more adaptive ways that improve their 
relationships with others and expand the narrow coping style they originally adopted. 
In the chapters ahead, we will examine more specifically: (1) how the therapeutic 
relationship can be utilized to help clients resolve their core conflict; and especially, (2) 
how this emotional relearning with the therapist can be generalized to other relationships 
in clients’ lives. For now, an extended case study of a moving-toward client, and two case 
summaries of the other coping styles, will help therapists use these concepts to guide their 
interventions.
CASE STUDY OF PETER: MOVING-TOWARD OTHERS 
D/e.sc/v.sc/e.sc/l.sc/o.sc/p.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/a.sc/l.sc H/i.sc/s.sc/t.sc/o.sc/r.sc/y.sc /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc P/r.sc/e.sc/c.sc/i.sc/p.sc/i.sc/t.sc/a.sc/t.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc C/r.sc/i.sc/s.sc/i.sc/s.sc
Peter was an insecurely attached child whose emotional needs went unmet in his 
authoritarian home. Further stressors accumulated as he anxiously observed his parents’ 
ongoing wrangling, and contentious divorce when he was 7 years-old. His parents could 
not work out a cooperative parenting relationship following the breakup and Peter’s 
father did not fulfill an active parenting role. Two years after the divorce, Peter saw his 
father infrequently and when they were together their interaction was superficial.
Peter’s mother was overburdened by the demands of raising three children on 
her own, working full-time, and trying to make some kind of personal life for herself. 
Frustrated by the many demands and few pleasures in her life, Peter’s mother often made 
him the target of her resentment. Impatient and irritable toward him, she criticized Peter 
when things went wrong in her life. She often felt resentful of his needs and, although 
she tried her best to be fair to the children and give them a good home, she was not very 
responsive to Peter or affirming of him.
After his father left, Peter quickly learned that taking care of his mother was the best 
way to ward off her disapproval and to win whatever affection he could. Following the 
anxious/ambivalent attachment style, he was “preoccupied” with monitoring his mother’s 
moods and concerns. By the age of 10, Peter had already adopted a pervasive interpersonal 
style of moving-toward people. His teachers described him as an especially responsible 
and well-behaved boy who was “a pleasure to have in class — always so helpful.” Let’s 
turn the clock forward 15 years and see how these developmental challenges are being 
expressed in Peter’s early adulthood.
At the age of 25, Peter is a graduate student in counseling. Becoming a therapist felt 
like a perfect career choice to Peter. He prided himself on his sensitivity and concern for 
others and took pleasure in being able to help those in need. He enjoyed being a therapist 
and felt that he was often able to help his new clients. At least, all of his clients seemed 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INFLEXIBLE INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES  239
to like him and they kept returning to their counseling sessions each week. As his second-
semester practicum got under way, Peter felt that he was on his way.
Later that semester, though, Peter had a setback. After presenting a videotaped 
recording of one of his therapy sessions in group supervision, Peter received some 
unexpected feedback. The practicum instructor told Peter that he was being “too nice” 
to his clients and that he seemed to need their approval too much. The instructor went 
on to say that Peter seemed to be afraid to challenge his clients, reassured them too 
often, and tended to avoid potential misunderstandings or conflicts in the therapist-client 
relationship that needed to be addressed.
Peter was stunned. Although he had some awareness of his aversion to conflict, he 
felt hurt and confused by the criticism. It was important to Peter that his instructor like 
him and approve of his clinical work. Peter tried carefully to explain that the instructor 
did not understand the close relationship that Peter was developing with his clients or 
recognize all of the important issues that his clients had been revealing. The instructor 
responded that this was probably true, but Peter was missing the point. He repeated 
that Peter needed to think about his reluctance to address interpersonal conflict or say 
things that his clients might not want to hear. To make matters worse, two students in the 
practicum group chimed in and agreed with the instructor’s comments. With that, Peter’s 
anxiety became so high that he could no longer explain himself or try to learn from their 
comments. He stopped arguing, looked down, and was quiet throughout the rest of the 
supervision session.
Throughout the next few days, Peter was so dismayed by the criticism that he couldn’t 
think about anything else. He considered dropping out of the practicum group, but then 
he decided that if he tried hard enough, he could make the instructor see that his criticism 
was unfounded. Peter kept searching for a way to discount the feedback and stop the 
anxiety that was churning inside.
One week later, Peter found out that his girlfriend was having an affair with another 
student in the program. Although he tried to be understanding at first, he felt shocked 
and betrayed. He alternated between withdrawing and announcing that their relationship 
was over and desperately trying to win her back. He became so anxious that he was 
unable to eat or sleep, let alone study. Peter began hyperventilating, experiencing heart 
palpitations, and having anxiety attacks. 
To make matters worse, Peter tried to keep all of this turmoil to himself. He thought 
he should remain “calm and together.” He was afraid that his supervisors would not want 
him to see clients if he was “so messed up” that he was having anxiety attacks himself. 
But despite his attempts to cover up his distress, his individual supervisor soon asked him 
what was wrong.
Although he never could have allowed himself to ask for it, Peter desperately wanted 
his individual supervisor’s support, and he was greatly relieved to receive it. Peter 
explained how his practicum group was becoming one of the worst failure experiences of 
his life and how hard it was to accept what his girlfriend had done. The supervisor was 
supportive but also found a tactful way to say that the practicum instructor’s comments 
fit with some of his own observations. Because he knew that his individual supervisor 
liked him, Peter was able to consider the feedback this time. The supervisor suggested 
that these were important issues for Peter to work with but that they could be dealt with 
better in his own therapy rather than in supervision. Peter agreed and began seeing his 
own therapist.
It helped that Peter’s supervisor thought he could be a fine therapist, in spite of 
his anxiety attacks. However, Peter’s anxiety remained paralyzing as he began his 
own treatment. Fortunately, Peter’s therapist was skilled and experienced and soon 
conceptualized the predisposing vulnerability, interpersonal coping strategy, and 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

240  CHAPTER 7
situational stressors that precipitated his crisis. Peter’s coping strategy of moving-toward 
people had generally worked well enough for him up to this point. However, both of 
the crises that Peter had just experienced ran headlong into the heart of his core conflict 
and his interpersonal style for coping with it. As his ability to manage his core conflict 
by pleasing others failed, the anxiety associated with his profoundly insecure childhood 
broke through, and anxiety attacks resulted. Let’s try to understand more fully why Peter 
developed these symptoms.
P/r.sc/e.sc/c.sc/i.sc/p.sc/i.sc/t.sc/a.sc/t.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc C/r.sc/i.sc/s.sc/i.sc/s.sc, M/a.sc/l.sc/a.sc/d.sc/a.sc/p.sc/t.sc/i.sc/v.sc/e.sc R/e.sc/l.sc/a.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc/a.sc/l.sc P/a.sc/t.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/n.sc/s.sc,  
/a.sc/n.sc/d.sc S/y.sc/m.sc/p.sc/t.sc/o.sc/m.sc D/e.sc/v.sc/e.sc/l.sc/o.sc/p.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc
Many people would have coped with the two stressful events that Peter experienced 
without developing such significant symptoms. As we have seen, however, we understand 
more when we apply the concept of client response specificity. We will use Peter to 
illustrate how symptoms develop when situational stressors evoke painful developmental 
experiences, confirm pathogenic beliefs, or cause interpersonal coping strategies to fail.
The first stressor for Peter was his practicum instructor’s critical feedback. Criticism 
from a respected authority figure would be unsettling for most people, but generally 
they can cope with it. For someone like Peter, however, such disapproval carried far 
more weight. Peter’s childhood deprivation and strong need for approval, his history 
of receiving excessive criticism, and his lifestyle adaptation of trying to manage these 
developmental conflicts by being helpful and nice was not working.
Second, the instructor’s feedback triggered Peter’s core conflict—anxiety about 
receiving criticism and feeling rejected—and, simultaneously, weakened his interpersonal 
defense of pleasing others and accommodating their needs. Seeing how IWMs develop, 
Peter adopted the attitude toward himself communicated by his early caretakers — that 
he did not matter enough to be committed to (from his father and his girlfriend) and was 
not good enough to be approved of and responded to (from his mother), and to expect 
that others often would be critical of him (like his practicum instructor) . His attempt to 
defend against the anxiety evoked by his father’s abandonment and mother’s criticism 
was by trying to be perfect — to please her and others and submerge himself to their 
needs, so that this self-critical schema could be refuted by their appreciation (Bernstein & 
Benfield, 2013). This coping style was, of course, a formula for failure: It was impossible 
for Peter to be liked and appreciated at all times by everyone he met. There was no such 
thing as constructive criticism for Peter— he construed all disapproval as rejection, and he 
felt very uncomfortable whenever he could not win everyone’s approval. When teaching 
his first undergraduate course, for example, Peter seemed only to notice the two or three 
students in the class who seemed disgruntled. He did not meaningfully register that the 
large majority of students enjoyed the class and thought he was doing a good job.
If not for the subsequent crisis with his girlfriend, Peter probably could have 
recovered from the first setback without developing symptoms. Most likely, he would 
have reconstituted his interpersonal coping style and been somewhat successful in winning 
the approval he needed from others in his life— different instructors, friends, and as it too 
often goes, perhaps even clients. As we will see, however, the subsequent stressor with his 
girlfriend also struck at the same core conflict. At that point, his moving-toward coping 
style toppled, and the intense anxiety associated with his insecure attachment history was 
evoked. More specifically, this was “shame-anxiety” — anxiety over the threat of having 
his unlovable and unworthy self exposed. This anxiety over having his shame-worthy self 
revealed, both to himself and to others, became too intense and broke through in anxiety 
attacks and symptom formation.
A partner’s infidelity will be highly stressful for almost everyone. Here again, though, 
this particular stressor held far greater significance for Peter when viewed within the 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INFLEXIBLE INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES  241
personal context of his developmental history and subjective worldview. Peter had to 
cope with far more than just the loss of trust with his girlfriend; he also suffered a blow 
to his identity, his basic sense of self-worth, and his interpersonal coping strategy of being 
able to please others and win their approval. 
In and of themselves, these multiple stressors would precipitate a crisis for many 
people and lead them to therapy. However, if these situational stressors do not tap into 
preexisting schemas, repeat familiar but unwanted relational scenarios, and confirm 
pathogenic beliefs, they will not usually provoke such strong symptoms. The client will 
often be able to recover in a relatively short time with crisis intervention or short-term 
supportive therapy. In contrast, when stressful life events tap squarely into a client’s core 
conflict, a client such as Peter has to cope with far more than just the demands of the 
current situational stressors.
Thus, when Peter’s girlfriend became sexually involved with another man, he had 
to cope with much more than just the pain of this betrayal. He had to cope with the 
even bigger developmental problems that were triggered: his strained attachment history 
was evoked; his interpersonal coping strategy of pleasing to ward off the criticism and 
rejection that he expected was failing; and because he received too little empathy as a 
child, he had virtually no capacity for self-compassion or self-empathy to help see him 
through difficult times (Neff, 2014).
 In this way, clients such as Peter have little to fall back on in times of crisis. As 
unrealistic as it is, the secondary gains that clients can earn with their interpersonal 
coping style of moving-toward others and being “giving” is the only identity or sense of 
self-worth that some clients have been able to garner. It is understandable, then, that Peter 
was overwhelmed by anxiety attacks. Both of the situational stressors intensified Peter’s 
original conflicts, and they both took away his coping strategy for defending against 
them. In this light, we see that clients’ presenting symptoms are not irrational. Per client 
response specificity, they make sense once they are understood in the broader context 
of the client’s developmental history and the cognitive schemas, pathogenic beliefs, and 
inflexible coping styles that result from this life context.
C/o.sc/u.sc/r.sc/s.sc/e.sc /o.sc/f.sc T/r.sc/e.sc/a.sc/t.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc
Fortunately, Peter’s therapist was both knowledgeable and kind. He was genuinely 
empathic to the pain that these situational crises brought on for Peter but also grasped 
what made Peter so vulnerable to them. The therapist recognized that the current crisis 
provided an opportunity to resolve the more important developmental problems that left 
Peter prone to re-experience crises such as these whenever others left or disapproved of 
him. In the months that followed, Peter was able to resolve the precipitating crisis. More 
significantly, he made progress in coming to terms with the impact of his developmental 
history and the problems that followed from it. As a result, Peter was able to expand his 
narrow moving-toward coping style and adopt a more flexible interpersonal repertoire. 
Here and in the next chapter, we will review the course of therapeutic events that allowed 
Peter to make these far-reaching changes.
From the first session, Peter felt understood and cared about by the therapist. As 
the therapist’s accurate empathy led to a strong working alliance, Peter’s anxiety attacks 
stopped. The distress that had been so disruptive for him steadily subsided as the therapist 
continued to provide an effective holding environment. 
The primary way that the therapist worked in the beginning was to help Peter identify 
his habitual coping style of pleasing and recognize how automatically and frequently it 
came into play. Thus, the therapist named it , so they could talk about it and begin to 
explore it together — compassionately and without judgment. This opened the door that 
changed everything. From these conversations, for example, Peter learned to focus inward 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

242  CHAPTER 7
to identify what he was feeling, and what was occurring with others, at the moment 
just before he felt compelled to employ this coping pattern and please. Usually, at such 
moments, Peter found that he was expecting others to be disapproving of him or to go 
away and cut off from him in some way. With help from his therapist, Peter became 
increasingly adept at recognizing this sequence  and his propensity to manage his anxiety 
by engaging in pleasing behavior (Levensen, 2010).
Specifically, as he listened to Peter’s narratives, the therapist would highlight when 
instances of Peter’s key relational themes were occurring (Barber et al., 2002). The 
therapist would point out when Peter was (1) pleasing others, (2) avoiding anger and other 
interpersonal conflicts, and (3) expecting others to be critical or rejecting. In particular, the 
therapist used process comments to approach or explore these three repetitive relational 
themes whenever he thought they might be occurring in their interaction together, or with 
others (DeFife, Hilsenroth, & Kuutmann, 2014). For example, when the therapist thought 
that Peter was trying to please him, too, he made this overt in a direct but collaborative 
manner and invited dialogue about this possibility by saying:
THERAPIST:
 When we’re talking, Peter, sometimes I find myself wondering if you might be 
thinking too much about what I or others might want to hear. What do you think—is there 
anything to that?
The therapist also highlighted whenever he thought he heard one of these three 
themes in Peter’s relationships with others. For example:
THERAPIST:
 As 
I listen to you describe this interaction with them, it sounds like you are trying 
very hard to keep them from being angry at you. I feel like I’ve heard this before. Does it seem 
to you like this comes up a lot?
This feedback provided direction for their work together — a treatment focus —
and served as the basis for developing mutually held treatment goals. For example, the 
therapist encouraged Peter to risk not pleasing him and focus instead on just saying and 
doing what he wanted in their relationship . Not having to be vigilant about what the 
therapist might like or want gave Peter the opportunity to live inside his own skin and 
have his own mind rather than be so preoccupied about what the other person wanted to 
hear. This was a CEE for Peter. He could enjoy this relationship where he could be cared 
about even when he was not trying to please the therapist or act in ways that, at some 
level, were designed to keep the therapist engaged with him and ensure that he would 
not leave him or be critical (such as frequently complimenting the therapist or telling him 
how helpful he is being).
The therapist continued to focus Peter inward. In particular, they explored the feelings 
that were evoked for Peter when, instead of employing his usual coping style of pleasing 
others, he risked new, more assertive responses that he had rehearsed with the therapist. 
Gradually, by focusing on what he was experiencing just before he employed his usual 
coping patterns, Peter began to clarify the emotional deprivation he had suffered as a 
child but had always been too ashamed to reveal to others or even acknowledge fully to 
himself. Relatively quickly, the therapist’s accepting presence allowed Peter to overcome 
the shame of having his pain revealed. Now, for the first time in his life, Peter could be 
fully seen by someone with all his strengths and problems and continue to be respected. 
Peter began to understand how he had coped with his childhood predicament by taking 
care of and pleasing his mother, and then others as well. As this significant progress 
occurred, however, Peter still continued to struggle with strong feelings of anxiety, shame, 
and sadness.
These contradictory feelings continued to wax and wane for Peter over the next few 
months. He was increasingly recognizing how unwanted and alone he had felt as a child 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INFLEXIBLE INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES  243
and how ashamed of himself he had always been. Peter also recognized and began to 
challenge the false belief that he was not loved because he was somehow unworthy— that 
he did not matter enough to be important to others. As Peter continued to feel “held” by 
the therapist’s understanding, his long-withheld feelings of sadness over this deprivation 
and invalidation could be expressed for the first time. Peter successfully moved through 
his original expectations and coping style as he received a far-reaching CEE. Repeatedly, 
the therapist’s validating responses disconfirmed Peter’s old relational expectations and 
were deeply comforting, offering him the affirmation for which he had always longed. 
This validation also provided him with a sense of being seen or known, and accepted for 
who he really was for the first time.
Peter began to feel sadness and compassion for himself and mourn his childhood 
losses— rather than continue to blame himself for what occurred. In response to this 
primary affect of sadness, two reactive feelings followed closely behind. Peter found 
himself feeling angry: at his father for walking away from him; and at his mother for 
making him feel responsible for trying to earn her love, and for having to work so hard to 
be “good” to ward off her disdain. As soon as this anger emerged, however, Peter became 
exceedingly anxious — afraid of being left on his own by the therapist, his girlfriend, his 
parents, and anyone else for being angry with them and “protesting” how they treated 
him. Each of these three feelings in Peter’s affective constellation— the shame surrounding 
his unmet emotional needs, his anger over being rejected and dismissed so readily, and 
the anxiety of being left or emotionally cut off if he protested — was repeatedly aroused 
in treatment. With the therapist’s help, Peter was gradually able to integrate and resolve 
these feelings. He was able to experience or know them himself, to risk sharing or 
revealing them to the therapist, and to discover that he could live through or contain 
them with the therapist’s support. 
The therapist provided a skillful balancing of the good news and the bad news in 
Peter’s development. He was able to acknowledge the reality that Peter loved his mother 
and still felt loyal to her despite all that occurred, and that some of the qualities he 
valued most about himself were qualities derived from her. However, these reality-based 
strengths were accompanied by the painful realities of Peter’s emotional deprivation and 
invalidation. This process of acknowledging both aspects helped Peter preserve important 
aspects of his tie to his mother. Being able to protest with the therapist what had been 
so unfair and hurtful was not to reject his parents, hold a grudge, feel sorry for himself, 
or make his parents bad people. Instead, it was to change the narrative of his life and 
know that these things actually did happen, really were painful, and that he didn’t cause 
or deserve them. Rather than denying the reality of his circumstances any longer, being 
able to have the validity of his own feelings and perceptions for the first time led Peter 
to a stronger stance that he was able to generalize to other relationships. He became 
more confident and assertive, developed firmer boundaries with others and gained more 
clarity about who he was, and began to disconfirm the pathogenic belief that he would 
be criticized or rejected if he wasn’t taking care of others. Peter came to understand that 
his mother’s on-going criticism and exasperation with him was unwarranted - just the 
expression of her own hopelessness about ever being loved. Significantly, Peter was able 
to feel compassion toward her and appreciate the predicament she was in as she was 
coping with her own long-term depression, yet without denying the reality of the painful 
consequences this engendered for him. Peter also grasped experientially, for the first time, 
that his father’s abandonment was his inability to be a parent and had nothing to do with 
him or his basic worth and lovability.
As a result of these changes, Peter felt less compelled to make others like him, less 
threatened by interpersonal conflict, and more self-contained. He was also able to keep 
the best parts of his moving-toward style: He remained a genuinely caring and responsive 
person. However, this was no longer the unidimensional response pattern that it had been 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

244  CHAPTER 7
in the past. Peter no longer compulsively tried to get everyone to like him. He became 
increasingly more able to address interpersonal conflicts, although this would continue to 
be challenging for him. Nevertheless, this growing ability was helpful in establishing more 
mutually rewarding relationships. 
Peter will certainly have further crises in his life, especially when circumstances again 
tap into his old wound, but he is more resilient now and the changes he has made will 
help him respond to future problems in a more empowered, present-centered manner.
TWO CASE SUMMARIES
In the case study of Peter, we have seen how the interpersonal model for conceptualizing 
clients is used with a moving-toward client. Next are two case summaries that highlight 
salient features in the treatment of a moving-against and a moving-away client.
J/u.sc/a.sc/n.sc: M/o.sc/v.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc–A/g.sc/a.sc/i.sc/n.sc/s.sc/t.sc O/t.sc/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc
Juan came to therapy because his wife, Maria, had threatened to leave him unless he went to 
therapy to deal with his jealous, intrusive, and controlling behavior. Upon again finding him 
“checking up” on her by secretly going through her cell phone and emails, and then erupt-
ing in threatening accusations that she was having affairs when she told him to stop, she 
had, in fact, moved in with her parents for a week until he promised to give therapy a try.
CLIENT:
 I’m here because my wife is threatening to leave me. She says I’m too possessive and 
controlling. I’m not sure how therapy will help but when she went back to her parents’ house 
I agreed to try. 
THERAPIST:
 I hear you—you don’t want to be here talking to me, but you are doing this to 
try and save your marriage. I hope you find it helpful to talk to me, and eventually decide 
to come for yourself. Your wife says you are too possessive and controlling. Can you tell me 
more about that? 
CLIENT:
 Well, I just got back from Afghanistan and discovered—even though she knows I disap-
prove—that she started going to school. She says she needs a career. Why does she need a 
career when I’m here to take care of her and the family? I told her I don’t like it and that she 
should leave school—and I don’t like or trust the friends she’s making. She says she had to 
make all the decisions when I was in the military and now she thinks she should be able to 
make some of the decisions about her life. I have always made the decisions in my home and 
at my work—except when I was in the service.
THERAPIST:
 You disapprove of her going to school and feel now that you are back, you should 
make all the family decisions? Did I get that right?
CLIENT:
 Yes, I’m the man of the house. She shouldn’t have started school and been spending time 
with all of these new people she calls “friends” without my permission. And now that I’m 
back, she should leave the family decisions about our family life to me and respect that I don’t 
want her in school. She’s even taking night classes!
THERAPIST:
 How have you responded to her making decisions without checking with you?
CLIENT:
 I told her I don’t like it—things will get out of control. She used to go along with what 
I decided before I left for Afghanistan, but she has always complained about my needing to 
be in charge, in control. She used to call me “Mr. Control.” But maybe it’s fine with you for 
a wife to be disrespectful to her husband—you’re probably just a feminist. But I feel that if 
I don’t have control in my own house, then what kind of man am I, what kind of life are we 
going to have?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INFLEXIBLE INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES  245
THERAPIST:
 No, I’m not a feminist who thinks your wife should be disrespectful to you, but I do  No, I’m not a feminist who thinks your wife should be disrespectful to you, but I do 
value reciprocity in relationships more than you do—shared control and mutual respect. So 
there is a value difference between us that we can acknowledge and work with. But being in 
control is very important to you. Help me understand that better—have you always been this 
way?
CLIENT:
 Oh no, I didn’t have any control when I was a kid.
THERAPIST:
 No control at all…that doesn’t sound good—tell me how that went.
CLIENT:
 Yeah, no control at all, like where I would sleep at night.
THERAPIST:
 You didn’t know what bed you were going to sleep in at night?
CLIENT:
 I wish it was just that—not knowing what bed I was going to sleep in, but which house.
THERAPIST:
 “Which house” —that really is “no control.” I’m so sorry—that sounds so very dif-
ficult for a child. Tell me more about not having control as a child—not knowing where you 
were going to sleep—and how it’s affecting you now?
CLIENT:
 Well, my mom was unreliable—a flake. Sometimes she was there and helpful and nice—
until she found a new boyfriend and would disappear for weeks at a time. I lived mostly with 
my grandma, but she died when I was five. After that I lived with different family members—
whoever would take me in for a while. I didn’t have a real home staying with my aunts or 
uncle, I always felt like the outsider. I had no control, no bed of my own or my own clothes—
just “hand-me-downs.” I was alone a lot and people said I was too angry—I got in lots of 
fights. But I know I was angry about not having a home like other kids—I don’t need a shrink 
to tell me that—and promised myself that it would be different when I have my own family 
and would have control over things and how we lived.
THERAPIST:
 You’ve just said so much, Juan, and it’s heartbreaking. I’m so sorry you were so 
alone and painfully on the outside as a child—and things really were out of control, not know
-
ing when your mother would be with you or gone, and who would be taking you in. It makes 
sense that you want a stable life with Maria now—where things are dependable and in con
 -
trol. But maybe we could explore some better ways to give that to you, and to Maria as well?
CLIENT:
 Well I can see you girls like to stick together, and I don’t need you to feel sorry for me, ei
-
ther. But shouldn’t a woman, who is being taken care of, want what her husband wants? I’m the 
man of the house and ought to have the last word. I’ve always taken charge—since I got eman
-
cipated at age 16. I seriously wanted to get out of the back and forth, and stop having people 
telling me what to do. I started working—at a warehouse, and took charge there too—and they 
liked it and promoted me—I became the youngest loading supervisor. I should have stayed but 
they kept telling me to do more, so I got pissed and quit to join the military. I thought it would 
provide more benefits and pay for college—but they REALLY control you. I hated it, but now 
that I’m back, I’m not going to have my wife going places and being with people and doing 
things that I don’t know about. She’s my wife and she ought to respect what I want.
THERAPIST:
 Sounds like you have strong beliefs about a woman’s role. Tell me more about that.
CLIENT:
 Maria says she knew that I was possessive and needed to be in charge but thought I 
would change once we got married. But now she thinks I’ve gotten worse since I’ve been in 
the military. And she says she liked living more independently—going to school—when I was 
away and doesn’t want to just be home like she should be. Who and what else does she need 
if she has me?
THERAPIST:
 I understand that your childhood experiences have made you want to make a 
different and better life for yourself—and certainly respect that. And I can see how having 
control over things—over Maria—is a way you are trying to bring a feeling of safety and pre-
dictability, but it seems to be costing you a lot at the same time.
CLIENT:
 “
Costing me,” what do you mean, it doesn’t cost me anything. It’s the right way.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

246  CHAPTER 7
THERAPIST:
 Well, I’m concerned it may cost you Maria…she is saying she doesn’t want this con-
trol anymore, and has moved to her parents’ home.
CLIENT:
 Well, she should be a good wife. But you’re probably on her side. You’re a working 
woman—like Maria wants to be. You’d probably like it if she left me.
THERAPIST:
 Thank you for expressing your concern with me so directly. No, I’m not wishing 
she would leave you, but that you two could work out some new ways of being together that 
worked for both of you.
CLIENT:
 So how could that happen—how does this stupid therapy thing work anyway? Obvi-
ously you think I’m just a control freak, like her parents do, but you’re just trickier about how 
you say it.
THERAPIST:
 No part of me wants to trick you, Juan. The important relationships in your life 
have not been trustworthy—so painfully undependable, and I certainly don’t want to add to 
that. I think therapy might help if we could work together to sort out a middle ground where 
you finally have the stable life you want and deserve, but don’t have to always be in control of you finally have the stable life you want and deserve, but don’t have to always be in control of 
Maria. How does that sound to you?
CLIENT:
 How could my life possibly be stable if I’m not in control? That’s happy-talk, Disney-
land, that just doesn’t happen.
THERAPIST:
 Yes, I think it would be very hard for you to imagine that possibility, because you 
have never experienced anything like that. But I think it’s certainly possible that you and Ma-
ria can share control and have a stable family life. You could know that she is choosing you, 
and not staying with you out of fear that you’ll lose your temper if she doesn’t do everything 
your way. I don’t have any guarantees, of course, but I think it’s possible your relationship 
could go better for both of you.
CLIENT 
(less combative, more thoughtful tone of voice)
:
 Maria has said almost those same words to 
me (pauses). But when we start to talk, I do get upset—angry I guess, and everything just goes 
to shit. I don’t like this “independence” thing she’s on… but ya, I don’t want to lose her either. 
Could the three of meet together sometimes—it might make it easier for us to talk?
THERAPIST:
 Yes, we’re on the same page—I was just going to suggest the same thing. And I’d 
like to say something else, Juan—about us—that I think is important. Right now, I feel like 
our relationship, the way you and I are talking or being together, just changed. I feel like you 
just took a risk with me, let go of some control here in our relationship, and we started work-
ing together rather than jockeying or vying back and forth. I liked that change a lot, and I’m 
wondering if you felt something different happened as well?
CLIENT:
 Yeah, I did, and I liked it too. 
Previously, with Peter, we discussed many different facets of his moving-toward 
interpersonal coping strategy and how it played out in his life and in treatment. In 
contrast, here with Juan, we are going to use this extended dialogue to try and highlight 
just one cardinal issue: the process dimension. 
Like other moving-against clients, Juan repeatedly responds to the therapist in ways 
that are challenging (and especially unwanted for most new therapists), just as he does 
with others in his everyday life. Juan is provocative with the therapist and, at times, overtly 
disrespectful and insulting—perhaps even contemptuous. Even though he is repeatedly off-
putting in this moving-against way, his therapist is non-defensive and doesn’t personalize
his disdain for her and therapy. Instead, she is able to sustain an empathic stance toward 
Juan in the face of this—which is not so easy for most to do. She readily grasps with 
compassion the meaning of his profound childhood losses (grandma), abandonment 
(mother), and aloneness (an outsider with the relatives he is shuffled around to). And, 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INFLEXIBLE INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES  247
despite her repeated bids to see things from Juan’s point of view, he repeatedly brushes off 
the therapist’s empathy and counters by framing the therapist as being against him and on 
his wife’s side. 
As a thought exercise, pause now for a moment and consider how Juan would have made 
you feel, and how you would have tended to respond to him, if he were your client? 
Moving-against clients like Juan often elicit a fight-or-flight response from others. 
That is, the initial or automatic response tendency for some is to respond with counter-
hostility and spit back, whereas many others will simply withdraw and go away from 
this difficult individual. Whatever the theoretical orientation of the therapist, treatment is 
likely to fail if the therapist responds in either of these ineffective modes and reenacts this 
familiar but faulty interpersonal process that typically ensues with others in his everyday 
life. That is, Juan’s therapist did not respond defensively with her own counter-hostility or 
become embroiled in a control battle with him—as Juan elicits from many. And without 
getting into a power struggle with him, she did not give in to Juan, either. He did not 
control or dominate her, and she did not withdraw physically or emotionally give up on 
him, as Juan often elicits from others. Instead, this therapist was effective in establishing 
a new and different interpersonal process with Juan that did not repeat either of these 
two maladaptive scenarios that pervade his life. As the therapist patiently tried to create 
a different and reparative interpersonal process in their interaction together, Juan made a 
highly significant shift at the end of the dialogue. He stopped (temporarily) his me-against-
you way of interacting with the therapist, relinquished his controlling stance temporarily, 
and accepted the therapist’s repeated bid to work more collaboratively. At this closing 
moment, their interpersonal process—the way they were interacting together—was 
behaviorally enacting a resolution of his presenting problem with his wife. 
With such significant attachment trauma in his history, Juan will not be able to 
relinquish his defensive interpersonal coping style for long. However, this success 
experience, which the therapist “names” and makes overt to help Juan recognize the 
different way of relating in their relationship, is significant. And, as he and the therapist 
can continue to find ways to interact in this new and different way, the potential for 
change with his wife is greatly enhanced. 
M/a.sc/g.sc/g.sc/i.sc/e.sc: M/o.sc/v.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc A/w.sc/a.sc/y.sc /f.sc/r.sc/o.sc/m.sc O/t.sc/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc
Six months after her adolescent daughter had been date-raped, Maggie, a 38-year-old 
biracial woman, was still in crisis— as if it all happened yesterday. Nightmares stole her 
sleep; migraine headaches tormented her days. Feeling so helpless and inadequate to 
comfort her daughter, and furious at the casual indifference of the lawyer and police, 
Maggie was afraid her life was spinning out of control. At work, her supervisor’s evaluation 
said she was “irritable, sullen, and difficult for coworkers to interact with” and suggested 
that she seek counseling. Although she had always “hated” to ask for help with anything, 
Maggie contacted a therapist when she realized her job was in jeopardy. The therapist was 
responsive to Maggie’s feelings of outrage, guilt, and helplessness evoked by her daughter’s 
tragedy. To her surprise, Maggie felt understood by the therapist. Time and again, the 
therapist “got it”— understood what something really meant to her— and Maggie actually 
began looking forward to their meetings. She gradually came to trust the therapist a little 
more and slowly began to risk investing herself a bit in their relationship.
During one session, Maggie reported a dream from the previous night. In the dream, 
Maggie was alone in a vast desert night. No other people existed in this great, silent space. 
The desert night was black; no light shone from stars or moon. As she walked across the 
endless sand, a cool, dry wind began to move lightly across her face. Maggie lay down on 
the sand, closed her eyes, and silently slipped away into the darkness.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

248  CHAPTER 7
Maggie relayed that she had dreamt variations of this dream many times throughout 
her life. Because this was a recurrent dream, the therapist knew that it held much meaning 
and, in ways she couldn’t fully understand yet, probably encapsulated her core conflict. 
Hoping that the dream could also provide an avenue for joining her in her central feeling 
of aloneness, the therapist tried to bridge Maggie’s moving-away orientation:
THERAPIST:
 Can you close your eyes and find the dream again?
MAGGIE:
 Uh-huh. 
(settles back and closes her eyes)
THERAPIST:
 Describe what you see to me.
MAGGIE:
 I’m walking, but I’m tired of it; there isn’t any place to go anyway. It’s quiet and dark, 
empty. I’m alone. I can feel the breeze. It’s sandy and the horizon is a long way off. Now 
I’m lying down on the sand. I close my eyes, and just slip away somehow, like going to sleep 
forever.
THERAPIST:
 I don’t want you to be there alone. Will you let me join you?
MAGGIE:
 (pauses, then speaks cautiously) Well, thanks, but it feels sort of familiar, sort of safe, I 
guess, to be just by myself.
THERAPIST:
 You are familiar with being alone, that’s the safe zone for you.
MAGGIE:
 Yeah, 
I 
guess it is...
THERAPIST:
 ...
is that what you want?
MAGGIE:
 (very long pause, tears in her eyes)
 No...actually, no.
..
I really don’t want to be alone 
(looks at therapist)
. 
I do want to be with you, it’s kind of comforting to talk with you, but it’s 
kind of scary, too, sort of vulnerable.
THERAPIST:
 Uh-huh. It’s kind of comforting to have me there and not be alone, but that vulner
-
able feeling is kind of scary too.
MAGGIE:
 Yeah, 
I guess I’ve just learned to do it all myself. Being alone, doing it on my own has 
just become the safe way. But no, I don’t really want to be alone anymore.
THERAPIST:
 Good. Will you let me join you and maybe talk about the scary/vulnerable feelings 
if you want?
MAGGIE:
 Yes...but do you really want to join me?
THERAPIST:
 Yes, Maggie, 
I really do want to join you, and I don’t want to do anything that 
would hurt or scare you if you invited me in.
MAGGIE:
 Well, maybe that would be nice, to not be alone anymore.
THERAPIST:
 Thank you for taking the risk to let me join you. Can we go back to the dream, but 
be together in it this time?
MAGGIE:
 All right.
THERAPIST:
 Good. Close your eyes and hold that same, familiar image. But you’re not alone this 
time. I am walking toward you, and I reach my hand out toward yours. Will you take it?
MAGGIE:
 Yeah. It’s nice...But I’m kind of scared, too...
THERAPIST:
 Mmm hmm. Now I’m in the dream with you—you’re not alone there anymore. 
We’re holding hands and walking together through the desert night. And it feels two ways—
kind of nice, and kind of scary.
MAGGIE:
 Yeah, we’re walking together. 
(opens her eyes and looks at the therapist)
 I’m not alone. 
It’s better to have you with me. I think it’s more nice than scary...but I sort of feel like crying 
when I say that...
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INFLEXIBLE INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES  249
This joining experience was a turning point in therapy. Maggie had grown up in a 
silent void, much like the setting in her dream. She had never known her father, and her 
mother was often “away” pursuing the next new boyfriend in her life. By 10 years of age, 
Maggie was regularly spending most of the weekends alone, fixing her own meals, and 
putting herself to bed while her mother was “out.” Maggie felt unwanted and rejected 
by her mother, and not “safe” with the men her mother brought home — who “weren’t 
always nice” and whom Maggie sometimes felt “scared” of. The dream reflected the 
emptiness of her childhood, the lack of comfort and protection she had experienced, 
and her lifestyle adaptation of moving-away from others. However, the crisis with her 
daughter overwhelmed her coping strategy to withdraw and be self-sufficient and aloof. 
In letting the therapist join her in her dark, empty space, Maggie took the enormous 
personal risk of accepting the human contact she longed for yet had long since resolved 
to hold away. Of course, this single CEE did not resolve her core conflict or change her 
interpersonal style for coping with it. However, in big and small ways, similar incidents of 
sharing continued to occur with the therapist.
Maggie’s sense of aloneness was heightened by her consciousness of being “different” 
because she was biracial, as her therapist, herself a biracial woman, was well aware. The 
therapist’s support and ability to articulate all the factors, familial cultural, and racial, 
that contributed to Maggie’s sense of isolation helped her begin to change in three ways.
First, Maggie’s affective constellation emerged. The profound sadness resulting 
from her childhood neglect began to come to her — as we see at the end of the preceding 
dialogue. To ensure that the lack of response that Maggie had suffered as a child was 
not reenacted in their relationship, the therapist was careful to let Maggie know that 
her feelings were being heard this time. The therapist was skillful in communicating 
to Maggie that she was not in a dark, silent void anymore but rather in a caring and 
responsive relationship. Maggie became more comfortable sharing her loneliness with 
the therapist — and began to question the accompanying beliefs that she “didn’t really 
matter very much” and that others “wouldn’t be very interested in helping” if she had a 
problem and needed them. Feeling safe with the therapist allowed her to experience her 
deprivation and face it rather than dismiss it as she had always done before. She was able 
to register how painful this had actually been for her. This deep sharing and resonance 
from the therapist was relieving for her, but it evoked another threatening feeling — the 
intense anger she felt toward her mother for, in effect, walking away from her and for 
exposing her to all of these men who just kept coming in and out of their apartment. The 
therapist was affirming of her anger and validated her feelings of not being watched over 
and protected. For example, 
Maggie: I didn’t deserve this— a mother shouldn’t leave her daughter home alone to go 
chasing after the next stupid boyfriend or bring all those creeps into the house. The one she 
had around the longest was awful—had around the longest was awful—had around the longest was awful he knew the bathroom door didn’t lock and he used to 
always “accidentally” walk in when I was in there. He also used to talk about the size of 
my breasts and behind—my breasts and behind—my breasts and behind he was a creep and my mom never stopped him from saying those 
things. I guess she preferred those worthless men to me. Even when they tried to touch me, 
she would say they were just “teasing.” I hated it. 
Feeling such anger toward her mother evoked the third feeling in her affective 
constellation — anxiety . Painful separation anxieties were aroused by this protest, as 
Maggie feared that being angry with her mother would only further push her away and 
leave her back where she started — feeling even more alone. The therapist affirmed each 
feeling in her affective constellation and, as she did, Maggie progressively became more 
comfortable with each feeling. In turn, the therapist began to hear narratives in their 
sessions where Maggie was being a little more forthright, engaging, and confident in her 
interactions with some others.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

250  CHAPTER 7
Second, as the therapist continued to understand and support Maggie through each 
feeling in her affective constellation, Maggie began to make further important behavioral 
changes in how she responded to the therapist. Although Maggie had developed a strong 
working alliance with the therapist, she was still deeply reluctant to accept help from 
anyone and held a part of herself back. Interestingly, the therapist’s biracial identity had 
given her an ascribed credibility, based on perceived similarities of race and gender, which 
helped Maggie remain in treatment initially when she was so unsure of this process. Now, 
however, the therapist’s achieved credibility— her skillfulness and the effectiveness of her 
responses— took center stage.
 As their working alliance continued, Maggie incrementally relinquished her coping 
style of moving-away and gradually allowed the therapist to see her, know her, and help 
her. Maggie became less reserved toward the counselor and, instead, more expressive and 
responsive than she had been with others. She talked more freely about herself and found 
herself being curious about the therapist’s own personal life. The therapist saw this as 
positive for this particular client and responded willingly at times. Maggie’s nightmares 
and headaches already had been alleviated, but now a sense of humor and relaxed 
confidence were emerging as well.
Third, as Maggie talked about feeling “fuller” inside, the therapist observed that 
changes were occurring in other relationships as well. At work, her supervisor said he was 
pleased to observe that Maggie was “less irritable and sullen than before” — it was easier 
for others in the office to talk and work with her. When tensions surfaced with others, 
Maggie’s initial reaction still was to withdraw and “go away inside.” However, Maggie 
became better able to approach problems with others and talk through the interpersonal 
conflicts that inevitably come up in a busy workplace. For Maggie, it was especially 
helpful for her to describe a conflict she was having with a coworker or customer and 
have the therapist suggest new or different ways for her to respond. Together, they would 
role-play different responses that would keep Maggie involved in the situation, rather than 
withdraw or remain aloof as she had always done in the past. Maggie relished playing the 
part of the difficult customer or coworker and have the therapist role-play what Maggie 
could say or do in that situation. Maggie found this behavioral training invaluable. With 
frequent success, she regularly found herself using almost the same words and phrases 
with others that the therapist had modeled.
Especially meaningful for the therapist to observe, Maggie became more accessible—
more emotionally present— with her two adolescent children. For the first time, she talked 
more about her own interests and personal history with them. The nearly grown children 
welcomed this sharing and, in turn, began to say more about themselves and what 
was going on in their lives as well. Maggie was feeling closer to her children and, with 
coaching from the therapist, more capable of helping her daughter with the aftershocks 
of her assault.
In addition, Maggie began to change how she responded to a man she had started 
dating. This had been a superficial relationship, like most others in her life had been. 
Even though they had known each other for more than two years, Maggie now invited 
more personal sharing and emotional closeness in their relationship and asked for more 
commitment from him. Specifically, she asked him to talk more about himself and to 
spend more time with her, which he was able to do. It was exciting but anxiety-arousing to 
take each of these steps forward. Maggie’s old coping style of moving-away was activated 
each time she took a step toward her boyfriend or others, especially when others did not 
respond in completely positive ways. Repetitiously, the therapist celebrated her successes 
in each of these arenas, and patiently helped her work through the setbacks and recover 
from the disappointments that regularly came along as well. As she continued to make 
progress and participate more fully in life, however, Maggie tentatively suggested that it 
might be time to end counseling.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

INFLEXIBLE INTERPERSONAL COPING STRATEGIES  251
Although things had been going well, Maggie became depressed as they started 
talking about ending. Even though she had brought up the topic of termination, she 
missed their next session (“I just completely forgot”), and arrived late to another. As 
before, the therapist continued to focus Maggie inward, and her profound feelings of 
being unwanted, alone, unprotected, and vulnerable emerged again. The therapist 
suggested that they put off setting a termination date for a while and work further with 
this sadness. With more vividness and detail than before, Maggie recalled her childhood 
depression. Painful recollections returned— for example, the memory of being eight years 
old, sitting alone on the living room couch, and listening to the clock tick away the empty 
afternoon. Maggie sobbed as she recalled her aching wish for a mom she could come 
home to, which was only reenacted in her unfortunate marital choice. Following her early 
maladaptive schemas, Maggie had married a salesman whose job took him away from 
home for extended periods— and he had been preoccupied and emotionally unresponsive 
to her when he was home as well. Thus, in her first significant love relationship, Maggie 
chose someone who repeated, rather than resolved, her history of aloneness. However, 
touching the pain of her childhood neglect so directly, and sharing so fully how it was 
echoed in the disappointment of her marriage, relieved the depression that the suggestion 
of terminating had precipitated. Before long, Maggie again felt ready to end and, this 
time, successfully terminated.
CLOSING
In this chapter, we have studied an interpersonal model for conceptualizing clients. In 
an extended case study of Peter, a moving-toward client, we saw how this model can be 
applied to treatment. We also explored two case summaries that illustrate its application 
to moving-against (Juan) and moving-away (Maggie) clients. The therapists in these three 
cases were helpful, in part, because they used their clients’ rigid interpersonal coping 
styles as an orientating focus for treatment. These therapists were also helpful because 
they worked collaboratively and engaged the client in recognizing and expanding their 
coping strategies.
 Although new therapists often find these three coping styles relevant with their 
clients, they can intervene with them ineffectively. To help, Safran and Muran (2000) 
clarify that the therapist’s premature attempts to identify a relational pattern (that is, force 
it) usually feels blaming to the client. They encourage collaboration and, again, as Kiesler 
(1996) and others guide, to share observations with “skillful tentativeness.” Emphasizing 
the subjectivity of the therapist (e.g., “My sense is ...” “What occurs to me ...” “I’m 
wondering if...”) suggests a more egalitarian relationship. This allows clients to be freer to 
accept, reject, or modify the therapist’s observations and make them their own. Similarly, 
once therapists identify these patterns, they can press clients to change the patterns too 
quickly. Instead, a better stance with most clients is to encourage a simple awareness of 
the relational patterns—merely taking note when clients see themselves responding in 
this way, rather than pressing clients to change their coping strategy prematurely. For 
example:
THERAPIST:
 Let’s watch for this and see when it comes up. You know, just pay attention to mo-
ments when you find yourself accommodating or trying to please too much—and we’ll start 
to track that together. As you become more aware of it, I think it will become easier for you to to track that together. As you become more aware of it, I think it will become easier for you to 
change it and respond differently if you choose.
Looking ahead, new therapists need further guidelines for conceptualizing clients and 
more help to shape treatment plans that guide where they are going in treatment and 
what they are trying to accomplish with each client. To do this, further information about 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

252  CHAPTER 7
clients’ current interpersonal functioning will be provided in Chapter 8. At this point, 
however, readers are prepared to utilize the guidelines for keeping process notes provided 
in Appendix A, and for writing case conceptualizations in Appendix B. These guidelines 
have two overarching goals. First, they will help therapists formulate treatment plans 
by clarifying the maladaptive relational and cognitive patterns that provide a focus for 
treatment. Second, they will help therapists recognize the process dimension and intervene 
more effectively by linking the current interaction with the counselor to the problems 
clients are having with others.
CHAPTER EXERCISE
What is your primary or initial interpersonal coping strategy? As a child, why was this 
adaptive in your family of origin? What does it cost and what does it give you in your life 
today?
READING SUGGESTION
Student therapists with two or more years of clinical experience are encouraged to 
read Lorna Smith Benjamin’s (2006) Interpersonal Reconstructive Therapy , New York: 
Guilford. This clinically rich, interpersonal and attachment-oriented book will help 
readers understand and intervene with their clients. Clearly written, integrative, and wise, 
this book is a must-read for more experienced graduate student therapists.
Visit CengageBrain.com for a variety of study tools and useful resources such as interac-
tive exercises, flashcards, and quizzes. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

253
CHAPTER 8
Relational Themes and 
Reparative Experiences
CONCEPTUAL OVERVIEW
This chapter explores further the interpersonal patterns that are causing problems 
in clients’ lives, highlights different ways they can be played out in the therapeutic 
relationship, and suggests useful ways to respond to these reenactments. In particular, we 
are going to explore these maladaptive relational patterns to help therapists conceptualize 
what is really wrong for clients and better understand what is going on in the therapeutic 
relationship. We will learn how therapists can use their own feelings and personal 
reactions toward clients as one of the best ways to understand the problems clients have 
with others. Clients often are adept at getting the therapist to feel or respond toward 
them along the same problematic lines that occur with others in their lives (e.g., having 
the therapist — like others in their lives —  feel overwhelmed, bored, or controlled by 
them; helpless or discouraged about being able to help; anxious about offending them or 
making a mistake). We will see how the problematic patterns that are disrupting clients’ 
relationships with others can be brought into the therapeutic relationship and played 
out with the therapist along the process dimension. Empowered by an understanding 
of what is going on between them, therapists can formulate better treatment plans and 
know where they are trying to go and what they are trying to do to help their clients. 
Throughout, we will suggest different ways that therapists can intervene to change 
these problematic reenactments by making process comments, providing interpersonal 
feedback, and using other immediacy interventions to disconfirm IWMs and provide 
corrective relational experiences.
THREE WAYS CLIENTS REENACT THEIR PROBLEMS 
WITH OTHERS IN THE THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP
The problems that clients try to resolve in treatment usually originated in attachment 
and formative family relationships, and now are being played out in thematically similar 
ways in current relationships. Routinely, the same interpersonal patterns that are causing 
problems with others emerge in some form in the therapeutic relationship as well. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

254  CHAPTER 8
As we have seen, clients do not merely talk with therapists about the problems they are 
having with others (Beatson & Rao, 2014). Clients also recreate relational themes with 
the therapist that parallel the problematic patterns they are playing out with others. The 
challenge for the therapist, then, is to find a way to alter or change this pattern—often 
through process comments and providing CEEs. Providing this experience of change with 
the therapist— as opposed to merely interpreting or explaining it intellectually — greatly 
facilitates clients’ ability to change these faulty patterns with their spouses, children, and 
important others (Rubinstein, 2015). Throughout the course of treatment, the therapist’s 
aim is to:
1. identify and highlight these maladaptive relational patterns that keep recurring with 
others,
2. provide a new and better response that does not repeat the familiar scenario in their 
interactions together, and
3. help generalize this experience of change in the therapeutic relationship to clients’ 
interactions with others in their everyday lives.
Therapists practicing in varying interpersonal/relational, psychodynamic/inter-
subjective, attachment, and cognitive/schema-oriented approaches are all working with 
three closely related but still distinct ways in which clients bring their problems with others 
into the therapeutic relationship: Eliciting Maneuvers, Testing Behavior, and Transference 
Reactions. Additionally, all three topics share an especially important component: each 
commonly evokes COUNTERTRANSFERENCE REACTIONSCTIONSCT  in the therapist. 
Clients often employ eliciting maneuvers (Sullivan, 1968) to avoid anxiety and 
defend against their problems by getting others to respond in certain predictable ways. 
At other times, clients will employ testing behavior (Weiss, 1993), to cope with problems. 
When “testing,” clients behave in certain ways to assess whether the therapist is going to 
respond in the familiar but problematic ways they have learned to expect, or in the more 
helpful ways they actually need. The final (and better-known) way that clients bring their 
conflicts into the therapeutic relationship is through transference reactions or distortions 
based on their IWMs— systematic misperceptions or cognitive distortions of the therapist. 
These three concepts illuminate much of what is going on in therapeutic relationships. 
In all three concepts, the basic assumption is that the client recreates certain problematic 
relationship patterns with the therapist as a way to confirm that the therapist and others 
are going to respond in the same unwanted way that important attachment figures once 
did or behaviorally respond in a new, more helpful and corrective way (Castonguay & 
Hill, 2012; Gelso & Hayes, 2002). Let’s look closely at these important interpersonal 
processes, and the countertransference issues that all three readily evoke in therapists.
/one.taboldstyle. E/l.sc/i.sc/c.sc/i.sc/t.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc M/a.sc/n.sc/e.sc/u.sc/v.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc
Many cognitive and interpersonally oriented therapists have described how clients 
develop fixed interpersonal styles to avoid anxiety and defend against the unwanted 
responses they expect from others (see, e.g., Beck et al., 2003; Benjamin, 2006; Millon, 
2004 ; Young, 1999). Routinely, clients are inaccurate in their perceptions of others and 
restricted in their range of emotions. As we saw in the last chapter, they often respond to 
others inflexibly, using rigid coping styles of moving-toward, moving-away, and moving-
against. In part, clients systematically employ these interpersonal styles to:
1. Elicit desired responses from others that will avoid conflict and ward off anxiety and
2. Preclude threatening or unwanted responses from others that will trigger their IWMs 
and key conflicts. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  255
Thus an eliciting maneuver is an interpersonal strategy that wards off anxiety and 
brings about certain desired, safe responses . However, this defensive maneuver learned 
in parenting and familial interactions, keeps the client stuck; change, personal growth, 
and interpersonal relationships remain stymied (Bartsch et al., 2015). To illustrate how 
eliciting maneuvers serve to defend against problems, we will return to the case study of 
Peter, the moving-toward client in Chapter 7.
Peter’s moving-toward style tended to elicit approval and kindness from others. As 
a general way of life, Peter was helpful; he sympathized, agreed, and cooperated with 
people. For example, Peter tried to “understand” his girlfriend’s infidelity and to win 
his instructor’s approval. When Peter began to see a therapist, he continued to employ 
the same interpersonal style that he had used with others throughout his life. As many 
moving-toward clients do with their therapists, he tried to elicit his therapist’s approval 
by being a “good” client who was quickly getting better — at least until the therapist 
began using process comments to question this unwanted, symptomatic compliance. For 
example: “Peter, sometimes I wonder if you are trying too hard to figure out what I want I want I
you to do. Any thoughts about that possibility?”
Peter was rarely forthright, appropriately assertive or angry, or skeptical with anyone 
in his life. These responses, which a well-functioning person needs to employ at times, 
were not part of Peter’s interpersonal repertoire. For example, he did not communicate 
how angry he was with his girlfriend or even have much awareness of how angry he 
actually was with both of his parents. Similarly, he did not set limits with his practicum 
instructor or classmates regarding how much critical feedback he could incorporate at 
one time. Thus, his pleasing interpersonal coping style was designed to elicit approval 
from others and discourage familiar, angry, or critical responses that would arouse intense 
anxiety for him.
If Peter’s therapist had merely responded automatically, by simply supporting 
Peter and meeting his anxious need for approval, without first considering what Peter’s 
interpersonal style tended to elicit from others, Peter would not have changed much 
in therapy. Peter would have only reenacted in therapy the same pleasing/caretaking/
accommodating interpersonal defense that he had used throughout his life. Shoring up 
these defensive coping styles may be the goal in some time-limited or supportive therapies 
and can help some clients in crisis regain their equilibrium. However, the therapist wanted 
to do more than this with Peter. Seeking more enduring changes and not merely symptom 
relief, the therapist tactfully used process comments to help make Peter’s moving-toward 
style overt as a shared focus for discussion. Thus, instead of automatically responding to 
what Peter elicited and providing only approval, support, and reassurance, the therapist 
focused on this eliciting maneuver as a part of Peter’s problems that needed to be 
addressed in treatment. How did this intervention occur?
Over the course of several months, the therapist remained watchful for points of 
entry to tentatively wonder aloud— in a supportive and curious manner— about instances 
where Peter’s coping style of moving-toward others might be operating with him and 
with others in Peter’s life. Soon, working collaboratively on this, Peter and his therapist 
began to consider how this was serving to protect and help him avoid his problems, 
but also causing Peter further conflict and distress. As they “named” this behavior 
pattern and began watching for it together, Peter increasingly reported instances where 
he had observed himself using this moving-toward style with others, and recognized 
how it elicited approval and support from others. He also began to see how this style 
discouraged the critical or rejecting responses that were so familiar from his childhood, 
and that were so anxiety-arousing for him. As Peter made progress in treatment, he 
gradually became less preoccupied with winning approval from others and less worried 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

256  CHAPTER 8
about “fixing things” when small interactions with others held some conflict or just didn’t 
go so smoothly. The treatment goal of expanding his interpersonal range was being met 
as he continued to report instances where he was feeling less self-conscious than before, 
speaking up more directly with others, and standing up for himself more assertively when 
the situation called for it. Peter was excited about these changes and described himself as 
feeling “less anxious” and “stronger.”
Clients’ Eliciting Maneuvers Can Evoke Countertransference in the 
Therapist. Clients’ eliciting maneuvers can evoke countertransference reactions in the 
therapist that lead to reenacting rather than reparative responses. For example, the eliciting 
maneuvers used by moving-toward clients like Peter are not personally threatening or 
challenging for most new therapists to work with. However, if the therapist has strong 
needs to be liked or approved of, and is conflict-avoidant in relationships, it is easy to 
see how Peter and this therapist can merely reenact together what Peter does in other 
relationships . This may feel good to both but precludes change for Peter. In contrast, 
moving-against clients like Juan in Chapter 7 employ eliciting maneuvers that are often 
challenging for beginning and experienced therapists alike. In the first few minutes of 
the first counseling session, for example, moving-against clients may do something to 
take command of the relationship. They may find some way to intimidate or provoke 
the therapist—making the therapist feel insecure in the therapeutic relationship (or 
sometimes defensively angry and competitive). For example, clients may insist on sitting 
in therapists’ chairs, question therapists’ adequacy, diminish their credentials, compare 
them to “better” or more experienced therapists, or criticize what therapists have just said 
or done. Consider the following:
CLIENT:
 So, if you’re just a trainee, what makes you think you know enough to be able to help me?
THERAPIST:
 Well, 
I
’ve had some experience before 
I 
entered the program, and 
I 
have a supervisor 
to help me.
CLIENT:
 I see. Now, does this supervisor always tell you what to say, or do they let you newbies 
say what you think sometimes?
This provocative presentation elicits anxiety in many therapists— as it often succeeds in 
doing with others in clients’ lives. Many therapists respond by trying to be nice in order to 
stop the hostile challenges: continue along, hoping that ignoring the hostile subtext will stop 
it; or becoming quiet or withdrawing emotionally. In contrast, some therapists will respond 
in kind and become judgmental or punitive, and a few will even counter with their own 
overt hostility (Binder & Strupp, 1997; Henry, Schact & Strupp, 1990; Lambert & Barley, 
2002). Treatment will not progress when moving-against clients succeed in eliciting one 
of these defensive flight-or-fight responses from the therapist— as they commonly do with 
others. By reenacting this maladaptive relational pattern with the therapist, these clients 
have successfully neutralized the therapist’s ability to help them (or to hurt them). In this 
way, they have defended against their anxieties associated with having problems, asking for 
help, relinquishing some control, getting closer to what’s really wrong, and so forth. Clients’ 
eliciting maneuvers protect them from their core conflicts, but at the price of change.
Unfortunately, therapists tend to respond reflexively or automatically to clients’ 
eliciting maneuvers with their own countertransference propensities — that is, with their 
own characteristic tendencies toward flight or fight (Millon & Grossman, 2007; Mueller 
& Aniskiewicz, 1986). What can therapists do instead? First, they can try to retain 
legitimate control of themselves internally by trying to understand what is occurring 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  257
right now in their relationship with the client — rather than personalizing it so readily 
and overreacting. It certainly is challenging for new therapists to do this in the beginning, 
but with experience and help from a supervisor the goal instead is to begin formulating 
working hypotheses about:
 /uni25CFthe impact this moving-against behavior might have on others in clients' lives (such 
as making others feel like arguing with or withdrawing from them) and
 /uni25CFwhat conflicts or anxiety-arousing situations clients might be avoiding by these 
maneuvers (for example, feeling weak or ashamed of needing help or having a 
problem they can't solve on their own).
Second, on an interpersonal level, therapists are trying to find ways to engage 
moving-against clients in some way in which the interpersonal patterns of domination, 
intimidation, and competition are not reenacted . Immediacy interventions offer us many 
possibilities (Teyber & Teyber, 2014). One option is for the therapist to adopt a curious 
stance with the client and try to explore, or try to understand internally, clients’ responses 
as diagnostically or therapeutically useful, without avoiding the challenge or becoming 
defensive (Datz et al., 2016). For example:
THERAPIST:
 (calmly, straightforwardly)
 So, your previous therapist was an experienced psychia-
trist, and you’re not sure that a younger social worker such as myself can help you. Let’s talk 
together about that—tell me more about your concern.
Another alternative is for the therapist to make a process comment and engage clients 
in talking together about the current interaction and what’s going on between them.
THERAPIST:
 You’re speaking to me in a loud, forceful voice right now, and you sound angry. 
What are your thoughts about what might be going on between us here?
 With some clients, the therapist may wish to use a self-involving statement or provide 
interpersonal feedback to begin exploring the effects of his or her interpersonal style on 
others and highlighting the relational patterns that ensue. For instance:
THERAPIST:
 Let me take a bit of a risk here and talk about the impact you have on me some-
times. Right now, I’m feeling criticized as you correct me again, as I’ve felt other times. That 
leaves me wondering how others in your life usually respond to you when you are critical like 
this—what usually happens next?
Some of these clients will be unaware of the distancing and disruptive impact 
their provocativeness/criticalness has on others, and this interpersonal feedback can 
provide a point of entry to begin exploring this collaboratively. Other moving-against 
clients will say something that suggests that they “hit first” before someone can get 
them. The purpose here is not to win the battle for power and control. On a process 
level, this interaction would only continue or re-enact the same cyclical pattern that 
recurs with others (Wachtel et al., 2005). Rather, this approach is intended to help the 
therapist find some way to engage with clients other than automatically responding with 
counterhostility, control, or withdrawal to the eliciting maneuvers— as others usually do. 
It will also help clients develop increased awareness of when they employ their coping 
style, its impact on others, and (most important for change to occur) the price they pay 
for this coping style. As clients hear interpersonal feedback from the therapist, become 
more aware of the impact they are having on others, and begin to reflect on when and 
why they act this way, they may begin to respond more flexibly and exercise more choice 
about how they want to respond.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

258  CHAPTER 8
 Still another possibility is for the therapist to explore how clients’ eliciting maneuvers 
affect clients and others. For example:
THERAPIST:
 (non-defensively)
 You have insisted on sitting in my chair, even though I asked you 
not to. Now that you are there, how does it feel?
Routinely, moving-against clients become aware of feeling alone, empty, or anxious at 
these moments, and the hollowness of their victory provides a new shared point of entry 
for the therapist and the client. As all four of these different types of immediacy responses 
illustrate, there is no simple formula for the “right” way for therapists to respond. Per 
client response specificity, one type of response will work well with one client and not 
so well with another. Therapists need to be flexible, assess how clients respond to each 
intervention, and modify their responses to find what works best for a particular client 
(Persons & Silberschatz, 1998). Thus, to respond effectively to the eliciting maneuvers 
these challenging clients present, therapists’ intentions are to:
 /uni25CFattend to their own subjective reactions and recognize what clients are eliciting in 
them (such as feelings of incompetence or competitiveness);
 /uni25CFformulate working hypotheses about how others would typically respond and begin 
to identify the relational patterns that are occurring with others and causing prob-
lems in clients’ lives;
 /uni25CFtry to find another way to respond (e.g., via process comments, self-involving 
statements, or interpersonal feedback) that does not go down the old familiar path 
and reenact the same problematic scenario that the client usually elicits from others.
Although moving-against clients often intimidate new therapists, this doesn’t 
usually last very long. With a little more clinical experience, practice, and rehearsal, and 
a supportive supervisor, new therapists learn not to charge so readily at this red flag 
the client is waving. With more exposure to moving-against clients, therapists learn to 
appreciate that the intensity and rigidity of clients’ eliciting maneuvers, no matter how 
alienating initially, are commensurate with clients’ degree of anxiety and conflict. As 
therapists better understand the purpose of these distancing maneuvers, they begin to 
find some compassion for the predicament such clients are living out, which is usually 
the very best way to step out of the old relational pattern being elicited. By flexibly 
trying out different approaches (it helps to practice by role-playing with classmates and 
supervisors), it’s really not so hard for therapists to find ways to engage these clients that 
do not reenact either the intimidated/withdrawal or the competitive/hostile patterns that 
they usually succeed in eliciting from others (Gans, 2011).
As we have seen, the confrontational eliciting maneuvers of moving-against clients—
such as Juan in Chapter 7— place considerable stress on many new therapists. Surprisingly, 
however, the meeker, moving-away clients — such as Maggie in Chapter 7 — often pose 
a greater challenge in the long run. Many who select counseling careers have strong 
needs for engagement and deeply enjoy close personal relationships. When moving-away 
clients continue to maintain their characteristic stance of emotional distance, therapists 
can begin to feel ineffective or unimportant, become discouraged about the therapeutic 
relationship and helping, and ultimately give up — disengaging as many others have done 
before (Robbins & Jolkovski, 1987). When this occurs, clients’ eliciting behaviors have 
successfully defended them from a meaningful relationship with the therapist and thereby 
allowed them to avoid anxiety-arousing issues — which were reality-based threats in 
their history evoked by risking genuine involvement. Thus, the clients’ conflicts, or the 
threats and dangers that engagement has brought in the past, will not be activated, but 
the therapist’s only real vehicle for resolving these problems is closed as well. Rather than 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  259
responding automatically to these clients’ aloofness by giving up and, too commonly, 
blaming clients as unmotivated, therapists can use process comments to find other 
avenues for establishing an alliance. For example:
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 You’re very quiet, Mary. Sometimes it almost feels as if you are hardly 
in the room with me. Would it be OK with you if we talk a little about what it’s like for you 
to come here and take the risk to try and bring me in on your life?
CLIENT:
 I’m not sure what you mean. Am I doing something wrong?
THERAPIST:
 Oh no, you absolutely are not doing anything wrong at all. I guess I’m trying to 
say that sometimes I feel like I’m not reaching you—or getting close to what really matters 
in your life, even though I want to. Has anyone else ever said something like this to you—or 
maybe this is just me?
CLIENT:
 Well, kind of. The only really nice boyfriend I’ve ever had left because he said he never 
really felt very important to me, that he gave up trying to “pursue” me.
THERAPIST:
 Thanks for joining me. This is a sensitive thing for us to be talking about, but I 
think this is important. It sounds like other people feel held away from you in some way or 
that they have to work to reach you...or maybe that you can “go away” so readily or do with-
out them so easily. I’m trying to understand how this goes in your life. Can you help me say it 
better?
CLIENT:
 I think I do withdraw from people easily. I know I’m too sensitive—my feelings get hurt 
so easily...over “nothing” they would say. And sometimes I feel nothing they could say would 
help me…
THERAPIST:
 I see, you go away when your feelings get hurt, and maybe others don’t understand 
what’s really going on for you. We’ll have to watch for that here and make sure that doesn’t 
happen between you and me, too. But right now, I’m appreciating that you’re choosing not to 
go away from me, but taking the risk to stay present and engaged with me as we try to sort 
this through. This is feeling very different right now than how we usually are. I’m feeling more this through. This is feeling very different right now than how we usually are. I’m feeling more 
connected with you, and I like it, but I’m wondering what it’s like for you?
CLIENT:
 I don’t know...I’m not so sure. I just get afraid with other people. I know I shouldn’t go 
away so easily, but it just feels easier...it’s safer.
THERAPIST:
 It just “feels safer.” And maybe it’s not feeling very safe with me either right now.
CLIENT:
 Oh, you’re very nice. But it is just easier to go away...it’s just what I’ve always done.
THERAPIST:
 Well, I’m thinking that it’s probably easier for you to “go away” because it really 
hasn’t been safe for you in the past. Would you be willing to tell me a little more about how 
I might hurt you if you stay engaged with me like this, or what others have done in the past 
that you really did need to get away from? You lead and I’ll follow.
Therapists can attend to what clients systematically elicit in others and hypothesize 
how this interpersonal strategy is likely to affect others and cause problems in their lives. 
In doing this, therapists attend to clients’ developmental history, current life situation, 
and to the cultural context in which coping styles and eliciting maneuvers are embedded. 
Importantly, therapists are also attending to their own feelings that are elicited by their 
clients. This self-awareness is one of therapists’ most important sources of information 
about clients and what their interpersonal style tends to elicit or “pull” from others (such 
as feeling controlled, minimized, pushed away, idealized, etc.). To be able to learn from 
their own personal reactions to clients, however, requires therapists to be non-defensive
enough to be able to observe what the client tends to elicit or “pull” in them (Bass, 2007; 
Gabbard, 2007).
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

260  CHAPTER 8
Attending to their own personal reactions in this way will often provide important 
information about clients’ key concerns, coping strategies for defending against old 
problems, and how the relational themes being played out in the therapeutic relationship 
may be disrupting other relationships. Doing this is very useful in highlighting the 
treatment focus, as therapists consider:
1. What has brought clients to this particular place in their lives (developmental history);
2. What is causing problems in clients’ lives now and how this might be similar to what 
they have had to deal with developmentally;
3. What the cultural context is in which this all developed;
4. How aspects of these issues are being replayed in the client-therapist relationship; and
5. How to address and clarify what has been difficult for clients and provide an experi-
ence in the client-therapist relationship that is different, reparative, and empowering.
Over time, therapists can begin to help clients identify their eliciting mechanisms, 
recognize the situations or types of interactions where they tend to employ these measures, 
and understand how these maneuvers have served to create safety in the past. It takes 
courage for therapists to do this, however, especially as they begin their clinical training. 
Therapists are trying to tolerate their own unwanted feelings long enough to sort through 
whether these reactions have more to do with their own lives and personal feelings (i.e., 
countertransference) or whether they inform therapists about clients’ eliciting maneuvers 
and helthemus understand what clients tend to evoke in other relationships (Datz et 
al., 2016). The key element here is for therapists to remain non-defensive in their own 
reactions so they can reflect upon them and learn more about what may be going on in 
the therapeutic relationship.
 We need to explore this interface further, so let’s examine how clients’ eliciting 
maneuvers often tap into therapists’ own personal issues— activating countertransference 
reactions that lead to reenactments, confirm faulty beliefs and expectations, and impede 
treatment.
Two Types of Countertransference: Client-Induced versus Therapist-  
Induced. At the beginning of this chapter, we noted that all three topics in this section 
shared a common denominator: Countertransference runs through each of them. We have 
just begun to see how eliciting maneuvers can readily evoke countertransference reac -
tions in therapists, and we are going to see this throughout our next two topics of testing 
behavior and transference reactions. Let’s introduce this related new concept here, and 
begin by distinguishing two different types of countertransference: client-induced coun -
tertransference versus therapist-induced countertransference.
As we have seen, clients’ eliciting maneuvers tend to evoke certain similar reactions in 
the therapist and others — which we will call client-induced countertransference because 
the client tends to induce these reactions in most people. Things become more complicated 
when clients’ eliciting behaviors happen to tap into therapists’ own personal issues or 
current stressors— which we will call therapist-induced countertransference because it has 
a lot to do with a particular therapist personally (Springmann, 1986). With therapist-
induced countertransference, it’s not just about what clients tend to elicit in others, but 
how the therapist’s own life and personality have been activated and brought into the 
equation as well.
 To illustrate, suppose that a hyperactivating client acts helpless and keeps escalating 
his distress, and the therapist tries hard to respond better and help but “fails” at each 
attempt. Ideally, the therapist would retain a certain objectivity, remain actively engaged in 
the work but not overly invested in the client’s response, and keep exploring other ways to 
respond— for example, by making the process comment that whatever the therapist tries 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  261
to do seems to disappoint the client or fails to help. However, what if this therapist grew 
up with critical caregivers and, no matter what she did, she could never quite do it right 
or please them? If the therapist’s own personal concerns regarding performance demands 
or criticism are activated in this way, she may lose her effectiveness because the client’s 
eliciting maneuvers have tapped into her own history and personal issues (in other words, 
“therapist-induced” countertransference). Continuing, the therapist who is now over-
reactive to this client’s unspoken disapproval may feel inadequate and withdraw— believing 
falsely that she is failing or incompetent as a therapist, or perhaps feeling resentful and 
becoming critical toward this client in turn. When clients successfully elicit the same type 
of response from the therapist that they usually elicit from others, as is occurring here, the 
therapist and client are reenacting rather than resolving the problem. These “enactments” 
replay unwanted patterns rather than provide a CEE (Aron, 1996; Renik, 1998), and are 
complex and challenging issues for new therapists. As student therapists learn more about 
these ways of understanding what may be going on between the therapist and the client, 
they discern more specific ways to intervene and help their clients change.
Scenarios such as the preceding one—where the client’s eliciting maneuvers activate 
therapist-induced countertransference and lead to reenactments in the therapeutic 
relationship—are commonplace . For beginning and experienced therapists alike, it’s just 
part of the work. When this type of reenactment occurs, however, and clients’ defensive 
eliciting maneuvers have succeeded in immobilizing or discouraging the therapist, clients 
often switch to the other side of their ambivalence and try to re-engage the therapist—
perhaps by reassuring the therapist about how helpful the sessions are. Clients don’t want 
to end the relationship and will often try to get the disengaged or discouraged therapist 
to become involved in the relationship again . Premature and unnecessary terminations 
may occur, unfortunately, because the therapist (and perhaps the supervisor) fails to hear 
clients’ renewed bids for engagement because the discouraged or frustrated therapist has 
given up on the relationship. For example:
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 This client is hopeless; he isn’t ready to change. He’s the King of 
Blame—he just wants to tell everybody else what’s wrong with them—including me! No won
-
der his third secretary just quit and his teenaged son doesn’t want anything to do with him.
Therapists will find that these disengaging and subsequent re-engaging maneuvers are 
especially significant with more troubled clients who are coping with abuse histories. 
How do therapists begin to sort through for themselves whether clients’ eliciting 
maneuvers (client-induced), their own personal issues (therapist-induced), or perhaps, 
some combination of both are evoking their strong reactions? If a particular client makes 
others feel or react similarly (e.g., others in the client’s life are also bored, impatient, or 
intimidated, as the therapist is made to feel in the session), it is probably client-induced. If 
not, this reaction probably has more to do with a therapist’s own personal life (it is more 
likely therapist-induced countertransference). Of course, when reenactments and ruptures 
are being experienced, both may be occurring (Hill & Knox, 2009) and supervision is 
usually the best place to sort this through (Falender & Shrafransky, 2004).
We will find these two different conceptions of countertransference helpful as we 
move on to explore clients’ testing behavior and their transference reactions. 
II. C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc’ T/e.sc/s.sc/t.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc B/e.sc/h.sc/a.sc/v.sc/i.sc/o.sc/r.sc
We have seen how clients employ their inflexible coping style to systematically elicit 
responses from others that may seem self-defeating yet have served to avoid anxiety or 
support self-esteem in the past. These eliciting maneuvers — or “security operations” as 
Sullivan (1953) first termed them— are interpersonal defenses.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

262  CHAPTER 8
Eliciting maneuvers are used defensively to avoid anxiety, but at other times clients 
use different interpersonal strategies to approach and try to resolve problems. Although 
this may sound contradictory, it reflects clients’ ambivalent feelings about treatment— the 
hope that things could change and get better versus the schema-driven expectation that 
the same unwanted outcomes will only occur again . Clients often carry out this healthy, 
approach side of their ambivalence by means of testing behavior (Sampson, 2005; Sil -
berschatz & Curtis, 1993; Weiss, 1993). In direct or in more covert ways, and especially 
at the beginning of treatment and when strong emotions have been evoked, clients often 
tend to reconstruct interpersonal patterns with the therapist that follow those that have 
been causing problems with others in their lives (Strupp & Binder, 1984; Zilcha-Mano et 
al., 2014). Clients “test” to ascertain whether the therapist will respond in the familiar but 
problematic way that others often have in the past. Or, as is hoped, whether the therapist 
can respond in a different and more reparative way that changes the old predictable sce -
nario—which allows clients to expand IWMs and facilitate progress on their problems. 
There is nothing casual about this testing for clients; they are vitally interested in assessing 
whether the therapist is going to confirm or disconfirm strongly held but faulty expecta -
tions and beliefs. Many clients bring profoundly painful histories of exploitation, denigra-
tion, ostracization, and rejection; for these clients, their trust in others has been betrayed. 
Their testing behavior with the therapist often reflects their intense wishes for healthier, 
safer relationships—specifically, hoping that the therapist’s response will disconfirm their 
fear of again being violated, disappointed, or hurt. Through testing, in other words, cli -
ents are trying to assess safety/danger in the therapeutic relationship (Rubinstein, 2015).
Therapists respond effectively and pass tests by behaviorally disconfirming clients’ 
faulty beliefs and expectations — and this corrective or real-life experience (not just 
interpretations, explanations, or reframing) powerfully sets the change process in motion. 
Clients feel safer when the therapist does not respond in the familiar but problematic 
way that important others often have, and that they have now come to expect from the 
therapist as well. Immediately following this CEE, clients often make visible progress in 
treatment. For example, within the next minute or two, the therapist may observe that 
clients act stronger or behaviorally improve in one of these ways:
 /uni25CFThey express more confidence in themselves or in the therapist ("You know, I think I think I
I'm just going to go ahead and talk to my wife about this. I've gone around about it 
in my head for too long now. I'm going to bring this up with her and just put it on 
the table— it’s not good for me to keep avoiding it like this.”)
 /uni25CFThey feel better as symptoms such as anxiety or depression diminish ("I feel more I feel more I
settled right now. Maybe he won't ever stop being so bossy, but that's just him— it 
really doesn’t have much to do with me. Maybe he can’t change, but I don’t have to I don’t have to I
get so angry and upset when he’s demanding like that.”)
 /uni25CFThey take the risk of bringing up threatening new material with the therapist ("I've 
been ashamed to tell you about something that's happening: I've been having an af-
fair for a while now. I know I know I I should be talking to you about it, but I should be talking to you about it, but I I've been afraid 
to tell you. I guess I guess I I've been worried that you'll judge me— you know, you wouldn’t 
respect me anymore if you knew about this.”)
 /uni25CFThey act stronger by being more honest or forthright with the therapist and bringing 
up problems between them ("It's kind of hard to say this because I don't want to I don't want to I
hurt your feelings or anything, but I've been thinking for a while that therapy hasn't 
been working very well for me. You're so quiet—been working very well for me. You're so quiet—been working very well for me. You're so quiet I don’t know what you’re thinking I don’t know what you’re thinking I
a lot of the time. I think I think I I need more feedback or something from you.”)I need more feedback or something from you.”)I
In a healthy attempt to address and resolve problems, clients often actively (but 
without really being aware of it) elicit the same types of problems with the therapist that 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  263
they are having with others. They are actively testing to see whether they can change these 
problematic relational patterns and disconfirm the pathogenic beliefs that stem from 
them. However, it is difficult for clients to find disconfirming evidence because repeated 
confirmation of the beliefs has made clients deaf to such evidence, and selective attention 
and biased filters also lead clients to keep slotting diverse experiences into the same 
narrow categories (Beck, 1995). However, the power of immediate, in vivo relearning 
with the therapist allows clients to begin questioning, or sometimes even to relinquish, 
deeply held but faulty beliefs about themselves and expectations of others. 
To illustrate, suppose a young adult client is being seen in a college counseling center 
for depression. Her therapist has formulated the working hypothesis that this client is 
ruled by the pathogenic belief that if she has her own mind and does what she wants 
with life, her mother will be hurt, feel sad, and withdraw. Thus, she believes that she 
deserves to feel bad whenever she differentiates in any way because this is being “selfish” 
and hurts her mother, who acts as a martyr and induces guilt. How can this hypothesis 
guide the therapist’s interventions as he tries to pass the tests this client is apt to present? 
The therapist would likely fail her test, because he would be repeating the dysfunctional 
interpersonal pattern that the client lives out with others if he expressed caution, worries, 
or doubts when this inhibited client said something about becoming more independent, 
speaking up, acting on her own behalf, or pursuing her own interests and goals in some 
way (rather than submerging her Self to the needs of others). For example:
CLIENT:
 I don’t think I want a career in business after all. I’m not liking these business classes 
I’ve been taking very much. The other students are fine, but I’m not really like them. I think I 
might like teaching better—kids have always been fun for me.
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 Well, maybe education would be a better major for you but, gosh, 
that job market sure is tight right now, and it hasn’t ever paid as well as it should.
CLIENT:
 (sinking)
 Yeah, I wasn’t thinking about that. I guess I need to be more practical. Maybe 
teaching wouldn’t work very well for me after all...
The counselor’s reservations would be insignificant to many clients, and even helpful 
to some, but they are highly problematic for this particular client. In this reenactment, 
for example, the client’s own choices and interests were disapproved of, which then 
exacerbated her presenting symptom of depression. In contrast, a helpful, counteractive 
response, in which the therapist would pass this test—and empower this cautious and 
compliant client—would involve expressing interest in the client’s own interests and 
supporting the client’s initiative whenever it emerged. The therapist can still express 
realistic concerns and potential problems, but not until unambiguous support for her 
own interests and choices have been affirmed and recognized. For example:
CLIENT:
 I don’t think I want a career in business after all. I’m not liking these business classes 
I’ve been taking very much. The other students are fine, but I’m not really like them. I think I 
might like teaching better—kids have always been fun for me.
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 Kids are fun for you—I’m seeing that. I’d love to hear about your in-
terest in teaching. Tell me more.
CLIENT:
 Well, I don’t think my parents would like to see me be “just a teacher.” I was a National 
Merit Scholar, you know. But I think I’d love having my own classroom, and I could have a 
more balanced life with summers off—you know, so I could have time to raise my own family.
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 You sound excited about this, like it would give you the kind of life-
style that you choose. You know, you really do sound different right now...your voice is more 
alive, has more feeling, as you talk about this possibility.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

264  CHAPTER 8
Testing behavior such as this pervades all counseling relationships—from the first 
session to the last. However, testing is especially likely to occur in the initial sessions, 
in situations where strong feelings are being evoked, and when the current interaction 
between the therapist and client parallels relational problems that the client is having 
with others. Testing will also be more persistent and pervasive when clients are struggling 
with more serious and painful problems, such as trauma and abuse. And this makes sense 
when we consider this in their broader life context. Too often, for example, a client’s 
experience goes like this: The client’s mother did not believe her as a child when she 
said her stepfather was “touching” her; in high school her sister (who suffered the same 
violation) said she “didn’t want to talk about this”; her best friend at college anxiously 
said, “I’m sorry” and immediately changed the topic; and when she vaguely alluded to 
childhood molestation with her previous therapist, he suggested they remain focused on 
her presenting symptom of anxiety attacks. If this client does decide to return to therapy If this client does decide to return to therapy I
with another therapist at some point, she will appropriately be testing earnestly in the 
initial phone contact and first session to discern if this therapist, too, does or does not 
want to hear about what happened to her— so she will not be painfully invalidated again. 
Testing is about assessing safety/danger in the interpersonal environment.
Let’s consider another example of testing. Once therapists have the concept of testing, 
many of these tests will be easy to recognize and pass, allowing clients to progress in 
treatment and make changes in their lives. Suppose a female client, who often has been 
acting in a passive and dependent way with others in her life, says to her male therapist, 
“Where should we start today?” Even though he has the best of intentions, the therapist 
will fail this client’s test if he takes the bait and says, “Tell me about...” By telling this 
client where to begin, even though she has just asked for his direction, the therapist has 
confirmed this client’s pathogenic belief that she needs to take a subservient role with 
others and follow or comply with what they want. The problematic belief that she ought 
not to assert herself, initiate, or take the lead is confirmed when the therapist tells this 
client what to talk about (recall that, per client response specificity, this same directive 
could be helpful to a different client). This client is likely to remain unassertive and 
dependent in her relationship with the therapist and, as a result, she will be unable to 
change this with others in her life . In contrast, the therapist is likely to pass this test and 
disconfirm this faulty belief if he repeatedly looks for ways to encourage her own voice 
and actively supports her initiative whenever she does take the risk of speaking up on her 
own behalf (which therapists can recognize in the moment if they have conceptualized that 
this client’s problem is about compliance). Thus, when this client tests and compliantly 
asks him what to talk about or where to begin, the therapist can provide an experience of 
change by responding as follows:
 /uni25CFWell, maybe you could just sit quietly for a moment or two, think about the issues or 
concerns that feel most important to you right now, and bring me in on those.
 /uni25CFWhat would you like us to begin with today?
 /uni25CFOK, I do have some possibilities, but maybe I do have some possibilities, but maybe I I could hear your thoughts first about I could hear your thoughts first about I
the best way to use our time today.
 /uni25CFI'd like to talk about whatever you think would be most helpful. What might that be 
for you today— what comes to mind?
Many compliant clients will not accept these invitations so easily, of course. Often, 
they will not accept the therapist’s first invitation but continue testing to see whether the 
therapist really means it when he or she shows interest in clients’ choices and what seems 
most important to them:
CLIENT:
 (vaguely)
 Oh, I’m not sure, I can’t really think of anything. What do you suggest?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  265
Trying again to change the old relational pattern in their current interaction and 
engage the client in a new, more egalitarian way, the therapist might pass the test by 
giving a second bid for the client to take the lead:
THERAPIST:
 (comfortably and patiently)
 OK, let’s just wait a minute then. Why don’t you take a 
moment to check in and just be with yourself, and let’s see what comes up for you.
CLIENT:
 (pause)
 Well, uh, OK...I guess I haven’t been sleeping very well lately. I keep having this 
bad dream.
THERAPIST:
 The same bad dream keeps coming back—I’m sorry, that’s no fun. Let me join you 
there—tell me about the dream.
With each of these responses, the therapist’s intention is to demonstrate that he or 
she genuinely wants to engage the client in a more collaborative way. Behaviorally, the 
therapist is demonstrating to the client that he or she does not share the client’s belief 
that she needs to remain dependent or submissive and be told what to do. The therapist 
is also discerning more clearly as a treatment focus that, too often in other relationships, 
this is how things went. Repeated interactions of this sort— which consistently disconfirm 
the client’s symptom-engendering belief that she isn’t capable of acting independently, 
that others need her to depend on them or be submissive, or that she doesn’t have a 
right to say what she wants and express her own needs — will be reparative and bolster 
her self-efficacy and autonomy. As she continues to find it safe to act stronger with the 
therapist, she can begin to generalize and try this new way of relating with a few carefully 
selected (safe/affirming) others in her life as well. She and the therapist will begin to sort 
through and identify others in her life with whom it is safe to act more assertively and 
independently, and others who undermine her confidence, try to control her, and do in 
fact want her to remain one-down or to act dependent.
Usually, it is relatively easy for new therapists to identify this type of testing around 
dependency/compliance issues and respond effectively. In contrast, tests that involve 
issues of power and control usually are far more challenging for new and experienced 
therapists alike. Clients with different developmental experiences — for example, those 
who could “run over” their caregiver, or who wielded too much power and influence 
in family matters, often test the resolve of the therapist. When these confrontational or 
moving-against clients can successfully dominate, demean, or control the therapist, things 
go downhill for therapist and client alike. Before these clients feel safe disclosing personal 
or vulnerable issues, or even begin to engage in a working alliance, they also need to 
assess safety/danger in the therapeutic relationship. For these clients, this often means 
testing whether the therapist can manage their demands and maintain boundaries without 
becoming angry/punitive or withdrawing. For example, when clients are insulting, 
provocative, manipulate or push limits with the therapist, as they could their permissive 
caregiver, they are often testing. Let’s consider a case example of this more challenging, 
provocative type of testing.
Graduate students in Carl’s training program were supposed to videotape all therapy ses-
sions. Early in treatment, however, Carl’s client Lucy complained that the videotaping made 
her “self-conscious.” She said it was already hard for her to talk about what was going on 
in her life and that the videotaping just made it “impossible” to talk about really important 
things. With each successive week, Lucy voiced her increasing exasperation with Carl and 
disappointment in treatment. She told Carl that he was not helping her and threatened to 
stop treatment if he didn’t turn off the video recorder.
Carl was torn and truly did not know what to do. He knew the clinic rules and that his 
supervisor would want him to abide by them. Yet he also felt he should be flexible enough 
to do what his client needed, and he didn’t want her to stop coming and “lose another 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

266  CHAPTER 8
client.” Without consulting his supervisor, he reached a compromise with Lucy and agreed 
to turn the videotape off for the last five minutes of each session. Lucy was appreciative 
and did indeed disclose new material to Carl. Carl felt badly about doing this without his 
supervisor’s permission, but it also seemed like it was the only way to help his client and 
keep her in treatment (which was Carl’s need, not Lucy’s).
Soon afterward, however, Carl realized that treatment was not going well. Even though 
she brought up some relevant new issues, Lucy became scattered and started jumping from 
topic to topic. Carl tried to pin her down and focus on one thing at a time— such as her 
ever-changing feelings or scattered thoughts, but she slipped away to a different issue each 
time. Lucy’s distress escalated and she communicated that she was “very upset” and needed 
more guidance from Carl, yet whatever he did failed to help. Realizing that he had made a 
mistake and things were getting worse with his client rather than better, Carl knew he had 
to face his anxiety and talk with his supervisor.
First, Carl and his supervisor spent some time discussing honestly what Carl’s decision 
to turn off the tape meant for their relationship and their ability to work collaboratively. 
With their relationship restored, Carl and his supervisor began exploring what had been 
going on between Lucy and Carl, and tried to understand what this interaction pattern 
might mean. To begin, they clarified how badly Carl had always felt about himself when 
others were critical of his performance. Carl relayed that he just “dreaded” to be in 
situations where, no matter what he did, he “couldn’t do it right.” Further clarifying their 
mutual interaction, the supervisor helped Carl recognize how this countertransference 
issue in his own life was activated by the critical and demanding stance that Lucy took 
with Carl — and with others in her life. Carl felt empowered by these new ways of 
thinking about what was going on in the client-therapist relationship and accepted his 
supervisor’s firm limit that the videotape must remain on throughout every session. To his 
dismay, however, Lucy did indeed feel angry and betrayed when Carl reinstated this limit 
at the beginning of the next session. She accused Carl of being “untrustworthy” because 
he broke their agreement, told him that she didn’t think he was going to become a very 
good therapist, and informed him that she could no longer talk with him about certain 
important topics. All of this was difficult for Carl, but the biggest threat came when she 
told him that she would have to think about whether she wanted to come back next week 
and keep working with him.
Carl felt “horrible” about her threats and accusations, yet with his supervisor’s 
support, he tolerated his discomfort, tried to remain as non-defensive as he could, and 
stuck to the rules this time. Although she continued to blame, threaten, and complain, 
Lucy did return. In fact, despite her protests, she actually seemed calmer than before and 
began to focus more productively in therapy. Over the next few weeks, Lucy succeeded in 
making some important changes in her life. She began to share with Carl how “sickening” 
it had felt for her to be able to “boss my father around — just like my mother did.” 
Following this disclosure, which Lucy had felt so ashamed about, she returned to the next 
session and said that she had apologized to her boyfriend for being “so demanding.” Lucy 
told her boyfriend that she “didn’t want to be this way anymore — with him or anybody 
else,” and was trying to change it.
It is adaptive—even vital—for clients like Lucy to test whether the therapist will 
confirm or disconfirm their pathogenic beliefs. Clients will make progress toward more 
vulnerable material, or make behavioral changes in their lives, if the current therapeutic 
relationship is safer than past relationships have been. However, there is limited leverage 
in merely reassuring clients verbally about deeply held beliefs and expectations. Moreover, 
most clients are not consciously aware of testing therapists in these ways, and usually it is 
not helpful to point out testing behavior to them. Instead, as in all human relations, it is 
what the therapist does that counts, rather than what the therapist says.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  267
Therapists pass tests and provide a CEE when they repeatedly respond in ways that 
behaviorally disconfirm pathogenic beliefs and alter maladaptive relational patterns. 
Fortunately, even though all therapists fail tests sometimes, they will have many 
opportunities to recover— just as Carl did. It is especially important for new therapists to be 
reassured that they can readily recover from mistakes, failed tests, and reenactments. They 
can acknowledge what went wrong and talk it through with the client, or simply respond 
more effectively the next time this issue or theme comes up— often later in the same session 
or in the next session. In particular, therapists can recover from these failed tests that, like 
ruptures, regularly occur for even the most effective and experienced therapists if they:
 /uni25CFStay closely attuned for any relational statements— whether overt or subtly em-
bedded, that clients make about the therapist or their interaction together (Client: Client: Client
“You’re probably not the kind of person who would approve of this, but...”). ...”). ...”
 /uni25CFIn each successive interaction, track how the client responds to what the therapist 
has just said or done (Therapist: Therapist: Therapist “I“I“  just asked you to clarify that for me, and you be-I just asked you to clarify that for me, and you be-I
came quiet. I wonder what went on right there for usI wonder what went on right there for usI — maybe something didn’t feel 
quite right?”).
 /uni25CFWhen therapists are thinking to themselves that, right now, something just isn’t 
going right, check in and ask the client (Therapist: “Can I check in with you for a I check in with you for a I
minute about how we are doing together here—how things between us are feeling 
for you as we talk about this?”). 
The therapist passes a client’s test and provides a reparative experience by responding 
in the way the client needs. The client experiences a new degree of safety in the therapeutic 
relationship (such as providing limits for Lucy, who held too much power over adults 
while growing up and did not experience appropriate limits and boundaries). Therapists 
will often observe clients respond to this new safety by beginning to remember more 
clearly, feel more deeply, and share more fully. In the next few sessions, therapists will also 
observe clients taking risks, as Lucy did, and try out new and better ways of responding 
with others in their lives. Most clients will initiate these changes on their own, saying, for 
example:
CLIENT:
 Hey, guess what I did this week? I finally spoke up and told my boyfriend...
At this point, the therapist can support the client’s willingness to risk engaging with 
others in this new and self-affirming way. This then leads to further discussion about 
discerning who in the client’s life is capable of responding affirmingly to the changes the 
client has made and who is not. Thus, the client can safely process with the therapist how 
to generalize the new response style and work at consolidating a new set of beliefs about 
him or herself and others. For instance:
THERAPIST:
 You just did this differently with me
—
 how very nice. You know, that makes me wonder 
—
 how very nice. You know, that makes me wonder 
—
if you couldn’t speak up for yourself better and say more of what you want with your hus-
band, too. What would it be like for you to try this with him, like you just did with me? What 
might the plusses and minuses be in doing that?
Helping Therapists Provide Reparative Responses that Pass Clients’ T ests. 
How can therapists clarify the interpersonal response that each particular client needs 
in order to pass a test and provide a reparative experience? To guide their responses, 
therapists can (1) consider client response specificity and (2) track the moment-to-
moment interaction sequences and assess the client’s positive or negative reactions to 
what the therapist has just said or done. Let’s consider both carefully.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

268  CHAPTER 8
Client Response Specificity. As discussed in Chapter 1, therapists need the flexibility 
to be able to respond differently to different clients (see Norcross & Wampold, 2011). In 
counseling relationships, there are no cookbook formulas for the “right” way to intervene 
—one size does not fit all. The same therapeutic response that passes a test for one client 
may reenact problems for another client with different IWMs and expectations (Persons 
& Silberschatz, 1998). For example, in response to pressure from her client, Nico agreed 
to reduce her fee substantially. At their next session, however, Nico noticed that her client 
was wearing an expensive watch, and mentioned that he and his wife were “converting 
reward points” to fly first-class on their upcoming vacation to Hawaii. Realizing that the 
client was taking advantage of her, Nico recognized the need to make this treatment issue 
overt and renegotiate a new fee. This client had been indulged by doting parents and his 
wife, and now was testing to see if the therapist would just “go along” with him as well. 
A point of entry soon emerged and Nico was relieved that this potentially challenging 
conversation went so easily—it was almost as if the client felt reassured by her forthright 
discussion and limits. Later in the session, the client brought up important new material 
about feeling both “alone” and “anxious” when he felt he had too much control over 
others. Working together, they entered a productive new phase of treatment where the 
client began to explore how this pattern of being demanding or taking advantage was 
being played out and disrupting his other relationships with people—who also caught on 
eventually and stopped trusting or liking him.
 Based on the client’s willingness to begin looking at these unwanted parts of himself, 
Nico concluded that by being firm and not allowing the client to take advantage, she 
had passed the client’s test and provided him with the corrective response he needed. 
This client was unaware of his own testing behavior with Nico, however, and unable 
to articulate it in any way. Like most clients, he did not feel safe enough to recognize 
or discuss this sensitive issue until he was behaviorally convinced that he could not 
manipulate Nico as he could others in his life. 
In contrast, the same response of lowering the fee can be helpful for a different client. 
Chris was coping with a diminished income following a recent divorce and was having 
trouble making ends meet. Knowing that she grew up with demanding, authoritarian 
parents who gave her little, the therapist realized that offering Chris a more flexible fee 
arrangement could be a significant overture. This client would never have asked the 
therapist for a reduced fee (or asked anyone for help with anything) and was initially 
unwilling to accept any of the alternative fee arrangements that the therapist suggested. 
When the therapist asked about her reluctance to even consider his offer, Chris began to 
cry. As their discussion soon revealed, the therapist’s generous response disconfirmed her 
pathogenic belief that she “didn’t matter” and evoked the longing she had felt for her 
parents to “see her” and help when she had a problem. Chris had grown up under the 
demanding expectations that she had to do everything “perfectly” and should never need 
any help or support. That was simply the family norm and was what was expected from 
her. Clearly, changing the payment schedule with this client disconfirmed pathogenic 
beliefs about herself and faulty expectations about others. Within this session, treatment 
progressed into more intensive work about her emotional deprivation and resulting belief 
that she “did not matter much” to others. As these two examples illustrate, the same 
response by the therapist will often have very different effects on different clients (Daly & 
Mallinckrodt, 2009; Silberschatz, 2005).
Clients’ cultural/ethnic backgrounds add complexity to response specificity. For 
example, self-disclosure of an issue that the therapist had great difficulty resolving in his 
own life could be viewed as unprofessional by some traditional Asian clients. However, the 
same disclosure with some African-American clients may be welcome and convey that the 
therapist is human and less likely to be judgmental. In this way, racial, gender, religious, 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  269
or other differences between therapist and client will affect how the client responds to 
the therapist’s self-disclosure. Following our previous guidelines, the therapist’s intention 
is to pay close attention to how the client responds to this intervention. For example, if 
the therapist decides that self-disclosure may be productive for a particular client, the 
therapist will closely observe how the client reacts to it —therapist will closely observe how the client reacts to it —therapist will closely observe how the client reacts to it with a helpful new perspective 
or more involvement in the working alliance, for example, or with greater reserve and 
emotional distance from the therapist.
Client response specificity puts more demands on the therapist. It takes away the security 
of having a simple, rule-based approach to therapy. Manualized therapy approaches have 
been useful in terms of maintaining adherence to the treatment approach — especially in 
research studies, which was their original purpose. However, manualized treatments fail to 
honor client response specificity unless they specifically allow for variation based on client 
needs. The Motivational Interviewing literature has richly informed our understanding of 
how manualized approaches can be limiting when the client’s expressed need or initiative 
and lead is not taken fully into account and there is a press to strictly follow the manual. 
These MI researchers report that therapists in their treatment approach were more likely 
to bring about effective and lasting change when therapists applied the manual flexibly and 
tracked the client’s response to interventions— attending and adjusting to how the client 
has responded to what the therapist just tried to do  (see Amhrein et al., 2003; Levant, 
2005; Miller & Rose, 2013). Client response specificity requires the therapist to remain 
close to the unique and personal experience of each individual client. However, within 
this highly idiographic approach, guidelines are available to help therapists discern more 
accurately the specific needs of differing clients. In particular, the therapist can learn to 
assess the specific relational experiences that each individual client needs by identifying the 
maladaptive interpersonal patterns that tend to recur in three arenas:
1. current client-therapist interactions,
2. relationships with important others in the client’s current life, and
3. the client’s family of origin, where these IWMs and patterns were originally engendered.
We have begun to see that therapists learn how to pass tests and provide clients 
with the specific relational experiences they need by assessing how clients react to 
different interventions from the therapist. Let’s go further with it—learning to do this is 
empowering for new therapists. 
Assessing Clients’ Reactions. How do therapists know whether they have passed 
or failed the client’s test, or determine in general whether they have responded usefully 
to what the client just said or did? In this section, we provide guidelines to help new 
therapists assess whether their interventions or responses have been helpful or potentially 
reenacted some aspect of the client’s conflict.
New therapists often have the misconception that there is a single correct way to 
intervene with clients, and they feel worried or insecure that they haven’t done it right. 
A better approach is to observe how the client reacts to the therapist’s response. In 
this flexible, assessment-oriented approach, the client is determining the best way to 
intervene — based on how well the client can use what the therapist just said or did to 
make progress in treatment. With each successive turn of the conversation, therapists are 
trying to decide what is the best way to respond to this client right now — and choosing 
to respond by empathizing, challenging, exploring, affirming, reframing, making links, 
providing feedback, and so forth.
 As soon as they respond, however, the therapist’s intention is to attend closely and 
observe how the client seems to be responding to this intervention. As the therapist tracks 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

270  CHAPTER 8
the moment-to-moment interaction sequences— how the client is responding right now to 
what the therapist just said or did— clients inform the observing therapist of the responses 
they can utilize or benefit from. Clients do not usually verbalize this outcome and may 
not be conscious of it, but they reliably guide the therapist by their behavioral response to 
how the therapist just intervened. Let’s look more closely at how this goes.
When the therapist responds effectively to a client’s test and disconfirms pathogenic 
beliefs about self and faulty expectations of others, the client often feels safer and begins 
to behave in new and more adaptive ways. This progress can be expressed in many 
different ways. For example, in the minutes after the therapist passes a test, clients may 
stop complaining about other people and begin talking more directly about their own 
thoughts and feelings. Or, they may look more honestly at their own contribution to the 
problem, as Nico’s client just demonstrated. Perhaps the client will relate a vignette with 
more clarity than usual. The interaction with the therapist may acquire more immediacy 
or intensity and the dialogue becomes less intellectualized or superficially social. Clients 
will often engage the therapist more directly or be more present, perhaps by expressing 
warm feelings toward the therapist or by taking the risk to bring up a problem they are 
having with the therapist. Often, the client’s affect will emerge or intensify. Therapists 
want to take note when clients act stronger in any of these ways. It is a pleasure to see the 
client is improving, but the client is also teaching therapists what they have just done, and 
what they can do in the future, to make a difference.
Therapists also learn that they have responded effectively or passed tests when 
clients bring up relevant new material to explore. When clients initiate new topics in 
this way, they tend to become especially productive. In particular, clients may make 
useful connections, on their own, between their current behavior and formative 
relationships— without the therapist needing to make interpretations or guide the client 
back to developmental or familial relationships. The insights that clients generate in these 
circumstances are enlivening and hold real meaning, and they are readily translated into 
new ways of thinking and acting in their everyday lives. In contrast, it is not usually very 
productive for therapists to make historical interpretations or to lead clients back to try 
and make these familial connections. Even when these developmental links are accurate, 
clients do not usually find them to be relevant to their current problems — just abstract 
ideas or distant possibilities that do not hold real meaning or lead to behavior change. 
For example, a client might say with exasperation, “ My mother? Why are you asking 
about my mother? I’m 31 years old—’m 31 years old—’m 31 years old what does my mother have to do with anything?!”. 
Therapists are usually reassured they have responded effectively or passed the client’s 
test when the client responds by acting stronger in one of these ways. To illustrate, when 
Carl turned the videotape on for the full session, Lucy complained and even threatened 
to terminate. But by maintaining these appropriate professional boundaries, Carl 
behaviorally demonstrated that he was different from Lucy’s father and was therefore 
safer. Carl could tolerate Lucy’s disapproval and do what she needed rather than what 
she demanded. Although Lucy threatened and complained, she also began to work more 
productively with Carl and began changing with others in her life this way of relating 
that wasn’t working.
If therapists observe how clients respond to their interventions and try to identify 
what they have just done to pass (or fail) clients’ tests, they also will be able to formulate 
treatment plans more effectively . These conceptualizations can then be used to shape 
subsequent interventions and better provide clients with the responses they need in order 
to change. For example, at other anxiety-arousing points in treatment, Lucy will again 
push the limits with Carl. If Carl has learned from their previous interaction, however, 
he will be better prepared to provide Lucy with the clear limits she needs and is covertly 
requesting.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  271
What about the other side of the coin?How do therapists know when they have failed 
the client’s test or unwittingly reenacted the client’s conflict in some way? In this situation, 
the therapist will often observe that clients act weaker in some way — such as, becoming 
more compliant, defensive, confused, externalizing, distant, self-doubting, intrapunitive, 
and so on. Clients may also backtrack from healthy new behavior by undoing or retreating 
from recent successes, or become less of a partner in the working alliance. If therapists are 
closely assessing how the client is responding to what they have just said, they will observe 
that these reactions to failed tests are usually evident within the next minute or two, and 
may continue into subsequent sessions. By tracking their interpersonal process in this 
moment-to-moment way, therapists are much better able to recognize when their current 
interaction may have just failed a client’s test. In particular, therapists should consider the 
possibility that they have unwittingly reenacted some aspect of their clients’ conflicts when:
 /uni25CFclients begin talking about others rather than themselves and the dialogue becomes 
more superficial;
 /uni25CFthe therapeutic process becomes repetitive, intellectual, or loses any real focus; or
 /uni25CFclients become passive or compliant, lose their initiative, or cannot find meaningful 
material to discuss.
We have just seen that when therapists pass tests, clients usually acknowledge the 
therapist’s effectiveness by acting stronger and making progress in treatment. In parallel, 
when a therapist repeatedly fails a specific test, the client may inform the therapist that 
something is awry by recalling other relationships in which the same problematic scenario 
was being enacted. That is, the client may begin to tell the therapist vignettes about other 
people the client has known, or perhaps characters in books or movies, who are enacting 
the same problematic pattern. Therapists always want to consider the possibility that, 
whenever the client is talking about another relationship, the client may be using this 
as a metaphor, analogue, or encoded reference to describe what is going on between the 
therapist and the client as well (Kahn, 1997). Throughout each session, therapists are 
listening for the relational themes that characterize the vignettes clients choose to relay. 
For example, if clients repetitively share stories in which trust is betrayed, control battles 
are being enacted, and others are not responsible or need to be taken care of, they are 
often expressing how these same patterns are currently being activated or played out 
with the therapist. Yalom (2003) describes this as listening with “rabbit ears” — always 
considering the possibility that whenever clients are talking about another person they 
may be making a covert reference to the therapist or what is going on between the 
therapist and client as well. When this occurs, the therapist can use a process comment to 
inquire about this possibility, make this relational theme overt, and bring it back into the 
immediacy of the therapeutic relationship— where something can be done to address and 
resolve the misunderstanding or repair the rupture in the working alliance. For example:
THERAPIST:
 Both of these people you’ve just been telling me about failed to hear something 
important that others were trying to tell them. I’m wondering if something like that could be 
going on between you and me as well?
CLIENT:
 I’m not sure what you mean?
THERAPIST:
 I’m wondering about the possibility that, like with these other two people, you 
might have told me something earlier that was important to you, but maybe I didn’t hear it 
very well. Anything come to mind?
CLIENT:
 Well, since you mention it, sort of. I guess sometimes I think you do try to make things 
seem better than they really are. Like you need me to be happier than I really am, or want to 
make my problems less than what they really are.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

272  CHAPTER 8
THERAPIST:
 It seems like I’m trying to make things better than they really are. Like I don’t want 
to see how bad it really is for you sometimes? I can sure see why you wouldn’t like that, and 
it’s helpful that you’re speaking up and talking with me about it. I want to understand this 
better so I can change it. Can you give me an example—did I do that today? 
CLIENT:
 Uh-huh. I told you I was “terrified” when I woke up and they were gone. And you 
said, “Yeah, I can see how anxious you felt.” Maybe you prefer that I only feel anxious, but I 
didn’t. I felt terrified—that’s what I said and that’s what I meant, but I don’t think that’s what 
you wanted me to feel.
THERAPIST:
 Got it—thank you, I see what you mean now. I don’t want to do this and am going 
to be mindful to change it. If you ever feel I’m still doing it, would you please speak up again, 
right as it’s happening? I don’t want this to continue. 
CLIENT:
 Yes, I will, and thank you for hearing me. 
(pause)
 You know, I think I often have the 
sense that my feelings are “too much” for other people…
Supervisors and theories certainly are useful, but new therapists develop more 
autonomy and better find their own identity as therapists by learning how to assess 
client responses and determine for themselves the effectiveness of their interventions. By 
tracking the therapeutic process in the ways suggested here, therapists become able to 
assess for themselves whether they are providing clients with the reparative responses 
they need. However, all of this can seem like too much for a new therapist to be tracking 
all at once. Although it may feel overwhelming to try and think about so many things 
while simultaneously interacting and trying to be present with the client , most of this 
does become second nature with practice and several years of experience. However, as 
therapists incrementally learn to track and assess client reactions in this way, they will be 
able to choose more confidently or know more easily how they want to respond next to 
what the client just said— and that’s a very good feeling to have.
III. T/r.sc/a.sc/n.sc/s.sc/f.sc/e.sc/r.sc/e.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc R/e.sc/a.sc/c.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc/s.sc
The third way clients bring their problems with others into the therapeutic relationship is 
through transference reactions. Transference means inaccurately displacing or projecting 
various positive and negative feelings and attitudes toward the therapist that clients 
have held toward important people in their past (Gelso & Bhatia, 2012; Gelso, Palma 
& Bhatia, 2013). That is, these distortions have been overgeneralized or transferred to 
the therapist — casting the therapist inaccurately  into a role that better fits important 
persons from clients’ pasts. It is during vulnerable or distressing, affect-laden moments 
that clients are most likely to misperceive the therapist and others along old familiar 
lines. These persistent distortions of the therapist (and others) reflect clients’ schemas or 
IWMs. The more troubled clients are, the more pervasive their transference distortions 
will be— causing significant problems in their close personal relationships and distorting 
their reactions to the therapist as well (Levy & Scalia, 2012).
As new therapists gain more clinical experience, their worldview often changes as 
they experience distressed clients having strong reactions to them that do not fit very well 
with who they are or how they have responded. However, therapists error when they 
automatically or too readily relegate clients’ positive or negative feelings toward them 
merely to transference distortions. We can make that possibility a working hypothesis, 
but therapists want to be non-defensive enough to be able to consider  the potential 
validity or partial accuracy of those reactions as well. Maybe a client does have a valid 
complaint and something we have said or done has contributed to the client’s (seeming) 
misperception or misunderstanding. In this egalitarian approach to transference the 
therapist is never a completely neutral or objective observer but, instead, always considers 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  273
the possibility that both client and therapist may be contributing their own biases (Hill & 
Knox, 2009). In this regard, attachment researchers find that therapists who themselves 
have Secure attachment styles are better able than insecure therapists (that is, Dismissing 
or Preoccupied) to remain non-defensive, have the reflective capacity to consider the 
client’s differing point of view, and do not readily provide the automatic responses that 
the client characteristically tends to elicit or “pull” from others (Dozier et al., 1994; 
Dozier & Tyrell, 1998; Fonagy et al., 2002).
Therapists can use transference reactions both to conceptualize their clients and 
to help resolve problems within the therapeutic relationship. An important change 
has occurred in how therapists work with transference reactions. In decades past, 
transference reactions were used as a springboard to make interpretations about historical 
relationships and the genesis of conflicts with parents and early caregivers. Now they are 
used instead to understand and change the current interaction between the therapist and 
the client (Levenson, 1995). As noted earlier, therapists will often recognize important 
connections between current problems and developmental relationships, yet few clients 
will find these links meaningful without first addressing and resolving these distortions 
in the real-life relationship with the therapist . In this more contemporary approach, the 
therapist is working with transference in the immediacy of the current relationship, rather 
than through the more distant or intellectualized approach of trying to interpret or lead 
the client back to historical relationships. For example, 
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 What might I be thinking about or feeling toward you as you tell me this?
VERSUS
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 So, you’re seeing me as being withholding here...could that percep-
tion fit your father better than me?
Researchers find strong empirical support that this here-and-now approach is 
linked to better treatment outcomes (Andrusyna et al., 2006; Levy et al., 2006). In this 
contemporary approach to transference, the goal is to:
1. help clients feel safe to explore and discuss personal reactions toward the therapist;
2. work collaboratively to explore mutual contributions to problematic interactions or 
misperceptions in their relationship; and
3. work together to change interactions that are problematic or resolve misperceptions 
with the therapist first, and only then explore how these also might play out with 
others in their lives.
We want to emphasize further that clients’ reactions toward the therapist may
accurately capture the interaction with the therapist—or aspects of it. It is essential for 
the therapist to acknowledge and consider the potential validity of clients’ perceptions. 
Indeed, without realizing it, we may well have said or done something that contributes to 
the misperception, misunderstanding, or rupture. Therapists want to be non-defensive and 
enter into a genuine dialogue with clients to clarify what each was thinking, feeling, and 
intending during any misunderstanding or rupture of the working alliance. Addressing 
and resolving differing perceptions and ruptures in this way, as soon as they emerge, is 
associated with treatment retention and treatment outcome (Muran et al., 2009). Clients 
feel respected and empowered in this egalitarian relationship, and they often are able to 
become more authentic with the therapist and, in turn, with others in their lives.
In this way, the therapist is receptive to the potential validity of client reactions and 
tries to sort through and resolve disagreements or distortions in the current relationship, 
rather than focusing back on the historical genesis of conflicts. Ironically, just after 
the therapist and client have addressed and resolved a significant misperception or 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

274  CHAPTER 8
misunderstanding between them, clients will often go on to make meaningful connections 
between formative and current relationships on their own . Let’s look further at how 
therapists can intervene with transference to help clients change.
Transference in Everyday Life. Transference reactions are commonplace — they 
simply pervade human relationships. To a greater or lesser degree, they occur for all 
people at times— including therapists. We all systematically misperceive others as a result 
of overgeneralizing previous learning to the present situation — especially when we feel 
vulnerable or distressed.
Transference reactions are also likely in other types of emotion-laden situations. For 
example, transference reactions are especially pronounced when two people are falling 
in love. Many married couples recall their courtship as the happiest time in their lives. 
During this time, each member may systematically misperceive the partner as someone 
who can fulfill unmet developmental needs — most commonly, perhaps, making one feel 
love-worthy or wanted when one has not felt this way before. This romantic period is 
usually short-lived for two reasons, however. First, the transference projections break 
down— they both realize that the other person cannot fulfill their unmet developmental 
needs, and their old schemas are reinstated as they face this disappointment. If the unmet 
attachment needs and accompanying transference distortions are strong, the result is often 
dashed dreams or angry feelings of betrayal. In contrast, if the transference distortions of 
the partner have not been extreme, they can readily be shed, and a more realistic and 
enduring relationship can develop. Relinquishing these transference distortions of the 
new spouse is one of the major psychological tasks of courtship and early marriage.
 Second , individuals with Insecure attachment styles often will make poorer 
relationship choices because they will not “see” problems, realistic limitations, or red 
flags in their exciting new partner. When this occurs, the partner presents problematic 
aspects of the relationship with attachment figures that often cannot be registered  until cannot be registered  until cannot be registered
the client has achieved earned security. These individuals need to develop a new and more 
realistic narrative for their lives where they can accept the good and bad news of their 
attachment figures, which for many means grieving the loss, or feeling the sadness, over 
what one once wanted but did not receive.
Perhaps the primary arena in life for transference distortions is in parenting. One 
type occurs when a parent’s unresolved conflict with his or her own parent is projected 
onto a child who (often selected by birth order, gender, or appearance), most reminds the 
parent of the grandparent who was most hurtful. Alternatively, as in the heartbreaking 
vignette that follows, a child ”reminds” a parent of the child’s father from whom she is 
now estranged and, in fact, has come to detest. 
Ten-year-old Adam was brought into treatment at the request of his teacher, who reported 
that Adam was “sullen and withdrawn” and often spent his class time drawing pictures of 
angry/muscular men, swords and other weapons, and blood. The teacher became increas-
ingly concerned when he began getting into fights with others at school, and made the 
referral when she noticed that he had cuts on his arms. In evaluating Adam, the therapist 
ascertained that Adam’s mother had become increasingly negative and hostile toward him 
in the past year (for example, setting up his bedroom out in the garage). She had been tell-
ing Adam that she “hated” his worthless father and that Adam was “just like his father” 
and that “the apple doesn’t fall far from the tree.” Adam reported feeling acutely suicidal 
and had to be hospitalized (where he did, in fact, make an attempt—trying to electrocute 
himself by inserting a wire paper clip he had been using to “scrape himself” into an electri-
cal outlet). Adam’s troubled mother argued against any need for treatment and had been 
skeptical about his need for hospitalization. She confirmed Adam’s belief that “my mother 
hates me” when she said to the therapist in front of Adam: “Adam: “Adam: “ re you sure he isn’t just trying 
to manipulate you—just trying to get attention like his father always did?”
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  275
In treatment, the therapist can systematically utilize the client’s transference reactions 
to better understand the client’s problems with others. One of the most effective ways 
to discern the client’s IWMs and faulty expectations and make transference distortions 
accessible for discussion in treatment is to check in regularly and ask how the client might 
be perceiving or reacting to the therapist or what is going on between them right now. 
Routinely, aspects of the same patterns and themes that cause problems with others will 
be activated toward the therapist or played out in the therapeutic relationship (Connolly 
et al., 2000). If the therapist tracks these transference reactions and successfully engages 
the client in a dialogue about them, they clarify faulty schemas to the client and help 
change the problematic relational patterns that are being reenacted with the therapist. 
As this important relearning occurs with the therapist, the client is empowered to begin 
changing this pattern with others as well. Let look more closely at how transference helps 
therapists discern the problem and clarify the treatment focus.
Utilizing Transference Reactions to Conceptualize Clients. Attachment his -
tories provide one useful lens for understanding transference reactions and helping us 
conceptualize our clients. As Bowlby noted (1988), repetitive interactions with early care-
givers shape children’s expectations, and subsequent transference distortions of, thera -
pists and others. Researchers have supported this, showing that the attachment patterns 
individuals develop shape both transference reactions for clients and countertransference 
reactions for therapists (Dozier & Tyrrell, 1998; Mallinckrodt et al., 1995; Martin et al., 
2007; Woodhouse et al., 2003). For example, researchers find that Preoccupied clients 
tend to misperceive the therapist as being unreliable in meeting, or overwhelmed by, their 
emotional needs. At the same time, problematically, Preoccupied clients are unlikely to 
address this or other problems with the therapist for fear of offending and potentially los-
ing the relationship with the therapist. Thus it becomes especially important that thera -
pists ask these clients directly about their reactions to the therapist and explore their 
perceptions of the therapist. This is one way to help these clients find that this is a safe or 
different relationship that challenges their IWMs because, unlike significant others in the 
past, the therapist is making it unambiguously clear that he or she is not overwhelmed by 
them— or too caught up in his or her own emotional problems or distress to be able to see 
and respond to clients in a consistent and dependable way.
Transference distortions for Dismissive clients tend to follow themes that the therapist 
will see them as being weak, or will be intrusive and controlling, if they are vulnerable or 
share deeply with the therapist. Dismissive clients also will tend to distort the therapist 
and others in their lives as being hostile and competitive— when actually it is usually they 
who are responding this way and causing problems with others by trying to dominate 
and take control (Mallinckrodt, Daly, & Wang, 2009; Smith et al., 2010). 
Therapists may not see clients’ transference reactions, and the valuable case 
formulation/understanding they provide, unless they actively intervene to draw them 
out. Let’s look further at how the therapist can highlight or identify clients’ transference 
reactions. Below, we present several ways of making clients’ transference distortions overt 
so clients can collaborate with the therapist to understand and change them.
Primarily, the therapist is looking for tactful but direct ways to inquire about clients’ 
feelings and reactions toward the therapist. As we saw in Chapter 3 when discussing 
resistance, it is important for both therapists and clients to learn about clients’ reactions to 
being a client and seeking help. Further along in treatment, it is also important to learn about 
clients’ perceptions and reactions toward the therapist. This is especially important when:
 /uni25CFconflicts or misunderstandings arise between therapists and clients, and
 /uni25CFclients have just shared strong emotions or self-disclosed.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

276  CHAPTER 8
It is during these two types of sensitive interactions that clients are most likely to 
misperceive therapists as responding in the same problematic or unwanted way that others 
have in the past. As we have just seen, for example, if clients disclose something they feel 
embarrassed about or enter a strong feeling, they will often be certain (erroneously) that 
the therapist feels burdened or depressed by their sad feelings. Or, they may inaccurately 
believe that the therapist doesn’t respect them anymore now that they have disclosed this 
information about themselves. Clients believe the therapist is privately responding in this 
unwanted way because this is how important others have responded in the past — even 
though the therapist doesn’t think or feel anything like this and has not communicated 
disapproval in any way.
 It is difficult for most graduate student therapists to grasp this in the beginning. 
Because the interaction or sharing seemed so positive to them, and to be so well-received 
by the client, new therapists find it hard to believe that it could have been misperceived 
in some problematic way by the client. However, if the therapist doesn’t check in with 
client and ask how it has been for them to share this significant feeling or disclose this 
important issue with the therapist, some clients will miss, reschedule, or come late to the 
next session, or return but keep the next session superficial. Thus therapists need to ask 
about or clarify potential transference distortions with the client and, when necessary, 
make it unambiguously clear that they are not thinking or feeling the same unwanted 
things that important others have in the past. For example:
THERAPIST:
 That was a lot to share—there’s so much sadness there.
CLIENT:
 Yeah, I guess I was crying pretty hard.
THERAPIST:
 Yes, and I’m honored that you choose to share such important feelings with me. 
May I check in with you for a minute about this—about how it feels right now to have shared 
so much and cried so hard with me?
CLIENT:
 Well, you’re always very nice, but this has to be pretty tiring for you, too.
THERAPIST:
 Tiring? No, it’s not tiring at all. Actually, it’s enlivening for me—I feel connected to 
you right now—that we’ve shared something that’s meaningful for both of us.
CLIENT:
 Really? I don’t wear you out with all this?
THERAPIST:
 No, I don’t feel worn out or tired in any way. Actually, it’s just the opposite; I like 
being able to respond to your genuine experience.
CLIENT:
 Boy, this is really different for me, that it’s OK for you if I feel sad or cry sometimes. I 
think my Mom needed me to be happy all the time, so I acted that way, even though I wasn’t. 
When looking at pictures of myself, other people often say I look pretty or have a nice smile, 
but I see a sad face...
Therapists want to debrief with clients after sensitive interactions, and check whether 
clients are distorting or accurately perceiving the therapist. If transference distortions are 
in play,, therapists want to differentiate themselves from significant others and clients’ 
IWMs. For example, 
T
HERAPIST
:
 Maybe you’re telling me that others in your life have felt burdened by you, or that 
your needs made people “tired,” but I think I’m different from some important people in your 
life. I’m not feeling “tired” or burdened or anything like that at all. 
 At other less significant times as well, therapists will want to check in with cli -
ents and explore their reactions toward the therapist. Routinely, the following type of 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  277
questions will open some of the most important, and unexpected , information that cli -
ents share during treatment — revealing perceptions and reactions that are central to 
clients’ problems but that would not become accessible if the therapist did not inquire 
in these ways:
 /uni25CFAs you were driving to our session today, how did you feel about coming to see me?
 /uni25CFWhen you find yourself thinking about therapy, what kind of thoughts do you have 
about me and our work together?
 /uni25CFI'm wondering what you might be thinking is going on for me right now as we talk 
about this sensitive issue?
 /uni25CFI wanted to check in and get your thoughts about our work together and how you I wanted to check in and get your thoughts about our work together and how you I
and I are doing together. You know, what you like about our time together, and I are doing together. You know, what you like about our time together, and I
anything about our interaction that may not feel so good.
Therapists can also explore what clients project onto the therapist — what clients 
believe the therapist is thinking, expecting, or feeling toward clients at that moment. For 
instance, therapists can ask:
 /uni25CFWhat do you think I am feeling toward you as you tell me that?I am feeling toward you as you tell me that?I
 /uni25CFHow do you think I am going to respond if you do that?I am going to respond if you do that?I
 /uni25CFWhat do you think I expect you to do in that situation?I expect you to do in that situation?I
Typically, it is uncomfortable for new therapists to break long-held familial and 
cultural norms and invite clients to talk about “you and me” so directly. Doing so, 
however, often brings up key issues and concerns that are central to clients’ problems 
and the therapeutic relationship, even though the therapist had no idea this was going on 
privately for clients. With training and practice, student therapists can learn to become 
more safely and comfortably forthright with their clients than they have been able to be 
(or may want to be) with others in their personal life (Spangler, Hill & Dunn et al., 2014).
The distinction between everyday social interaction and clinical intervention is 
significant here. Because many therapists have a moving-toward interpersonal style, it 
is especially difficult for them to become more forthright in this way and risk clients’ 
disapproval. By role-playing and rehearsing this interpersonal skill with classmates and 
supervisors, by viewing recordings of their sessions and considering times when they 
could have made process-oriented interventions, and in their own personal therapy, new 
therapists can practice being more direct or straightforward with clients without crossing 
the line and becoming confrontational or intrusive— which we don’t want and never need 
to do. If trainees practice this intervention with colleagues and take the risk to pose such 
questions diplomatically and respectfully, clients’ transference reactions will be made 
overt, and often the therapist will be taken right to the core of clients’ concerns. The new 
issues that are revealed are often rich in meaning, and routinely surprise the therapist as 
clients reply:
 /uni25CFI think you are feeling disappointed in me.I think you are feeling disappointed in me.I
 /uni25CFI think you'll act nice but really be wishing inside that I think you'll act nice but really be wishing inside that I I would just stop coming.I would just stop coming.I
 /uni25CFYou're probably thinking that it's wrong of me to even be thinking about getting a 
divorce— that it’s selfish for me to do that to my children.
As IWMs and misperceptions such as these are made overt, therapists can clarify 
their actual responses to clients, which in itself often provides clients with a reparative 
experience. When transference reactions are revealed in this way, therapists have the 
opportunity to respond to clients with an immediacy and authenticity that is not often 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

278  CHAPTER 8
found in other relationships (Gelso et al., 2013). For example, a therapist might clarify 
transference distortions by replying:
 /uni25CFNo, I'm not feeling disappointed in you at all. Actually, I'm very pleased with how 
well you have been doing. I'm wondering where that feeling of "disappointment" 
comes from, though. Did I do something today that made you think I do something today that made you think I I was disap-I was disap-I
pointed in you, or maybe this comes up with others, too?
 /uni25CFI want you to “stop coming”? I want you to “stop coming”? I Oh, no, that's not going on for me at all—h, no, that's not going on for me at all—h, no, that's not going on for me at all I enjoy I enjoy I
working with you very much. But I’m so glad you’re telling me this— so we can 
work it through. Do you know when you started thinking this?
 /uni25CFNo, I wasn't thinking that you are being “selfish.” I wasn't thinking that you are being “selfish.” I I was thinking about how hard I was thinking about how hard I
you are trying to do the right thing—you are trying to do the right thing—you are trying to do the right thing to find a balance between your needs and what 
you want to do for others. Tell me more about “selfish” — It’s such a judgmental 
term. Is that an important or familiar word for you?
Most beginning therapists find it difficult to explore the possibility that their clients 
are having significant feelings and faulty perceptions toward them that are not based on 
the reality of how they have responded to clients . With experience, these therapists often 
become more familiar with clients’ distortions and may be better prepared to explore and 
clarify them. Even though the therapist may never have responded to clients in a way that 
would reflect any of these problematic perceptions, the discerning therapist still works 
under the assumption that such client reactions are likely to be present yet covert. If these 
distortions are not made overt and rectified, the potential for change is limited. For some 
trainees, this may be the critical point: They can accept intellectually that clients may hold 
such faulty expectations of others. However, it is often too threatening— evoking too much 
anxiety over making a mistake or guilt about having done something wrong — to — to — explore 
the possibility that clients may have such unwanted reactions toward the therapist.
Exploring clients’ reactions toward the therapist reveals three important types of 
information. First, the faulty perceptions and expectations that are revealed are often 
central to clients’ presenting problems. They now provide a treatment focus and can be 
sorted through and resolved in the immediacy of the real-life relationship between the 
therapist and client.
Second, exploring transference will also highlight how aspects of the same problems 
that clients are having with others — and that they originally learned in formative 
relationships— are being reenacted with the therapist. Unless clients’ reactions toward the 
therapist are directly invited and explored, these distortions and reenactments are not 
likely to be identified or resolved. Here again, transference reactions reveal clients’ key 
concerns and provide an opportunity to resolve them — first, in the relationship with the 
therapist, and then with others.
Third, as paradoxical as it sounds at first, transference reactions ultimately provide 
evidence to clients that their feelings and perceptions really are trustworthy. We’re back to 
our theme of self-efficacy. Because clients’ expectations and emotional reactions may not 
accurately fit the current situation in which they are activated, they often do not make sense 
at first to clients or others. As a result, many clients experience their emotional responses 
toward spouses, children, employers, and others as “irrational,” “stupid,” or “crazy.” 
Consequently, they do not trust the validity of their own experience and, as a result, their 
self-efficacy is undermined. This also occurs in the therapeutic relationship when clients 
have emotional reactions toward the therapist that seem inappropriate or exaggerated. 
Clients’ emotional reactions are not irrational, however. Though they may not fully 
fit the present circumstances, they do make sense when they can be understood within 
their original developmental context. Real-life events have legitimately caused clients to 
feel and expect what they do. When therapists help clients link feelings and expectations 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  279
to where they originally learned them, they will prove to have been an appropriate 
reaction to someone else in another time and place (by therapist asking, for example, 
“When is the first time you can remember feeling this way? Who were you with and what 
was happening?”). Once the therapist and client have been able to clarify and resolve the 
transference distortion in their current interaction, this developmental link can often be 
made readily. In contrast, the developmental context will not come alive or be meaningful 
to clients if it is not first resolved in the current interaction with the therapist. In this way, 
transference reactions, like resistance, ultimately reveal that clients’ feelings make sense. 
Consider the following exchange:
CLIENT:
 He doesn’t want to listen to me, maybe I am just too much—too needy, too demanding, 
too much maintenance…I don’t know...
THERAPIST:
 Have you ever felt that way in here with me? That I find you “too much” in some way?
CLIENT:
 Well, sure, I guess I’ve thought that sometimes, but you can’t say anything because 
you’re a therapist. You know, you have to be nice—that’s your job.
THERAPIST:
 Well, no, I don’t think that being nice is my job—but giving you honest feedback 
is. If I thought you were doing something with me that was causing problems with others in 
your life, I’d tell you. It might not be easy for me, but I absolutely would take the risk and try 
to find a way to talk with you about it in a constructive way. So, no, I don’t find you needy or 
demanding or too much with me. Actually, I like it when you speak up for yourself—I think 
it’s a strong and healthy part of you.
CLIENT:
 I’m glad you’re saying that. I think I go along with other people too much, and don’t say 
what I want, because I’m so afraid of seeming, you know, selfish or demanding or something. 
I guess it’s easier for me to say what I want in here with you than it is in the rest of my life.
THERAPIST [linking interaction with therapist to client’s daily life]:
 I’m glad it’s easier with 
me—but what would you like to be able to say the next time you feel like your boyfriend isn’t 
listening to you or taking you seriously?
CLIENT:
 Just tell him to stop acting like an asshole.
THERAPIST:
 How do you think that will help your relationship? 
CLIENT:
 I guess we’d just get into another fight…do you have any suggestions?
THERAPIST:
 What if, next time, you just said to your boyfriend, “I don’t think you’re really lis-
tening to me right now. Can we both try to listen better to each other?” How would it be for 
you to try something like that? 
CLIENT:
 Ya, that’s better—I can say that to him. And I guess if he can’t really listen to me, I prob-
ably shouldn’t be thinking about moving in with him.
THERAPIST:
 Yeah, if he can generally respond well when you ask him for what you need, green 
light; and if he still can’t listen when you ask so specifically and respectfully, red light.
This type of transference clarification gives clients a real-life experience of change; 
they learn that their inaccurate expectations or problematic IWMs do not fit in this 
relationship . As they have a real-life experience of change with the therapist, they 
find that at least some relationships, sometimes, can be another way. This experiential 
relearning, which comes from clarifying the misperception with the therapist, allows 
many clients to make two important steps. First, they often are able to make meaningful 
links to formative relationships that shed light on current patterns and problems. Second, 
by clarifying the transference distortion and finding that the therapist is not responding in 
the familiar but unwanted way, many clients are empowered to try out these new ways of 
responding with others that have succeeded with the therapist. Some will initiate this step 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

280  CHAPTER 8
on their own (Client: Guess what I did this weekend…I did this weekend…I ) and others will risk changing as 
the therapist makes a suggestion—as occurred in the previous dialogue. ( Therapist: How 
would it be to say to him… ”). Together, the therapist and client then begin the essential 
process of sorting through who in the client’s life is likely to respond well to these changes 
and who isn’t. 
FINDING INTERPERSONAL BALANCE
In this chapter, we are trying to understand the patterns and purposes in clients’ 
interpersonal functioning in order to discern a treatment focus. In particular, we are 
exploring different ways that clients tend to play out with the therapist interpersonal 
patterns and themes that also are causing problems with others. However, as we 
consider clients’ eliciting maneuvers, testing behavior, and transference reactions, it 
draws us further into the closely related issue of countertransference, where therapists 
get pulled into “enactments” with their clients. We are striving to maintain a balanced 
level of interpersonal involvement with clients. The therapist’s intention it to be empathic, 
present and emotionally engaged, yet still boundaried or differentiated. This balanced 
degree of involvement helps therapists manage their own client-induced and therapist-
induced countertransference reactions more effectively, and be better prepared to provide 
clients with a corrective response that does not reenact familiar but unwanted relational 
scenarios (Gelso & Hayes, 2002; 2007).
To help with this cardinal issue in clinical training, recall the two important 
attachment constructs introduced previously: Safe Haven and Secure Base. As a Safe 
Haven, the therapist uses empathic understanding and emotional availability to make it 
safe for clients to share their distress and feel responded to. In combination, as a Secure 
Base, the therapist also has the task of supporting autonomy and differentiation while 
sustaining connection — such as the task of respectfully challenging clients’ schemas or 
questioning the current utility of their interpersonal coping strategies (Yeomans et al, 
2013). Thus, the therapist has to monitor these two different trajectories — trying to 
balance being separate and related at the same time, and avoid two common types of 
countertransference—enmeshment  and disengagement.
To provide therapeutic relationships that facilitate change, therapists want to track 
this interpersonal process and intervene to restore a more balanced degree of involvement 
when this has been lost. On the one hand, if the therapist becomes overly invested in 
clients’ choices or change, this will be an unwanted reenactment for many clients 
(enmeshment). Especially for clients who grew up with too much parental control or 
intrusiveness, or too little support for pursuing their own interests and goals, their fear 
and expectation that they will again be controlled by the therapist (and others in their 
life they get close to) will be confirmed. On the other hand, if the therapist is emotionally 
removed or too personally distant (disengagement), a CEE cannot occur either. Although 
this will be especially problematic for clients who had Authoritarian, rejecting, neglectful, 
Dismissive, or otherwise distant caregivers, it will also diminish the potential for treatment 
gains for most clients because the relationship is too insignificant to effect change. That 
is, even if the disengaged therapist responds in new, healthier ways that counteract what 
clients have found in the past, it doesn’t have much impact because the relationship is not 
very meaningful to the client . Thus, throughout the course of treatment, the therapist’s 
intention is to monitor the balance of separateness versus relatedness in the therapeutic 
relationship and maintain an effective interpersonal balance Kerr & Bowen, 1988; 
Minuchin & Nichols, 2007).
New therapists want to be patient with their ability to apply this concept with their 
clients. At times, all therapists will have difficulty maintaining an effective interpersonal 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  281
balance with some clients — whether because of client-induced or therapist-induced 
countertransference. To manage these pulls, the therapist’s aim is to be both a genuine 
participant in the relationship and, as we are trying to clarify, simultaneously an objective 
observer of it as well. Sullivan (1968) captured this complex, dual role in his enduring 
term “participant/observer.” However, combining genuine empathic engagement with an 
“observing ego” or objective viewpoint is no easy task for beginning (or experienced) 
therapists. It is a challenging paradox indeed to be close or related (be empathically 
engaged) and Separate (be differentiated and maintain clear boundaries) at the same time 
(Jordan et al., 1991).
Without question, this balancing act is one of the most difficult skill sets for new 
therapists to develop. Perhaps an apt analogy is being a 16-year-old student-driver in a 
car with a manual (stick shift) transmission. Simultaneously, the new driver is trying to 
press down on the clutch with her left foot; brake or accelerate with her right foot; steer 
the car with her left hand; and shift the gearshift with her right hand. She does this while 
she is trying to look ahead down the road; see where she is going and attend to what is 
rapidly approaching; and listen to instructions from a driving instructor sitting next to 
her and barking instructions! In just a short time, of course, the new driver will be able to 
do this almost automatically — and even change the playlist on the MP3 player, monitor 
directions on the GPS, and carry on a meaningful conversation at the same time. Similarly, 
with practice and two or three years of experience, trainees can be reassured that it will 
become much easier to maintain this self-reflective capacity and simultaneously be both a 
participant in and an observer of what’s transpiring in the therapeutic interaction.
E/n.sc/m.sc/e.sc/s.sc/h.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc
At times, all therapists will become over-identified — “enmeshed,” in family systems 
terms— with certain clients. For example, if a client is well practiced and skillful at getting 
therapists and others to rescue, direct, or take responsibility, this is an instance of client-
induced countertransference . It probably has more to do with what the client elicits 
in others than with the therapist’s own personal issues. With the help of a supportive 
supervisor, the therapist can come to recognize that the client is making the therapist 
feel responsible— just as the client does with others in his or her life. It is relatively easy 
to begin talking with the client about this relational pattern and changing how it is 
potentially being reenacted in the therapeutic relationship.
 However, this becomes a more complicated issue when the client’s attempts to 
make the therapist take responsibility, self-disclose, or engage more as friends taps into 
the therapist’s own personal issues (e.g., perhaps this therapist grew up in a parentified/
caretaking role, or has an anxiously Preoccupied attachment style with a high need for 
approval). With this type of therapist-induced countertransference , therapists lose their 
objectivity with the client because their own personal concerns have been activated. For 
instance, the parentified therapists may continue in a caretaking, dependency-fostering 
role with the client, or the Preoccupied therapists may have difficulty maintaining clear 
boundaries or challenging the client because they can’t risk the client’s disapproval (Sauer 
et al., 2003). Or, to use another example, therapists become personally invested in the 
client choosing to get (or not to get) a divorce — as therapists experience how hurt they 
have been by their own recent or their earlier parents’ divorce.
In these ways, their own developmental histories will give all therapists a tendency 
to lose the clarity of their personal boundaries and become over-involved with some 
clients at times. How can therapists recognize when this therapist-induced type of 
countertransference is occurring? When therapists find they are frustrated, angry, or critical 
of a client for not changing, they have become overly invested and usually are trying to 
manage a personal issue through the client. Similarly, therapists often are enmeshed when 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

282  CHAPTER 8
they have dreams about a client, often think about a client outside the therapy session, 
feel depressed (rather than appropriately concerned) when a client is not changing, or 
become envious or elated over positive changes in the client’s life. Enmeshment is usually 
occurring when therapists describe the client as being “just like me” and cannot recognize 
the many differences that, in reality, always exist between therapist and client. This over-
involvement, occurs, for example, when a Preoccupied therapist loses clear boundaries 
with a Preoccupied client who is pressing for intense engagement or even fusion — which 
is very different than genuine care and liking for the client which, of course, is helpful and 
appropriate when it is modulated. When enmeshment occurs, therapists usually need the 
client to change in order to meet their own needs — for example, to shore up their own 
feelings of adequacy as therapists or to manage personal problems or feelings of their 
own that are similar to the client’s. Recalling the concept of change from the inside out or 
an internal locus for change, enmeshed therapists are trying to solve an internal problem 
of their own, externally, through the client.
Treatment progress and change usually halt at the point when therapists become over-
involved with a client. When they become enmeshed, therapists lose sight of the fact that 
clients have their own subjective worldview, shaped by many factors that actually differ 
from those of the therapist. They tend to become controlling of the client and to project 
their own problems and solutions onto the client. This response often reenacts the client’s 
developmental predicament in the therapeutic relationship. For example, many clients 
have grown up in families with overly controlling or intrusive caregivers. When therapists 
fail to support the client’s own autonomy and differentiation, they are responding along 
the same problematic lines as caregivers did in formative relationships. This reenactment 
with the therapist will hinder clients as they try to resolve the same types of conflicts 
around intimacy and control that originally brought them to treatment. One reason for 
paying attention to maintaining an interpersonal balance, and always being receptive to 
the possibility of enmeshment occurring, is to safeguard against countertransference and 
responding to clients along familiar lines that originally contributed to their problems.
When therapists become too close or over-identified, they lose their ability to be a 
participant-observer. They cannot think objectively about clients or step out of the 
interpersonal process they are enacting with their clients to consider what their interaction 
may mean. In parallel, their heightened emotional reactivity to clients will cloud their 
understanding and diminish their ability to provide a holding environment and remain 
a “steady presence” to contain clients’ feelings and distress (See Fonagy et al., 2008). 
Enmeshed therapists lack the reflective capacity to step out of affectively charged 
interactions sufficiently to reflect on their own thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, and 
clients’ experiences, and respond to what’s going on between them . Instead of accurate 
empathy, enmeshed therapists will offer clients only a global, undifferentiated sympathy (as 
in, Ineffective Therapist: e.g., “Oh, I totally get it - I totally get it - I I know exactly what you mean!I know exactly what you mean!I ”) that 
does not consistently capture the specific, personal meaning that a particular experience 
holds for a client. Most important of all, perhaps, therapists will fail to discriminate the 
real differences between themselves and clients that do exist and will begin to see clients 
as being just like themselves. This over-identification may feel like closeness or deep 
understanding, and can be reassuring to some clients at first. However, initial positive 
changes do not sustain well in an enmeshed therapeutic relationship because clients will 
also need to differentiate—which an enmeshed therapist will have difficulty supporting.
D/i.sc/s.sc/e.sc/n.sc/g.sc/a.sc/g.sc/e.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc
Just as many therapists will become enmeshed with clients at times, many therapists 
also will hold themselves too far away from certain clients at times. Per client-induced 
countertransference, therapists will often observe themselves initially distancing from 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  283
moving-against and other “negative” clients who are characteristically hostile, critical, 
competitive, distrustful, controlling, or manipulative (Martin et al., 2007). Disengaged 
therapists distance themselves just as others in clients’ lives often distance from them. 
Similarly, it is common for clients with a Dismissive attachment style to evoke feelings in 
the therapist of boredom, detachment, or being unimportant and unneeded— feelings that 
these clients elicit in others in their lives, and feelings that also mirror Dismissive clients’ 
own childhood experiences (Daly & Mallinckrodt, 2009; Slade, 1999). As therapists 
recognize what their own personal reactions may be teaching them about clients’ 
problems with others, they can begin looking for points of entry to broach this topic and 
start talking about it (Bennett, 2008).
Therapists also tend to disengage or distance from clients when clients arouse a 
therapist’s own personal conflicts. For example, the therapist may disengage from the 
client as the client talks about the impending death of an aging parent. In this situation, 
the therapist may be activated by his or her own unresolved sadness about significant 
losses, disappointments, or deprivation. A primary purpose of supervision is to help 
therapists recognize their own countertransference reactions, find a more appropriate way 
to manage their own personal feelings (e.g., talking with a supervisor or a colleague about 
them, or in their own therapy if the issue endures), and empower therapists to be able 
to re-engage clients with their own boundaries better in place (Falender & Schafransky, 
2004). Many studies show that attending to therapists’ countertransference is essential to 
positive treatment outcomes (Beatson & Rao, 2014).
When therapists cannot be emotionally available or responsive to their clients the 
working alliance is shallow, or there may be too little empathy to allow some clients to 
enter treatment after the initial intake or first session. Treatment also loses its intensity 
and often becomes intellectualized when the therapist cannot be a “participant” in the 
real relationship with the client (Gelso, 2014; Marmarosh et al., 2009). Therapists need 
to be able to risk affecting and being affected by the client — nothing ventured, nothing 
gained.
Therapists also lose their intuition and creativity when they distance themselves from 
clients. Clients need the engagement that comes with a supportive relationship or safe 
holding environment necessary to explore affect-laden problems. Counseling is more 
than an intellectual discourse, and little enduring change will occur in an emotionally 
disengaged relationship. Without the impetus or real meaning provided by genuine 
personal involvement, a CEE will not occur, even if the therapist responds in schema-
disconfirming ways . The relationship does not matter enough to impact the client and 
fuel change.
Finally, a therapeutic relationship in which the therapist is too distant or uninvolved 
will reenact developmental problems for many clients. For example, for clients whose 
aloof, Dismissive, self-centered, or Authoritarian parents could not meet their child -
hood needs for emotional support, a distant therapist might be frustrating but ultimately 
“safe.” That is, their anxieties over their insecure attachments and unmet needs— and the 
resulting problems associated with trust, intimacy, or making commitments — will not be 
activated in this therapeutic relationship. This may occur, for example, in a therapeutic 
match between a Dismissive therapist and a Dismissive client, where both may be too 
comfortable with distance to engage each other or clients’ problems in a meaningful way 
(Dozier et al., 1994). Unfortunately, just as clients’ conflicts are not aroused in a disen -
gaged relationship, the opportunity to resolve these issues is lost as well. Our experi -
ence as supervisors has been that novice therapists who are consistently unwilling to risk 
authentic engagement with their clients are less likely to be effective (and to benefit from 
supervision) than those who are willing to risk a real relationship but tend to become 
over-involved at times.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

284  CHAPTER 8
E/f.sc/f.sc/e.sc/c.sc/t.sc/i.sc/v.sc/e.sc M/i.sc/d.sc/d.sc/l.sc/e.sc G/r.sc/o.sc/u.sc/n.sc/d.sc /o.sc/f.sc B/a.sc/l.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc/d.sc I/n.sc/v.sc/o.sc/l.sc/v.sc/e.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc
To be an effective participant-observer, or sustain an effective balance of being separate 
yet connected, therapists try to maintain a middle ground of involvement. Although the 
goal is to maintain this balanced involvement throughout the course of treatment, it is no 
easy task. Let’s look at other ways to achieve this goal. 
Learning How to Manage Our Own Reactivity. Therapists are continually con -
fronted with personal issues in their own lives by the sensitive, affect-laden material that 
clients present. For every therapist, it’s just part of the work— it comes with the territory. 
As a basic element of their training, all therapists are encouraged to pay attention to 
their own countertransference propensities and become more aware of how they tend to 
respond when clients activate their own anxieties or personal issues. For example, when 
your client talks about an issue that is difficult for you, pause for a moment and try to 
identify your initial response tendency.
Some therapists initially withdraw from the client and distance themselves by intel -
lectualizing— for example, by interpreting the client’s affect before the client fully experi-
ences it or by ineffectively “explaining” or interpreting what something means. Others 
become overly problem-solving and prescriptive, telling clients what they should do in a 
particular situation. Whereas some therapists begin to talk too much, we find that many 
student therapists become too quiet and unresponsive, leaving clients feeling that they 
aren’t getting any help or don’t have a real partner with them in the counseling room. 
With a little effort and some non-defensiveness, however, therapists can begin to identify 
their own countertransference propensities and learn how to manage them responsibly. 
Again, this is so important as studies consistently find that countertransference impacts 
treatment outcome (Hayes, et al., 2011).
Becoming familiar with our own response tendencies becomes even more important 
with moving-against and other difficult clients who respond to the therapist with negativ-
ity (Binder & Strupp, 1997). Through eliciting maneuvers, testing behavior, and transfer-
ence distortions, we have seen that some clients will respond in negative ways to thera -
pists. Too many therapists have not been given the practice and preparation they need in 
order to respond non-defensively to these challenging situations. Therapists-in-training 
need to role-play or rehearse alternative responses with supervisors that offer more “neu-
trality” (i.e., not the familiar fight-or-flight responses they typically evoke), and therefore 
are less likely to repeat the familiar but problematic response sequences that these clients’ 
negativity usually elicits from others. New therapists also are encouraged to anticipate 
and explore how their own personal issues and response tendencies will be triggered by 
different kinds of challenging, unwanted responses from the client— such as power strug-
gles, criticism, sexual innuendos, and so forth.
Whereas much is often said about “nice” things such as empathy, genuineness and 
warmth, or a working alliance, less training is usually provided to help beginning ther -
apists respond to a demanding, passive-aggressive, or demeaning client (the one who 
comments, for example, “Looks like you’ve been gaining some weight. What’s your hus-
band say about that?”). In this regard, researchers find that therapists do not register or 
respond to clients’ negative reactions toward them very well— therapists tend to deny or 
avoid the unwanted remark. It seems that it is much easier for therapists to miss or gloss 
over negative/hostile responses from clients than positive responses (Hill et al., 1992). 
However, we don’t want to tune out or miss these important messages from clients. Why? 
The negativity coming toward us is often at the heart of what is causing problems in 
clients’ relationships with others . We need to make the most of the time we have with 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  285
clients, and addressing clients’ problems with others — especially as they are occurring 
right now with us— is usually the best way to do this.
Our intention is to approach negativity non-defensively, rather than avoid it and act 
as if something significant was not being said — even though this may be hard to do in 
the beginning. Our goal is to work with it in an up-front way that doesn’t punish or 
blame clients in any way but, instead, helps them learn about the problematic impact 
they are having on others, and better ways to negotiate conflict and manage feelings in 
relationships. Consider this example:
CLIENT:
 (critical tone)
: Your office is looking pretty tired. This furniture and brown color went 
out a few decades ago.
THERAPIST:
 (calmly) 
Things look a little out-of-date to you in here.
CLIENT:
 Yeah, you should do something to change it.
THERAPIST:
 No, I don’t think I want to make any changes; I’m comfortable here. But maybe 
it would be helpful for us to talk about this for a minute. You’ve said things like this to me 
before, and I’m wondering how others usually respond when you criticize them or tell them 
what they should do?
CLIENT:
 Geez, Doctor, relax. I’m just trying to be helpful. You shouldn’t be so sensitive.
THERAPIST:
 It’s OK that you don’t like my décor. But I am still wondering how others usually 
respond when you advise or critique them like that.
CLIENT:
 Well, I don’t know, I guess mostly they just do it.
THERAPIST:
 Uh-huh, I can see that—you do have good taste, and express strong opinions in an 
authoritative voice. But I’m wondering how it affects your relationships. Maybe you’re right 
and this is just me here, but I’m thinking that most people wouldn’t like too much of this. 
What do you think?
CLIENT:
 (pause)
 Well, no, maybe some people at my church might agree with you and say I’m a 
know-it-all.
THERAPIST:
 Well, I’m not saying that, but I am wondering how this goes with others. So, yeah, 
I can imagine some people feeling intimidated and wanting to get away from you, and maybe 
a few feeling resentful and wanting to argue with you. What it’s like for you to be seen in this 
way—how does that feel?
CLIENT:
 Well, when you say it like that, it makes me feel kinda bad—almost like crying...
THERAPIST:
 Crying. Let’s sit together with that feeling and just let it be there.
CLIENT:
 (slowly)
 I’m taking over, aren’t I...just like my mother did. Giving advice and opinions 
that others haven’t asked for and don’t want. Sometimes I wonder if I’m going to ruin my 
marriage— like she ruined hers...
 This therapist was effective because she remained non-defensive in the face of the cli-
ent’s criticism and control. And she approached this sensitive issue—she took the risk of approached this sensitive issue—she took the risk of approached
naming it and asking about it in a respectful manner—rather than just continuing on and 
acting as if nothing important was happening between them. In contrast, other therapists 
too often respond ineffectively to such negativity with their own personal or counter -
transference reactions, as in the following exchange:
CLIENT:
 Your office is looking a little tired. This furniture and brown color went out a few  
decades ago.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

286  CHAPTER 8
Three ineffective responses to this client:
(Moving-toward and complying): Oh, I’m sorry. You know, you’re probably right. 
Maybe it is time for me to update things a bit in here.
(Moving-away and avoiding): OK, well uh, what do you think we should work on 
today?
(Moving-against and chiding) Maybe you should spend more time thinking about your 
own problems and less about what everybody else should do.
With practice, and by observing instructors role-play or model effective responses, 
therapists can learn how to remain non-defensive and approach the negativity — the key 
to responding effectively. This approach empowers the therapist to intervene when they 
provide interpersonal feedback, make process comments, take a curious stance toward 
what was just said, or simply adopting a neutral stance to question, highlight, or explore 
this negativity. Although still poorly integrated into clinical training, psychotherapy 
researchers have been trying for decades to tell practitioners that negativity will occur 
with many of their clients and therapists need to learn how to deal with it more effectively. 
Clearly, this is an important part of the treatment process that is difficult for new and 
experienced therapists alike as they tend to respond with the same fight-or-flight reactions 
that clients elicit from others and which cause problems in their lives (Safran & Muran, 
2003; Strupp & Hadley, 1979).
To help therapists better maintain an effective interpersonal balance with clients, 
let’s look further at what therapists can do to manage their reactivity to clients’ 
negativity. Angus and Kagan (2007) emphasize that it is critical for therapists — early 
in their training — to begin tracking their response tendencies and countertransference 
propensities, and they provide guidelines to help with this process. One useful exercise 
for therapists is to write down their initial reaction propensities in different anxiety-
arousing situations— for instance, what you are most likely to say or do first when a client what you are most likely to say or do first when a client what you are most likely to say or do first
is demeaning or critical of you, or telling you how amazing you are and asking if you can 
meet at Starbucks instead next week.
 Alternatively, with a partner, trainees can role-play their responses to varying 
clients in different challenging situations. For example, one person can role-play being 
a competitive, intimidating, or insulting client who is questioning whether the therapist 
is really capable, experienced, or old enough to be able to help. Taking turns, the other 
trainee practices responding to this challenging client. In small discussion groups of three 
or four, trainees can provide each other with feedback, or watch themselves being replayed 
on videotape, and share their observations of the other therapists’ responses while role-
playing these challenging situations. With practice and guidance from supervisors, 
new therapists can learn to approach rather than gloss over and avoid these unwanted 
situations, find non-confrontational, non-blaming ways to make them overt and safe to 
talk about, and begin to explore them collaboratively with clients. The goal with this 
approach is to identify and alter the usual problematic scenario that typically ensues 
for clients with others. This gives therapists a chance to provide a new and corrective 
experience of change—as we saw in the previous dialogue.
Managing Over-involvement and Under-involvement. It is also challenging to 
maintain an effective balance between over-involvement and under-involvement because 
clients may try to shift or move the therapist along this continuum of involvement as part 
of their interpersonal coping strategy. This fits our term, “client-induced countertrans -
ference.” When the therapist has been responding effectively, some clients will become 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  287
threatened by anxiety-arousing issues that begin coming up (succeeding and getting bet -
ter), or the alliance-strengthening and the therapist becoming more important to the 
clients. To cope with these anxieties that can be evoked by success in treatment, some 
clients will re-test safety/danger in the therapeutic relationship by trying to engender 
either enmeshment or disengagement in the therapist. For example, some clients may 
try to bore the therapist by talking about issues they are not really concerned about 
(which can be more problematic for a Preoccupied therapist, who needs engagement 
and intensity). In contrast, other clients may try to elicit too much involvement from the 
therapist by exaggerating their distress and escalating the urgency for their need for help 
(which may present more of a challenge for Dismissive therapists, whose propensity is 
to minimize strong emotions and bids for intense engagement). In these and other ways, 
clients’ eliciting behaviors may press the therapist away from a balanced middle ground 
of involvement.
If therapists can maintain this effective middle ground of involvement— by remaining 
both a participant and an observer in the counseling relationship— they can provide therapy 
that is more even with no stormy ups and downs or lengthy impasses. It is also safer 
for clients to be vulnerable and trust when the therapist is dependably available without 
swinging to either side and becoming over-reactive or unresponsive. By offering this steady 
presence in the face of clients’ eliciting maneuvers, the therapist is providing a Safe Haven 
for the client. More specifically, when therapists can maintain this effective interpersonal 
balance, clients do not have to be concerned about disappointing or letting down an 
over-involved therapist, or eliciting the responsiveness or engagement of an emotionally 
removed or distant therapist. In this regard, the attachment researchers have appreciated 
best the importance of the caregiver’s, and the therapist’s, consistent responsiveness in 
developing security and trust in relationships (Tufekciogly & Muran, 2015). The key is 
for therapists to maintain their own personal boundaries (Separateness) while still being 
empathic and responsive to clients (Relatedness). Therapists are striving to enter clients’ 
subjective worldview — to be fully present and empathically attuned — yet still maintain 
appropriate self-boundaries and self/other differentiation. 
How can we help therapists recognize the interpersonal process they are enacting 
with their clients and assess their balance of involvement with clients? Therapists can do 
this by considering the following questions after every session:
1. What are my feelings and personal reactions toward this client?
2. How might my reactions parallel those of significant others in the client’s life?
3. Are my feelings typical of my reactions to others, or are they more confined to this 
particular client?
By writing answers to these questions in their case notes after each session, therapists 
ensure that they are attending to the process dimension. Asking themselves such 
questions will also help therapists distinguish their own personal reactions toward the 
client (therapist-induced countertransference) from the client’s eliciting behaviors and 
interpersonal coping style that affect many people (client-induced countertransference). 
Building upon these three questions, therapists are encouraged to utilize the guidelines for 
writing process notes in Appendix A after each session.
All therapists will sometimes become over-involved with a client. Indeed, many 
theorists have described the therapeutic process as therapists’ ability to become immersed 
in clients’ modes of relating, and then to work their way out of these enactments (Gill & 
Muslin, 1976; Levenson, 1982; Mitchell, 1988). New therapists often feel discouraged 
when their supervisors accurately point out that, here again, they are reenacting aspects 
of clients’ problems in their interpersonal process. By examining their own affective and 
interpersonal range, anticipating their own countertransference propensities, and tracking 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

288  CHAPTER 8
the separateness-relatedness dimension in the therapeutic relationship, new therapists will 
become increasingly able to maintain an effective interpersonal balance—and thereby 
become more effective therapists.
When therapists realize that they have become over- or under-involved with a client 
and find that they cannot realign the relationship on their own with a process comment, it 
is best to consult with a colleague or supervisor to help reestablish clear boundaries. One 
of the most productive uses of supervision is to help therapists regain control of their own 
emotional reactions so that they can reestablish an effective degree of involvement with 
a client who has successfully pushed them away or drawn them in too much . Sustaining 
this interpersonal balance is one of the best ways to provide a reparative relationship and 
keep from reenacting the familiar but problematic scenarios that occur with others.
AMBIVALENCE: RESPONDING TO BOTH SIDES  
OF CLIENTS’ EXPERIENCE
Therapists can better understand their clients’ problems when they recognize the 
ambivalent nature of many conflicts. Often, there are two sides to clients’ most enduring 
problems and core conflict. Before many problems can be resolved, therapists need to 
be able to capture and respond to both sides of their dilemma . Therapists do this by 
responding with interest, curiosity, and an open-minded, exploratory stance for both sides
rather than persuading or pressing clients, or subtly leading and cajoling them, toward 
one side or the other (Miller & Rollnick, 2014; 2002).
 Often, because of their own countertransference, therapists may fail to recognize 
both sides of their clients’ conflict. Sometimes, because they believe they know what is 
“right” and know what clients “should” do, therapists press clients toward only one side 
of their ambivalence about a decision (e.g., an ineffective therapist might say: Just leave 
your boyfriend… You need to stay in school… You should apply for that position… You 
shouldn’t buy him that car… It’s a mistake to get married so young ...). Therapists are 
more helpful when they can articulate and highlight more clearly, and then help clients 
explore and sort through for themselves, the two opposing feelings, competing needs, or 
contradictory beliefs that make up the double-edged nature of the binding conflict they 
commonly are grappling with. For example:
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 Yes, I can see what an important but difficult decision this is for you. 
I’m not invested in the choice you make. I just want to help you sort through the mixed feel-
ings and all of your pros and cons about this decision. Let’s explore both sides: tell me about 
the part of you that wants to leave him, and the part of you that doesn’t. 
Colloquial expressions convey the two-sided nature of conflict—we often say that 
someone is “stuck between a rock and a hard place.” Such expressions capture the 
push-pull nature of conflict — that you “can’t live with them and you can’t live without 
them” or are “damned if you do and damned if you don’t.” Similarly, therapists working 
within different theoretical perspectives have used differing terms to describe this. Long 
ago, for example, the behavioral therapists Dollard and Miller (1950) highlighted how 
clients were often struggling with “approach-approach” or “avoid-avoid” conflicts, while 
communication theorists and early family therapists highlighted double-bind interactions 
and paradoxical communications (Bateson, 1972). We have also seen that contemporary 
attachment researchers reveal the immobilizing plight of “Category D” children who are 
attached to a caretaker who is sometimes helpful but, at other times, also frightens or 
hurts them (Hesse & Main, 1999). To these children, seemingly, there is no solution to this 
double bind. They think, “I can’t walk away from this caregiver who I depend on, yet at 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  289
the same time, I can’t be close and need this person who frightens or hurts me so much.” 
In this regard, clients with the most intractable symptoms, and who tend to internalize 
or repeat their caregivers’ own problematic parenting or symptomatic behavior, grew up 
with these highly ambivalent relationships (Benjamin, 2006). Indeed, life is easier when 
caregivers are generally good or generally problematic. In contrast, when there is too 
much good and bad news mixed together, problems become more complex and harder to 
resolve (e.g., when a client is molested by her stepfather who, in other ways, is the most 
responsive and helpful adult in her life). 
There are many different facets to this issue of the two-sided nature of conflict. One 
aspect is how therapists often fail to appreciate that some clients have concerns both 
about being hurt by the therapist as they have been hurt by others, and about hurting 
others by doing normal, appropriate things (Weiss, 1993). The counseling field has well-
developed concepts regarding clients’ expectations about being hurt, misunderstood, 
or betrayed, by the therapist — as they have been in other important relationships (i.e., 
Transference). In contrast, far less attention has been paid to some clients’ worry and 
guilt about hurting the therapist and others (and their internalized attachment figures) by 
doing well in life. This commonly occurs, for example, when these clients do better than 
their parents and surpass their caregiver in some arena such as having greater financial 
success, enjoying a happier marriage, or simply living longer or better than their caregiv -
ers. It may also occur when clients succeed at reaching a sought-after goal, appropriately 
stand up for themselves or advocate on their own behalf, and pursue their own interests 
or career choices. 
When these clients make progress and improve in treatment (e.g., by having a 
relationship with someone who treats them well), they may retreat from these success 
experiences. They may sabotage themselves, be unable to sustain progress toward their 
own chosen goals or, most commonly, simply be unable to enjoy or feel good about the 
success they achieve. Therapists will observe that some clients will become depressed as 
a result of separation guilt or survivor guilt. Even more will become anxious as success 
threatens their attachment ties to internalized caregivers who did not support their 
individuation, or if that success deviates from their prescribed familial role (e.g., to take 
care of others and submerge their needs rather than pursue their own interests or goals). 
Clearly, the therapist doesn’t want to sit back and relax as clients begin to make progress 
in treatment and improve their lives — this is often where the real work begins! Clients’ 
contradictory or self-defeating behaviors do make sense, but not until we understand the 
two-sided, push-pull, or double-binding nature of their conflicts.
With greater appreciation for ambivalence or the “shadow side,” therapists will be 
more effective when they can take a neutral, exploratory stance and invite clients to 
explore all of their competing or contradictory thoughts and feelings regarding this issue. all of their competing or contradictory thoughts and feelings regarding this issue. all
For example:
THERAPIST:
 It sounds like one part of you wants to get married but another part of you isn’t 
sure. Let’s let both sides have their full voice. Tell me about the part of you that wants to 
marry him and the part that doesn’t, so we can sort through all of your concerns about this.
Therapists provide a Secure Base for exploration, and often a CEE, by welcoming both 
sides of their clients’ ambivalence and responding to the opposing or contradictory feelings 
that accompany both sides. As clients find that they have the support of the therapist to 
explore all of their concerns about a decision, they are empowered to clarify their own 
preferences, take responsibility for their own decisions, and act on their own choices. 
In contrast, therapists will not be effective when they only respond to one half of their 
clients’ ambivalence, do not encourage clients to explore all sides of the issue, or jump in 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

290  CHAPTER 8
and subtly advocate or overtly tell clients what to do. In their Motivational Interviewing 
work with problem drinkers, Miller and Rollnick have found strong empirical support 
for listening for and then supporting clients’ own intrinsic motivation to change rather 
than trying to instill it or “motivating” clients to make a particular decision , such as to 
stop drinking (2013; 2002). When therapists cannot “hear” both sides of their clients’ 
ambivalence, or when they press clients to act or choose the way the therapists want, 
therapists’ own countertransference is usually in play, as the following vignette illustrates.
Marie, a depressed, 25-year-old graduate student, entered time-limited (16 sessions) treatment 
at the Student Counseling Center on campus. During the first few sessions, she explored how 
angry she was at her mother. Her mother expected Marie to be “perfect,” insisted that Marie 
never had any problems, and always needed Marie to be “happy.” In counseling, Marie began 
to realize how much she resented her mother for denying so many of her true feelings and 
for having so many expectations of how she “should” be. Recalling similar issues in her own 
childhood, Marie’s therapist resonated with her anger and actively supported her indignation.
At first, it was liberating for Marie to have her long-suppressed anger affirmed. She 
was both excited and relieved to be realizing that she no longer needed to keep fulfilling 
her mother’s unrealistic expectations. This good feeling was short-lived, however. In the 
next few sessions, Marie’s newfound freedom gave way to a growing despondency and 
return to her long-standing dysthymia. The therapist thought that Marie was worried 
about becoming the “bad child” in the family for defying her mother’s expectations, 
feeling disloyal to her family for complaining about her mother to the therapist, and 
feeling guilty about being angry with her mother.
While asking about and looking for opportunities to explore these reasonable 
possibilities, the therapist continued to draw out and encourage Marie’s anger. However, 
moving in a different direction than the therapist, Marie began to share fond memories 
about her mother and recalled special times they had spent together baking and making 
cookies after school. The therapist was not very responsive to Marie’s positive feelings 
toward her mother, however. The therapist thought that Marie’s fond recollections were 
part of denying her anger toward her mother, avoiding the reality-based conflicts in their 
relationship, and was concerned that Marie would continue to be ruled by her mother’s 
problematic expectations.
As too often happens, Marie’s therapist only recognized one side of her ambivalence 
and failed to respond to the feelings on both sides of her conflict. Yes, Marie was angry 
with her mother, and these feelings needed to be explored and affirmed. At the same time, 
however, Marie also knew that her mother had offered her many fine things as a parent 
and she did not want to forgo the good things they had shared. Marie’s conflict was that 
she wanted to keep the good things she had experienced with her mother without having 
to take on or adopt the problematic aspects of their relationship as well. On the one hand, 
Marie wanted to reject the unrealistic demands to be perfect and happy that her mother 
had placed on her. Yet on the other hand, Marie became depressed when it seemed that 
the only way to do this was to give up her identification with her mother altogether. This 
had been the most important relationship in her life and, understandably, Marie did not 
want to risk losing the good parts of this relationship as well.
Realizing that time was short and treatment was stagnating, Marie’s therapist sought 
consultation from a colleague. As an outside observer, it was easy for the colleague to 
recognize both sides of Marie’s ambivalence. The colleague encouraged the therapist 
to give Marie support for simultaneously having contradictory feelings of appreciation 
and anger toward her mother. At first, the therapist was reluctant and began arguing 
with the colleague. Soon, however, she began to consider the possibility that her own 
countertransference might be operating and that, because of her own history, it was easier 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

RELATIONAL THEMES AND REPARATIVE EXPERIENCES  291
to support Marie’s anger toward her mother than her appreciation for her. As a result of 
this helpful consultation, the therapist watched at their next session for a point of entry to 
invite and affirm the other side of Marie’s feelings in the following way:
THERAPIST:
 It sounds like you feel two different ways toward your mother at the same time, 
and that makes sense to me. You’re angry with her for expecting you to be perfect and happy 
all the time, but you also treasure the many fond times you’ve had together. Tell me more 
about your angry and your loving feelings toward her
—
 bring me in on both sides of this.
This new approach had an immediate impact on Marie. As the therapist encouraged 
Marie to explore both sides of her feelings and, in effect, gave her permission to love her 
mother and be angry with her at the same time, she felt enlivened and began to make 
real progress. Marie began to clarify what qualities of her mother she wanted to keep 
and make a part of herself (such as her mother’s easy laughter and genuine warmth at 
times) and what aspects of her mother she wanted to discard (her mother’s preoccupation 
with appearances and what other people might think). This process of differentiation
also allowed Marie to clarify which issues she wanted to bring up, talk about, and try to 
change in her relationship with her mother, and which issues she preferred to let be and 
simply accommodate herself to.
Marie continued to make progress in treatment as the therapist stayed this course and 
provided support for both sides of her ambivalence. At times, for example, the therapist 
would observe, “It really made you mad when she did that.” However, this would soon be 
followed by the reflection, “I can see how important you two are to each other, and how 
much you love her— even though these problems get in the way sometimes.” Therapy was 
successfully terminated at the 16th session. Marie was no longer depressed and had better 
integrated aspects of her own identity as a woman. In the months following termination, 
Marie was continuing to initiate a rapprochement with her mother, was sorting through 
what could change and be better now in their relationship and what couldn’t, and was 
exploring realistically how much authenticity she could have, including the closeness they 
could share now at this different point in their lives.
As Marie demonstrates, therapists help clients change when they recognize the two-
sided structure of their clients’ conflicts and help clients explore and integrate both 
sides of their ambivalent feelings. Trained to look for pathology, therapists tend to miss 
personal strengths or positive aspects of conflicted relationships. However, clients will 
make far more progress when therapists can actively encourage clients to keep the good 
parts of the parental (or spousal) relationship while they are realistically examining the 
problematic parts. In this regard, it usually is very helpful if therapists can tell clients 
explicitly that they are not being disloyal if they talk about problems with a parent or 
spouse, and that therapists know that clients’ complaints do not reflect all of their feelings 
about this person. This means clients can be disappointed or angry with someone they 
love while still remaining connected to other, more rewarding aspects of the person. This, 
in turn, will also allow clients to still feel worthwhile even though they are disappointed 
with themselves about something.
CLOSING
With these conceptual guidelines in mind, the next chapter returns more directly to the 
treatment process and explores the process dimension in more depth. Working in the 
here-and-now with the process dimension can be helpful to therapists working within 
any treatment approach. However, if therapists are to use process-oriented interventions 
and the therapeutic relationship to effect change, they need to be able to talk with clients 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

292  CHAPTER 8
about their current interaction and what may be going on between them. These immediacy 
interventions are powerful, yet challenging, for most new therapists to adopt because it 
often feels uncomfortable to meta-communicate and “talk about you and me.” Thus in 
Chapter 9 we explore therapists’ concerns about working with the process dimension and 
provide guidelines to help therapists use process comments more effectively.
CHAPTER EXERCISE
Describe your family of origin in terms of being disengaged or enmeshed (or for a few, 
both). Provide an example of how this was communicated to you. How doyou think your 
family system of relating has had an impact on your most important current relationships? 
How has this affected both your ability to become personally or emotionally engaged  
with your clients and simultaneously provide clear boundaries?and simultaneously provide clear boundaries?and
SUGGESTED READING
Hayes, J.A., Gelso, C.J., & Hummel, A.M. (2011). Managing countertransference. 
Psychotherapy, 48, 88-97. This helpful article offers different ways of thinking about 
countertransference and practical guidelines to help therapists manage their own. 
Visit CengageBrain.com for a variety of study tools and useful resources such as interactive 
exercises, flashcards, and quizzes. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

293
R/e.sc/s.sc/o.sc/l.sc/u.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc C/h.sc/a.sc/n.sc/g.sc/e.sc
CHAPTER NINE
Working With the Process Dimension
CHAPTER TEN
Working-Through and Termination
IV
PART
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

295
CHAPTER 9
Working With the Process 
Dimension
CONCEPTUAL OVERVIEW
The three previous chapters helped therapists conceptualize their clients’ problems and 
formulate treatment plans; we now focus further on the process dimension and how change 
occurs. Therapists need to empower clients by helping them develop new narratives for their 
lives that allow them to make sense of what occurred in significant relationships to shape 
who they have become and the problems they are having (Crits-Christoph et al., 1999). Unless 
clients develop self-narratives that are more realistic and fit closer with the good and bad news 
they have actually experienced in their attachment relationships, and are defined less by family 
family myths and roles, wishes and denial, and other distorting inaccuracies, it will be harder 
for them to guide where they are going in the future or to sustain changes after treatment 
has stopped. In this way, seeking a more realistic assessment of the formative experiences 
and interaction patterns that clients have experienced helps both clients and the therapist 
understand how they got here— where early maladaptive schemas and problematic IWMs — where early maladaptive schemas and problematic IWMs —
developed and why current relationships are being framed and recreated in the way they are 
(Bowlby, 1988; Luborsky et al., 1997; Mallinckrodt, 2010). However, a consistent or primary 
focus on historical relationships and what happened in the past will not produce change and, 
too often, only serves to help clients avoid the anxiety of addressing current problems.
Change often occurs as clients first find new responses to their problems in their 
relationship with the therapist and, then, with the therapist’s guidance, work through 
similar issues with others beyond the therapy room. To highlight the power of this experi-
ential relearning over just intellectually interpreting, reframing, or explaining what some-
thing means , the attachment researchers put it best: You do not get an empathic child by 
teaching or admonishing the child to be empathic; you get an empathic child by being 
empathic with the child (Karen, 1998). The therapist’s intention is to make this experi -
ence of change an ongoing pattern of interaction in the therapeutic relationship — one 
trial learning is not sufficient. As this occurs, the focus of treatment shifts to helping 
clients generalize this in vivo relearning to other arenas in their lives where, in parallel, 
similar themes are being played out and contributing to clients’ presenting symptoms. 
Conversely, if the therapist and client merely talk about important issues and behavioral 
options, but the therapist does not actively help the client link these new ways of relating 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

296  CHAPTER 9
with the therapist to other relationships where the same kinds of interactions are causing 
problems, change will be limited. Thus, the purpose of this chapter is to further clarify 
the process dimension and illustrate how therapists working within different theoreti -
cal orientations can use the therapeutic relationship to help clients change (Gold, 2011; 
Goldfried, 2004; Levenson, 2010; Sampson, 2005).
RESOLVING PROBLEMS THROUGH 
THE/uni00A0INTERPERSONAL PROCESS
In this section, we see how clients’ problems are brought into the therapeutic relationship, 
and how therapists can provide a new relational experience that does not go down old 
familiar lines. Putting these pieces together serves to introduce the next stage of treat -
ment— providing a CEE and helping clients apply this relearning to other relationships in 
their daily lives. Following this overview, we will look at four extended case vignettes that 
illustrate implementation of these constructs.
R/e.sc/s.sc/p.sc/o.sc/n.sc/d.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc /t.sc/o.sc C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc’ C/o.sc/n.sc/f.sc/l.sc/i.sc/c.sc/t.sc/s.sc /i.sc/n.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc  
T/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc/a.sc/p.sc/e.sc/u.sc/t.sc/i.sc/c.sc R/e.sc/l.sc/a.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc/s.sc/h.sc/i.sc/p.sc
Ongoing, problematic interaction patterns with caregivers give rise to developmental con-
flicts that clients have not been able to resolve on their own. Symptoms and problems 
develop as clients try to cope with difficult feelings and faulty beliefs by adopting fixed inter-develop as clients try to cope with difficult feelings and faulty beliefs by adopting fixed inter-develop as clients try to cope with difficult feelings and faulty beliefs by adopting fixed inter
personal coping strategies. Although these coping strategies once were necessary and adap-
tive, they are no longer necessary and create problems in many current relationships. The 
therapist’s first task is to establish a collaborative working alliance with clients by making 
accurately empathic connections. This is consistent with the empirical literature that indi-
cates that the therapist-client alliance is a highly significant predictor of treatment outcome, 
more so than any theoretical orientation (Barber et al., 2009; Norcross & Lambert, 2014; 
Norcross & Wampold, 2011). That is, the therapist’s empathic attunement facilitates clients’ 
self-reflection/perspective taking ability and their sense of agency (Allen, 2013; Bandura, 
2006) as well as their motivation for engagement in treatment (Westin et al., 2004). 
Once an alliance is established, client and therapist then work together to identify 
and change the maladaptive relational patterns that are occurring with others and in 
the therapeutic relationship, as well as the conflicted feelings and pathogenic beliefs that 
accompany them. As this work proceeds, the therapist’s intention is to watch for and 
recognize the pull from the client to reenact these relational themes in the therapeutic 
relationship. The therapist’s goal, then, is to respond differently than others usually have 
and change the familiar but problematic scenario— providing a different type of relation-
ship that resolves, rather than reenacts, clients’ cyclical relational themes (Beebe et al., 
2005; Goldfried, 2004; Sampson, 2005; Wachtel, 2005). As therapists respond in ways 
that counteract the problematic expectations learned in the past, clients experience new 
ways of relating and begin to question or evaluate the costs and gains of their habitual 
coping styles. In this process, clients are empowered to choose more flexibly how they 
want to respond in current relationships, and to develop more realistic, affirming and 
compassionate self-concepts (Gilbert, 2014).
The therapist’s primary role is not to give advice, explain, reassure, interpret, self-
disclose, or focus on the behavior or motives of others, although each of these responses 
will be effective at times. Instead, the therapist encourages clients to take ownership of 
the treatment process by setting the direction for therapy (Miller & Rollnick, 2013). The 
therapist does this by helping clients identify the issues or concerns that clients feel are 
most pressing or important right now, and then joining or responding to their initiative.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  297
The therapist continues to focus clients inward, reflects the core affective messages, 
links clients’ maladaptive relational patterns with others to their own current interaction, 
and maintains a collaborative, working alliance by ensuring that clients are active partici-
pants who feel ownership of the change process. As clients’ faulty beliefs, expectations, 
and coping styles recur throughout the narratives they relate, themes emerge that clarify 
the treatment focus and provide direction for the ongoing course of therapy (Barber et al., 
2009). For example, the therapist will be able to do the following:
 /uni25CFPoint out when and how clients employ their interpersonal coping strategy, and 
begin to discern when it is helpful and with whom it is no longer useful.
 /uni25CFHelp clients become aware of how they respond to themselves internally in the same 
problematic ways that others originally responded to them.
 /uni25CFHelp clients explore why they become anxious at a particular time, what types of 
responses they tend to elicit from the therapist and others to manage this anxiety, 
and how they systematically avoid certain interpersonal modes or feelings.
As we have seen, the client and therapist do not just talk about issues in therapy; they 
actually relive them in the therapeutic relationship. This occurs in three ways.
B/r.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc C/o.sc/n.sc/f.sc/l.sc/i.sc/c.sc/t.sc/s.sc /t.sc/o.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc T/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc/a.sc/p.sc/e.sc/u.sc/t.sc/i.sc/c.sc R/e.sc/l.sc/a.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc/s.sc/h.sc/i.sc/p.sc 
First, transference reactions bring clients’ core conflicts into the current relationship with 
the therapist (Connolly et al., 2000). As clients’ conflicts begin to emerge in therapy, they 
will become increasingly concerned that the therapist has been responding—or is going to 
respond—in the same unwanted ways that significant others have in the past. These fears 
and misperceptions follow from clients’ cognitive schemas—influenced by developmental 
experiences, which are most likely to occur when strong feelings have been evoked and 
clients feel distressed or vulnerable (Quirk et al., 2015). In some cases, treatment will 
reach an impasse until the therapist can help clients differentiate the therapist’s actual 
intentions from the problematic responses that clients expect and have in fact received in 
other important relationships. For example:
THERAPIST:
 As you tell me about this, what do you think I might be feeling about you? 
CLIENT:
 Well, I guess I’m concerned that you might be a little disappointed in me. 
THERAPIST:
 Disappointed? Oh, no, not at all. Actually, I was thinking...
Second, some clients will systematically elicit responses from the therapist that pull 
the therapist into reenacting their old scenarios or confirming their problematic expecta -
tions of others. When therapy stalls or ends prematurely, clients often have reenacted 
their generic conflict, evoking responses from the therapist similar to those they have 
received from significant others in their lives. This unwanted reenactment occurs when 
clients elicit responses from the therapist that are thematically similar to those they have 
received from others in the past. Clients elicit these familiar yet problematic responses 
from the therapist for different reasons — sometimes defensively, to avoid the internal 
aspects of their conflicts, and sometimes more adaptively, by testing whether they can 
obtain a better response to their familiar relational scenario than they have come to 
expect from others. For instance:
THERAPIST:
 How do others usually respond when you talk to them like you’re talking to me 
right now?
CLIENT:
 They probably don’t like it much
—
 you know, everybody just gets pissed with me.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

298  CHAPTER 9
THERAPIST:
 I can see how that happens, and I have some ideas about how we could try to make 
that different here in therapy
—
 in our relationship. I think if we could start talking about 
what’s going on between us and change how this goes in here, that would be a very helpful 
step to start changing this with others in your life. How does that sound to you?
Third, the way in which the therapist responds to clients— the interpersonal process—
may unwittingly reenact their conflicts. As we have emphasized, clients’ relationships 
with their therapists need to enact or provide, as specifically as possible, different and 
more helpful responses to their conflicts than they have received in the past. However, 
it is not always easy to provide this CEE. Many clients will expect, and some will suc -
cessfully elicit, similar types of problematic responses from the therapist that they have 
received from others . The task for therapists, then, is to identify how their interpersonal 
process with clients may be reenacting some aspect of clients’ problems with others and, 
when this is occurring, to use a process comment to make this interaction overt as a topic 
for discussion. The therapist then works together with clients (and with the help of a 
supervisor when the clients’ issues have evoked the therapist’s own matching or recipro-
cal conflicts) to establish a different pattern of interaction that does not repeat the old 
relational scenario. As we have seen, however, this idea is far easier to say than to put into 
practice. Consider the following exchange:
THERAPIST:
 I just disagreed with you
—
 I’m wondering how that was for you?
CLIENT:
 Well, kind of different, I guess. I’m not used to people speaking up and disagreeing with 
me much.
THERAPIST:
 Yes, I can see why
—
 you are so forceful when you speak. I hear you that you want 
to “communicate better” with your 15-year-old daughter, but it makes sense to me when she 
says that she feels “dominated” by you and reluctant to disagree or speak up. I’m a 45-year-
old, educated professional, and you’re a challenge even for me.
CLIENT:
 We need to work on this, don’t we? I think this is what my wife has been trying to tell 
me for a long time.
 When therapists enact a resolution of clients’ conflicts rather than a repetition of 
them, clients have received far more than just an explanation for their problems. They 
have experienced a meaningful relationship in which their old conflicts have been aroused, 
but this time they have found a better outcome than what usually occurs. They have been 
able to reveal themselves, to speak up or act more boldly, and ask for help or express 
a need without receiving the unwanted response they have come to expect. When this 
occurs in the context of a meaningful relationship, such in vivo or experiential relearning 
is powerful indeed.
Experiencing an interaction with the therapist that is incompatible with their early 
maladaptive schemas does not make up for the deprivations or disappointments that have 
shaped clients’ lives, of course. However, it does behaviorally demonstrate that change 
can occur— that at least some relationships, sometimes, can play out in a different and 
better way. This CEE begins to expand clients’ schemas for what can occur between peo-
ple in relationships and broaden their interpersonal and affective range. For example, 
they can voice their opinion with some others without being diminished or interrupted; 
they don’t have to fear being left if they disagree or prioritize their own needs at times; 
and they don’t have to be considered selfish or arrogant if they feel good about an accom-
plishment, and so forth.
 At this critical juncture in treatment, when clients are having a meaningful experience 
of change with the therapist and the therapeutic process is providing a resolution of 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  299
clients’ conflicts, two important things occur. First, intervention techniques from varying 
theoretical orientations all become more effective  (Ackerman & Hilsenroth, 2013).
That is, cognitive, interpretive, self-monitoring, educational, skill development, and 
other interventions all can be used more productively by clients because the useful 
new content in these interventions is congruent with the corrective process they are 
enacting. Second, as clients have repeated experiences of change with the therapist, the 
therapist can help clients begin to apply this in vivo relearning to other arenas in their 
lives where similar conflicts are being enacted. This next period of therapy — transferring 
this experiential relearning that has occurred with the therapist to other relationships — 
is called the working-through phase of treatment and will be the focus of the next 
chapter.
With this overview of the change process in mind, let’s now examine more closely how 
therapists can use the interpersonal process they enact with their clients to effect change.
U/s.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc P/r.sc/o.sc/c.sc/e.sc/s.sc/s.sc D/i.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/s.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc /t.sc/o.sc F/a.sc/c.sc/i.sc/l.sc/i.sc/t.sc/a.sc/t.sc/e.sc C/h.sc/a.sc/n.sc/g.sc/e.sc
To facilitate change, therapists are:
1. listening keenly to identify the core messages about Self (e.g., It’s weak to ask for 
help or need anything) and Others (e.g., They don’t want to listen to you, they won’t 
believe you) that clients learned in childhood; and
2. sustaining a focus on providing unique responses that differ from and disconfirm 
these problematic expectations (e.g., It’s safe to share with some others, I won’t 
always be controlled or criticized).
Providing this in vivo or experiential relearning is the core component of change in the 
interpersonal process approach.
Within this context, interventions from other theories can be helpfully integrated. 
Following Rogers (1975), (and the Motivational Interviewing approach), it is essen -
tial for the therapist to listen empathically and work collaboratively. Also, it is helpful 
with some clients to suggest psychodynamic interpretations and facilitate client insight 
about the sources or development of their problems (Hill et al., 2007). Behavioral and 
cognitive therapists significantly help clients by training new relaxation, desensitiza -
tion, and/uni00A0assertiveness skills; cognitively reframing situations; and suggesting new, more 
adaptive behavioral responses for clients to try between sessions. Each of these and 
other interventions will certainly be useful, but each can become more effective when 
the therapist is also attending to the interpersonal process that is being enacted with 
the/uni00A0client.
To help, we look below at four different case examples to illustrate how the process 
dimension can be used to facilitate change.
Example 1: Reenacting the Problem — An Inability to Recognize the 
Interpersonal Process. Therapists-in-training usually find it easy to understand the 
process dimension conceptually, and in group supervision, to observe when clients’ prob-
lematic relational patterns are being reenacted with another therapist. It is, however, far 
more difficult for therapists to recognize how the interpersonal process they are enacting 
with their own clients may be reenacting the conflict rather than resolving it.
Kareina, a 30-year-old mixed race woman, had been struggling with a generalized anxiety 
disorder and an eating disorder for the past 10 years. Bright, attractive, and extremely 
hard-working, she began treatment by expressing how much pain she was in as a result of 
her bingeing and purging. Kareina explained that when this symptom initially started, “it 
was my friend”— because the purging temporarily stopped the anxiety that simply became 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

300  CHAPTER 9
overwhelming for her at times. As a six-year-old child, she thought the anxiety “was 
going to make my head explode.” Kareina loved and respected her parents, but struggled 
intensely with both of them. Her Black father and Hispanic mother both had emigrated to 
the U.S. from Central America in their early teens — virtually without assistance or familial 
support. They made their way by “working the hardest” since they were just children to 
overcome real poverty and succeed in making a stable financial life for their family now. 
But their strong adaption that helped them succeed now held a big cost. Both parents, 
in their own different ways, were highly critical, demanding, and controlling of Kareina. 
They overtly demanded “perfection” in everything she did, and emotions elevated 
intensely if Kareina fell short in some way. First, either or both parents would express 
disappointment or frustration with her, and then withdraw in exasperation. Then, Kareina 
felt painfully responsible as her parents began to argue and berate each other’s parenting 
methods, which sometimes escalated to hitting walls or throwing dishes. Kareina would 
listened from her room and cry — feeling responsible and to blame for her parents’ intense 
conflict, and anxiously worried that the yelling and breaking might escalate to physical 
violence. 
Kareina was deeply ashamed of her eating disorder and, even though she had tried 
to keep it a secret, people figured it out as her ongoing lethargy, health problems, and 
preoccupation about food and eating kept giving her secret away. Her mother had recently 
walked in on her in their family bathroom while Kareina was throwing up and “talked” to 
her that she “must stop this.” Kareina was distraught but she could not stop bingeing and 
purging. She decided to enter therapy and during their first session she told the therapist, 
“Everybody ends up disappointed in me, no matter how much I do. Like my best friend 
distanced from me when I told her I had an eating disorder, and now my boyfriend is 
stepping away, too “because I spend too much time in the bathroom.” And then I feel so 
alone and anxious, and just loathe myself. So that’s when I start purging every day again—
and that’s my friend because it’s the only thing that stops the anxiety.”
The therapist was moved by the client’s plight but, unfortunately, lost the clarity of 
her boundaries and became overly invested in having her change. The therapist found it 
difficult to listen to how distraught and hopeless she sounded, and she began reassuring her 
that things would get better. The therapist disclosed that she had had an eating disorder  
of her own years ago and that she knew what Kareina needed to do in order to stop  
binge-purging. The therapist and client readily established a friendly rapport in which 
Kareina successfully elicited a great deal of support and encouragement from the  
responsive therapist. Kareina enjoyed this support greatly and sincerely tried to follow  
the therapist’s advice.
Things went better for a few weeks but then, as usual, Kareina “lost it” and began 
bingeing and purging again. Kareina didn’t feel comfortable telling her—bingeing and purging again. Kareina didn’t feel comfortable telling her—bingeing and purging again. Kareina didn’t feel comfortable telling herfearing — fearing —
disappointment and disapproval again, and started arriving late for her sessions. Then, when 
she missed one of them, the therapist expressed that she felt “let down.” Kareina acknowledged 
that she had not been able to “maintain our agreement” (to not binge and purge until she 
called the therapist first) but had begun bingeing and purging again, secretly. The therapist felt 
frustrated, in part, because she had extended herself to Kareina more than she usually did with 
other clients. She felt that Kareina was letting them both down and told her so. 
Unwittingly, the therapist had become “disappointed” with the client, as others had, 
and she induced guilt over the impact of her “counter-productive” behavior— which 
Kareina experienced as again being shamefully “imperfect”: (THERAPIST: After all our 
work together, I don’t know how you could do this without calling me first?). As she did 
with others, Kareina was contrite and tried to elicit her therapist’s support again. However, 
Kareina did not show up for her next appointment, and did not return to therapy: 
(CLIENT(CLIENT(thinking to herself): I’m just hopeless, I can’t do anything right. Everybody gets 
fed up with me, even this therapist).
This interpersonal process reenacted rather than resolved Kareina’s conflict in 
two ways. First, she initially elicited sympathy from the therapist, but the therapist’s 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  301
support eventually turned subtly toward control, criticism, and emotional withdrawal 
when Kareina could not perform and meet the therapist’s expectations. This reenacted 
a familiar and painful scenario for Kareina that confirmed her pathogenic belief that 
she always let others down. Relationships don’t sustain, conflict can’t be worked out —
the specific relational pattern that she had forewarned the therapist about during their 
initial session. 
Second, the therapist benevolently tried to rescue this client, who was highly dis -
tressed and overtly asking for help and direction. From the beginning, however, the thera-
pist took control of treatment and gave Kareina a program for what she “should” do to 
get better without asking this compliant client — who had received virtually no support 
for having her own initiative or voice in her life — for her ideas and suggestions for what 
would help. In addition to not working collaboratively, the therapist did not watch for 
points of entry when Kareina did act more assertively or independently in the session 
or with others, and respond affirmingly to these healthy expressions of her own iden -
tity. Thus, their interpersonal process paralleled the similarly controlling interaction that 
Kareina had received from her parents, who were well-intended, but could not serve as a 
Secure Base and support her own exploration, efficacy, and autonomy.
In reviewing this case several weeks later, the therapist reported, “The client just 
wasn’t ready to stop her binge-purge behavior yet. She’s going to have to get worse 
and really hit bottom before she’ll be able to stop denying there’s a problem and do 
something about it.” The therapist failed to recognize that the interpersonal process 
they had enacted in treatment unwittingly repeated the client’s familiar but problematic 
interpersonal scenario and prevented change from occurring. As is often the case when 
treatment fails, the therapist attended only to the content of what they talked about 
(her eating problem) and not as well to how their process might be replaying aspects of 
the client’s interpersonal problems (such as finding disappointment and blame when she 
failed to meet the therapist’s expectation). How could this premature termination (dis -
continuance) been prevented? Following the sequence we keep highlighting, the thera-
pist could have first provided a safe haven by offering an empathic response, and then 
provide a secure base by making a process comment—to explore with immediacy and 
real personal intensity for both, the reenactment transpiring in their current interaction . 
For example:
THERAPIST:
 I’m so sorry you had a setback and began binge/purging again. But my first 
concern 
right now is about you and me. It’s seeming to me that you didn’t feel safe bringing this to 
me—or were afraid I would respond in some unwanted way? Can we talk together about 
why/uni00A0it wasn’t ok to tell me? 
CLIENT:
 Well, I guess I thought you’d be disappointed…I didn’t keep our agreement…
THERAPIST 
(graciously, genuinely)
:
 Uh huh, I’d be disappointed in you. Thank you, I’m so glad 
we’re talking about this…
All therapists, beginning and experienced alike, will reenact aspects of clients’ pat -
terns and problems at times without realizing that this parallel is occurring. From an 
emotionally neutral vantage point — such as watching a recording of another therapist’s 
session— it is relatively easy to see how the old pattern is being reenacted in the interper -
sonal process. In humbling contrast, it can be exasperatingly difficult for therapists to see 
their own interpersonal process while engaged in an intense, affect-laden relationship. It 
is challenging for new therapists to attend both to the content of what is being discussed 
and to the process that is being enacted as the discussion proceeds. Clearly, therapists-
in-training are facing a complex challenge in their professional development here, and 
they need to be patient with themselves. With some practice and experience, however, 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

302  CHAPTER 9
developing therapists will often find that they have the most potent impact when they 
adopt a process-oriented approach and become comfortable using these immediacy inter-
ventions (Spangler, Hill & Dunn et al, 2014; Kuutmann & Hilsenroth, 2012). Student 
therapists will benefit from further reading on this topic, rehearsal and practice with 
classmates, watching the demonstration videos provided here and by others, role-play 
and modeling from practicum instructors, and the guidance of a supportive supervisor. 
(See the practical guidelines and exercises suggested by Hill, 2014 (see chapter 14) and 
Angus and Kagan, 2007).
Example 2: Process Comments Keep Therapists from Repeating Unwanted 
Patterns. In the previous example, the therapeutic process reenacted the client’s old sce-
nario. In the next illustration, a similar dynamic begins, but this time the therapist recog-
nizes the interpersonal process being enacted with the client and uses a process comment 
to realign their problematic interaction.
Many clients enter treatment because of depression. They feel sad, believe they are 
bad, and experience themselves as helpless to change their circumstances. In many cases, 
these clients communicate their very real suffering to the therapist with emotional pleas 
for help. However, with some Preoccupied and Fearful clients in particular, whatever the 
therapist tries does not work. The therapist’s efforts to meet the client’s request for help 
may be met with some resistant version of “Yes, but...” A problematic cycle begins: This 
client, who may be presenting with both anxiety and depression — perhaps an agitated 
depression — feels increasingly distressed and intensifies her plea for help. Some clients 
like these might even exclaim that they “can’t go on” and express suicidal ideation in a 
hyperactivating attempt to get their departing partner to re-engage. In response, the con -
cerned therapist becomes more anxious, more active, and tries even harder to find some 
way to help. However, nothing the therapist does has any impact or provides any relief. 
As these clients reject the help that they actively have been eliciting, the therapist’s 
own personal need to be helpful is frustrated. In a developmentally appropriate way, for 
example, the new therapist’s own tenuous confidence or fledgling sense of adequacy as a 
helper may be threatened by these clients’ responses — especially if the student therapist 
isn’t feeling supported by his or her supervisor. Or, other therapists who were parentified 
in their family of origin may feel distressed about failing to fulfill their familial role and 
meet the emotional needs of others. When clients’ eliciting behavior has tapped into the 
therapist’s own personal issues in one of these ways, some therapists will work harder 
to please; others will withdraw and emotionally disengage; and a few will become puni -
tive and critical toward the client. When any of these occur, clients do not experience a 
reparative relationship with the therapist.
Pause now and think about your own response tendencies for a moment, and consider how you 
would tend to respond, both internally and behaviorally, to this mixed message from your client.
Treatment will stall when the therapist remains stuck and continues to please, be 
critical of, or disengage from the client. The clients’ conflict is reenacted as they again 
feel dependent on a relationship with someone who is critical, too easily controlled to be 
trustworthy, inconsistent or emotionally unavailable, or threatens to terminate the rela -
tionship. What is the alternative? A more effective intervention is for the therapist to 
make a process comment (metacommunicate) and invite a dialogue with clients about 
what might be going on in their present interaction. Rather than focus solely on the con -
tent of what they are talking about (e.g., depression), the therapist can wonder aloud or 
tentatively inquire about how they seem to be responding to each other. This is often the 
best way to effectively change or alter the reenactment. For instance:
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  303
THERAPIST:
 Let’s talk about what is going on between us right now and see if we can under
-
stand what’s happening in our relationship
—
 it might have something to do with your depres-
sion. It seems to me that you keep asking me for help, but you also keep saying “Yes, but...” 
Maybe I over-react and get a little frustrated then, feeling that you don’t allow me to help. 
What do you see going on between us?
With a process comment of this type, the therapist is inviting the client to be a col -
laborator and join in trying to understand their mutual interaction. The therapist is also 
providing interpersonal feedback and helping the client look at how his depression is 
expressed to and experienced by others. (This client recently said, “My wife used to be 
supportive, but it seems like she’s giving up on me and kinda going away.”) As we will see, 
the process comment also allows the therapist to break the cycle, at least for the moment, 
of the client’s escalating need and the therapist’s increasing feeling of being stuck and 
unable to help.
How does this process comment help the client to change? In this moment, the 
client is experiencing a relationship with the therapist that provides a new and differ -
ent response to his old relational pattern. The therapist has remained engaged — in this 
moment by inviting the client to jointly explore the impasse — and being receptive to the 
possibility that both may be contributing to it. The therapist’s consistent availability, in 
the face of consistent rebuffs, differs from the sequence the client has often experienced in 
other important relationships: initial attempts to help, followed by subsequent frustration 
for the helpers who become critical and blaming, and ultimately ending in others with -
drawing from him. It signals a sustained interest in the client and commitment to being a 
collaborative partner in understanding what is happening.
 This is indeed a new and different experience for someone who typically expects, 
elicits, and then experiences abandonment or rejection at this juncture. The client has 
not experienced this consistent or steady engagement (without the therapist and others 
over-reacting on the one hand or giving up on the other), or the secure holding environ -
ment it provides, in past relationships. If this corrective stance toward the client continues 
and is repeated in many other ways — large and small — throughout treatment, the client 
is living out a resolution of his core conflict in the relationship with the therapist. When 
clients have this real-life experience of change, rather than passively or intellectually hear-
ing advice, reassurance, or interpretations, they are empowered to begin making similar 
changes with others in their lives.
A key concept in the interpersonal process approach is that the capacity for change 
increases as the therapeutic relationship becomes more meaningful—increases as the therapeutic relationship becomes more meaningful—increases as the therapeutic relationship becomes more meaningful that is, as the thera-
pist becomes someone who matters to the client (see important discussions of the “real 
relationship” in psychotherapy by Gelso, 2011 and Gelso & Samstag, 2008). When an 
interpersonal solution is enacted in a valued relationship with the therapist, the therapeu-
tic alliance is strengthened and change is facilitated in two ways. First, this new type of 
relationship provides interpersonal safety for the client (Weiss, 2005). The interpersonal 
safety of this new context permits clients to come to terms with the core conflicted feel -
ings and pathogenic beliefs that accompany their maladaptive relational patterns (Westin 
et al., 2004). In other words, clients have the supportive relationship necessary to experi-
ence and integrate those feelings and situations that previously needed to be disavowed or 
split off as they were too threatening to be dealt with.
 Second, the experience of change with the therapist demonstrates to clients, rather 
than merely tells them, that current relationships can be different than they have learned 
to expect. It does this by expanding their cognitive schemas for relationships and by alter-
ing their core beliefs about the possibilities that relationships hold for them (e.g., “I do 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

304  CHAPTER 9
matter and can be cared about”; “I can say what I want and not be left”; “I do have the 
right to set limits and stop letting my children run over me”) Next, with the therapist’s 
assistance, clients can begin to transfer this relearning and establish better relationships 
with others along these more flexible and self-affirming lines. As an illustration, let’s con-
sider the depressed client’s response to the therapist’s process comment:
CLIENT:
 Yeah, I do keep saying “Yes, but...”
to you
—
 like my wife always says I say to her. So this 
is all just pointless
—
 you’re frustrated now, too. If I’m doing this with you, too, then there’s no 
way I’m going to get better. Maybe we should just forget the whole thing and stop now.
THERAPIST:
 Oh, no
—
 that’s not what I’m suggesting at all. It makes sense that you and I are 
having a bit of the same problems in here together that you have with other people. In a way, 
it is a problem, but in another way, it gives us the opportunity to resolve your problem right 
here in our relationship.
CLIENT:
 How?
THERAPIST:
 If you and I can work out a better way of doing this in our relationship
—
 you know, 
find a way to keep this old pattern from repeating in our relationship
—
 I think it will go a 
long way toward helping you change this with your wife and others.
CLIENT:
 How can we do that now if we haven’t been able to up to this point?
THERAPIST:
 Well, I think it’s very possible. In fact, I think we are breaking that pattern right 
now, just by talking about the way we interact together. Tell me, how is it to be talking with 
me about our relationship and the way we respond to each other?
CLIENT:
 It’s different, but I like it. You’re pointing out something, but I don’t feel you’re being 
punitive.
THERAPIST:
 Good, I don’t feel punitive. And I like the way we are interacting, too. I feel like I’m 
working with you
—
 and not being pushed away as I have felt before. And I think if you do 
this with others, it would be easier for them to remain engaged with you without getting frus-
trated or withdrawing. What do you think? 
In this example, the therapist has used a process comment to effectively alter the cur-
rent interaction with the client. For the moment, the process comment has kept their inter-
action from repeating the client’s familiar predicament. Some variation on the old “Yes, 
but...” pattern will probably soon reappear, and the therapist will have to make another 
process comment and work through a similar cycle again. However, with the process 
comment, the therapist is temporarily providing the client with a different response that 
does not fit very well in the client’s old scenario. If the therapist continues to find ways 
to provide these types of counteractive or corrective responses throughout treatment (i.e., 
remain engaged and not withdraw from the client), the client will experience a reparative 
relationship and, as we will focus on in the next chapter, begin changing this pattern in 
other relationships as well (Bridges, 2006). The next example illustrates a more macro-
perspective that tracks the process dimension over the course of treatment.
Example 3: The Process Dimension as a Means to Bridge Differing 
Theoretical Orientations. There are many ways to help clients change, and therapists 
working from different theoretical orientations can all help. Every theoretical approach 
clarifies some aspects of clients’ problems, and every theoretical approach has limitations. 
Researchers from an integrative perspective find that “master” therapists representing 
different approaches tend to act more like each other than like the less skillful adherents 
of their own treatment models (Goldfried et al., 1998). Researchers also consistently find 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  305
that within each theoretical orientation, the primary component of change is not the the-
ory per se (e.g., client-centered versus psychodynamic) but how effectively individual ther-
apists apply it in their therapeutic relationships (Norcross & Lambert, 2014; Norcross & 
Wampold, 2011). That is, some cognitive behavioral therapists are far more effective than 
other cognitive behavioral therapists and account for most of the positive treatment effect
in psychotherapy outcome studies. Furthermore, it is the relationship between therapist 
and client, and common factors such as empathy, genuineness, and positive regard, that 
are most powerful in treatment outcome (Luborsky et al., 1997; Norcross, 2011; Teyber 
& McClure, 2000; Wampold, 2015). 
Decades ago, Kiesler (1966) identified this issue and called it the uniformity myth— as 
if all therapists were equally effective and differences in treatment outcome were due to 
theoretical orientation rather than more and less effective therapists within each brand 
of treatment . Kiesler and many others since have encouraged psychotherapy outcome 
researchers to study within-group differences (i.e., more and less effective psychody -
namic therapists, and more and less effective client-centered therapists), where large dif -
ferences in treatment effectiveness are consistently found. This is far more informative 
than continuing to focus on between-group differences (e.g., cognitive-behavioral versus 
interpersonal-dynamic treatment approaches), where only very small or no differences 
in treatment effectiveness are consistently found. In other words, variability in outcome 
is primarily due to therapist effects rather than theoretical orientation  (Anderson et al., 
2009; Okiishi et al., 2003).
 Summarizing this research literature, Lambert & Ogles (2004) argue that instead 
of continuing to try to identify empirically supported treatments we should be trying 
to identify empirically supported therapists . In sum, regardless of theoretical orientation 
or treatment approach, change is likely to occur when therapists can establish a strong 
working alliance through empathic understanding and repair this alliance when it is rup -
tured (Angus & Kagan, 2007; Horvath, Del Re, Fluckinger, & Symonds, 2011; Norcross, 
2010, 2002; Wampold, 2001). Working within any theoretical modality or treatment 
length, therapists will find that change is also more likely to occur when the therapeutic 
relationship provides a resolution of clients’ conflicts rather than a repetition of them.
After two years in analytically oriented therapy, Rachel still could not take charge of her life 
because her therapist, like her husband, engaged in interpretations that told her why and 
how she behaved the way she did. Rachel’s response to the therapist matched her response 
to her husband—to her husband—to her husband she took his views as “the truth.” This was exacerbated by her difficulty 
getting her children to do what she asked, fueling her sense of being incompetent. She also 
complained of her stultifying daily routine as a homemaker, yet she was never able to do 
anything to improve it. At her husband’s insistence, she would periodically enroll in a class 
or interview for an office job but she seldom followed through on his suggestions.
In therapy, Rachel had spent many hours exploring her childhood. Her therapist was 
skillful in seeing unifying themes in the recollections that she shared with him. For example, 
her therapist astutely observed how she was subtly discouraged from initiating activities 
on her own as a child, and how she was not allowed to feel good about her success 
experiences. Any time she expressed an enthusiastic interest, tried out a new venture, or 
achieved something she was proud of as a child, her parents did not notice it—achieved something she was proud of as a child, her parents did not notice it—achieved something she was proud of as a child, her parents did not notice it or, if they 
did notice, they somehow didn’t seem very happy about it.
Rachel’s therapist once explained to her, in a sensitive and nonjudgmental way, that 
she had a passive-dependent personality style. Rather than feeling labeled or put down, 
Rachel was impressed that her therapist seemed to understand her so well. He knew so 
many things about her without her even having to tell him. Although her problems had 
not changed much yet, she still believed her therapist would cure her. He was so bright and 
insightful, and she felt he genuinely cared about her. He didn’t like to tell her what to do, 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

306  CHAPTER 9
but when things became too much, he could usually help by explaining what the problem 
really meant. It was reassuring to be with him, and Rachel did not know what she would 
do without him.
It was Rachel’s husband, Frank, who finally ran out of patience with the slow course 
of treatment. After two years, he was fed up with the unending therapy bills and his 
wife’s unremitting discontent. His wife’s helpless dissatisfaction felt like an unspoken but 
unending demand for him to love her more, give her more, or somehow fill up her life. He 
was tired of these subtle, nagging demands and he wanted a change.
A man of action, Frank obtained the name of a cognitively oriented therapist on the 
faculty of a nearby college. A friend told Frank that this therapist was a “problem-solving 
realist” who could make things happen. This sounded like just the right approach to him. 
Frank insisted that Rachel stop treatment with her present therapist and begin with the 
new therapist. Initially, Rachel was sickened at the thought of leaving her therapist, but 
she sensed that Frank was truly at the end of his rope. Although she still believed in her 
therapist and felt loyal to him, she was afraid that Frank might actually leave her if she did 
not go along with this demand.
After her first two sessions with the new therapist, Rachel was surprised to think that 
perhaps Frank might have been right after all. The new therapist wasted no time in taking 
charge of the situation. It was actually encouraging to have the therapist outline a treatment 
plan with steps for her to follow, and tracking more concretely with a thought record. 
The therapist discussed a list of specific treatment goals with her and they planned a set of 
graduated assignments for meeting these goals on a scheduled timetable. 
In their first hour together, the therapist had Rachel role-play how she responded 
to her children when they disobeyed her. Then, with the therapist serving as a model and 
coach, they rehearsed more assertive responses that Rachel could try with her children. 
The therapist also had Rachel enroll in an assertiveness-training class that the therapist 
was running for some other clients. Each week, Rachel was also to complete a homework 
assignment. For the second week, she was to call one new person she might like to get to 
know better and ask her to lunch. She was supposed to report back to the therapist on this 
assignment at the beginning of their next appointment.
Frank was encouraged by this practical, problem-solving approach to his wife’s 
problems. He began to think that something might change after all. Rachel was surprised 
to find that she actually felt hopeful, too. She felt reassured by her new therapist’s goal-
oriented, problem-solving approach. In fact, Rachel became determined to make this 
therapy work, even though she had not wanted anything to do with it initially. She 
promised herself that she was going to try to do everything the therapist asked of her.
Therapy progressed well for the first few weeks, but things soon started to slow again. 
Without really knowing why, Rachel began to find it hard to muster the energy to attend 
the assertiveness class. She knew her therapist would be disappointed in her but she just 
couldn’t seem to help it. Although she felt guilty and confused about it, Rachel began to 
come late to some of her therapy sessions. Over the next month, she began to re-schedule 
or miss them altogether and soon faded out of treatment. Unwittingly, this “take-charge” 
approach taken by Rachel’s new therapist conveyed to her that she was incapable of 
independent action and that she needed his direction— as she did in complying with her 
husband.
Both of these therapists failed to have a significant impact on Rachel’s problems, 
even though the treatment approaches they used were seemingly very different. The ana -
lytically oriented therapist might attribute the unsuccessful outcome to the difficulty in 
restructuring this client’s basic dependency needs. The cognitive-behavioral therapist 
might note that Rachel was not sufficiently motivated to change because she was receiv -
ing too many secondary gains from her help-seeking behavior. If we look at the interper -
sonal process that transpired between both therapists and the client, however, a different 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  307
picture emerges. These two therapists actually responded to Rachel in a very similar— and 
problematic way.
Let’s look carefully at their interpersonal process. With both therapists, Rachel reen-
acted the same maladaptive relational pattern that she had with her children and with 
her husband. Her presenting problem was that her children ran over her and she could 
not make them listen to her. Her disturbing degree of compliance with her take-charge 
husband was a profound example of the same problem. Therapy failed because her pat -
tern of being passive and compliant was reenacted with both therapists. Unwittingly, both 
therapists provided a hierarchical relationship in which she remained the passive helpee 
led by an “expert” who was in charge and going to cure her. This interpersonal pro -
cess reinforced her pathogenic belief that the source of strength and the ability to solve 
problems did not reside in her but in the therapist or others. She was not a collaborative 
partner in her own treatment, so agency, motivation, and commitment to change were 
difficult to sustain (Horvath & Bedi, 2002; Rollnick & Miller, 2013).
In order for Rachel to change, she needs to experience a therapeutic relationship 
that behaviorally affirms her own efficacy. This would be a relationship in which she 
is actively encouraged to initiate what she wants to explore in treatment, invited to set 
personal limits and share control with the therapist, and is more overtly supported and 
encouraged by the therapist in making her own decisions and choices. The client’s symp-
toms will visibly improve in the context of a new interpersonal process in which the 
therapist:
 /uni25CFencourages her to act more independently in their relationship, and
 /uni25CFjoins with her in collaboratively exploring the anxiety and guilt that arise each time 
she tries to act more assertively or independently with the therapist and with others 
in her life.
This experience of change with the therapist behaviorally challenges her IWMs and shows 
her that her own strengths are valued and can be used, in conjunction with the therapist’s 
skill and understanding, in a more collaborative and productive relationship.
Unfortunately, both of Rachel’s therapists were comfortable with the hierarchical 
helper-helpee relational process and did not bring it up as a focus for treatment. For 
example:
THERAPIST:
 Can we talk together about how we are working together? I feel like we are inter
-
acting as if I am the teacher or leader and you are the student or follower. And I’ve heard this 
in other relationships you have talked about. I don’t think this is good for us
—
 I’d like for us 
to be collaborators—more equal partners in our work together. What do you think
 —
 what do 
you see going on between us? 
Neither therapist offered the metacommunication that, in certain ways, their current 
interaction was reenacting the same pattern that was problematic for Rachel in other 
relationships. If the therapists had asked Rachel what she wanted and supported her 
efforts to express her own voice, this would have given Rachel a sense of efficacy. Such a 
process comment, tactfully and tentatively shared, would have allowed Rachel to begin 
looking at this symptomatic pattern in a supportive environment. More importantly, it 
would have given her permission to change her dependent and compliant coping style 
with the therapist and to begin expressing her own feelings, interests, and authentic voice 
in their relationship.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

308  CHAPTER 9
The sequence is often important: If Rachel can experience support for her own ini -
tiative first in her relationship with the therapist, she can then feel more empowered to 
generalize and begin to do this in her relationships with others. The new experience with 
the therapist delivers two very important messages: (1) that some relationships can be dif-
ferent (i.e., Rachel will not be abandoned, ridiculed, or ignored if she asserts herself and 
has a “voice” with the therapist— and perhaps some others as well); and (2) she is already 
succeeding and experiencing empowerment, now, by acting as more of an agent in her 
own life and future trajectory than she has before (Bandura, 2006).
What do these changes in the ways she interacts with the therapist have to do with 
solving the real-life problems with others that brought her to treatment? As long as the 
therapists were telling her what to do, Rachel could not set limits with her children, take a 
more assertive stance with her husband, become more aware of her own genuine interests 
and goals, or follow through and act on what she wanted to do. That is, the highly rele -
vant content of what she discussed with both therapists (issues about autonomy, assertive-
ness, and her own identity) was not matched by the interpersonal process they enacted. 
Unless Rachel has the actual experience of behaving as an active, equal participant in her 
relationship with the therapist, she will not be able to adopt this stronger stance in other 
areas of her life. In other words, the process must be congruent with the content.
To enact a more egalitarian or collaborative relationship with someone like Rachel is 
not a simple task for the therapist, however. It requires therapeutic skill and thoughtful 
monitoring of the process dimension. In response to her life experiences, Rachel has 
become accomplished at getting her therapists, her husband, her children, and others 
to lead, direct, and take responsibility for her. If these therapists had encouraged her to 
initiate more in the session, and then focused together on exploring her reluctance to lead, 
Rachel’s core conflict would have emerged quite overtly in the therapeutic relationship. 
That is, as soon as either of the therapists invited her to follow her own agenda and bring 
up whatever she felt was most important to talk about, encouraged her to disagree with 
or express any dissatisfaction she may have with the therapist, or celebrated whenever 
she tested and tried acting stronger - more independent or assertive in the therapeutic 
relationship, Rachel would have become anxious. At that moment, either therapist could 
have acted on this point of entry and focused her inward on this anxiety so that they 
could begin exploring together what the threat or danger was for her to step out of 
her compliant and help-seeking mode (e.g., the belief that others would leave her if she 
wasn’t always nice, pleasing and compliant; that she would be acting like her demanding 
and dominating mother— of whom she was very afraid of being like; that she was being 
selfish or others would think she acting angrily if she spoke up for herself).
Simultaneously, either therapist could have given Rachel permission to act more assert-
ively within the therapeutic relationship and responded to her in ways that facilitated this 
new behavior in their interaction together. The therapist could do this in two ways. First, 
the therapist could watch for and affirm this effective new stance whenever it emerged 
in their relationship or with others. Second, the therapist could respond to instances in 
which Rachel “undid” herself by retreating to the safer, nonassertive mode just after she 
had risked acting in a stronger way with the therapist. Given Rachel’s life experiences 
and interpersonal coping style, she was likely to become apologetic or confused, or to act 
dependently and ask for direction, soon after disagreeing with the therapist, making an 
insightful connection on her own, or redirecting the session more toward her own interests 
or concerns at that moment. If therapists have formulated working hypotheses about these 
propensities, they can track this potential reenactment in their interpersonal process. If so, 
they will be prepared to help their client identify this problematic pattern as it is occurring,
and then explore the threat or danger she feels when she has just retreated from her new, 
stronger stance with the therapist. Let’s illustrate this immediacy intervention:
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  309
THERAPIST:
 You just took a risk with me, and acted stronger by disagreeing with me, and I want 
you to know that I liked that very much. But I also want to check in and ask: What do you 
think I might be going on for me after you just acted more assertively with me like that?
CLIENT:
 Uh, well, I’m not sure…
(pause)
. Maybe you don’t really like it, but you probably can’t 
say that…so you could think I’m being a little pushy, like my mother, and you know I don’t 
want to be that way.
THERAPIST:
 No, you were not pushy at all, and I genuinely liked it. I welcome you speaking up 
and saying more of what you think and feel with me.
CLIENT:
 Well, ok, but my father really did leave us - saying he couldn’t stand my mother’s 
pushiness anymore.
THERAPIST:
 I hear you, once there were very big consequences for speaking up
—
 for saying what 
you wanted. Are you concerned I’ll leave our relationship if you express yourself here? 
CLIENT:
 I don’t know…others have.
THERAPIST:
 I’m not going away, but others have in the past. And some others in your current 
life may not like it if you get stronger, but I think some others in your life will. We need to 
start sorting through who in your current life will support this, and who will punish it. But 
first, let’s agree that anytime I think you are being too pushy or demanding, or you are wor
-
rying that something like that is going on, that both of us will stop right then and bring it up. 
That way, I can be responsible for my response, and you can say whatever you want without 
worrying about what’s going on for me. How would that be?
CLIENT:
 Yeah, let’s try that. 
In most therapeutic relationships, therapists and clients will temporarily reenact cli -
ents’ core conflicts in their interpersonal process — it just happens. However, in success -
ful therapy of every theoretical orientation, the therapist and client do not continue to 
reenact the maladaptive relational pattern in an ongoing way. Instead, they are able to 
recognize and name this recurrent pattern (e.g., “going along”) and work out a different 
type of relationship that changes the course of the old familiar scenario. As Intersubjec -
tive therapists describe it, deconstruct or disembed from this enactment. Once clients find 
that their conflicts can be activated or come into play with the therapist, but do not have 
to result in the same hurtful or frustrating outcomes they have come to expect, their sche-
mas and expectations expand and become more flexible. At this pivotal point in treat -
ment, it is relatively easy for therapists to move to the next phase of treatment (i.e. the 
Working-Through phase) and help clients generalize this experiential relearning to other 
relationships in their lives.
Example 4: Resolving Sexual Abuse by Working with the Process Dimension. 
Excessive performance demands often leave trainees feeling pressure to do something to 
make their clients change. Unfortunately, these internal pressures on the therapist are often 
translated into interpersonal pressures on clients to change, often before either therapists 
or clients know what’s really wrong, let alone what they want to do about it. This is 
often evidenced by a premature emphasis on intervention techniques and usually at the 
expense of too little exploration and understanding. Unless the therapist has conceptualized 
what has gone awry for clients in other relationships and considered how these relational 
themes could be reenacted in their therapeutic process, intervention techniques will often 
fail. In contrast, if therapists have been assessment-oriented and asked themselves, “assessment-oriented and asked themselves, “assessment-oriented What 
experiences has this client had to bring him to this place in his life?” and has been able to 
generate two or three good working hypotheses about the interaction between themselves 
and the client — and the specific relational experiences that this client needs in order to 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

310  CHAPTER 9
change— it is usually easy to find effective ways to intervene. Thus, therapists are encouraged 
to ask themselves repeatedly, “What does this mean?” rather than, “What should I do?” As 
we will continue to see, the second question is usually answered by the first.
Therapists can employ a wide range of techniques from different theoretical modalities 
(Wachtel, 2008; 1997). The key, then, is to observe closely clients’ responses to what they 
have just said or done (Curtis & Silberschatz, 1997; Weiss, 1993). That is, the therapist 
evaluates the effectiveness of each successive intervention in terms of clients’ ability to uti-
lize each type of response to make progress in treatment. Based on this behavioral feedback 
from clients, therapists need the personal flexibility to modify their interventions to provide 
the responses that work best for this particular client (Binder, 2004; Teyber & McClure, 
2000). Unfortunately, researchers find that many therapists do not flexibly alter their inter-
ventions to match clients’ needs, but dogmatically stick to the same approach whether the 
client is finding it helpful or not (Ackerman & Hilsenroth, 2001; Najavits & Strupp, 1994).
To illustrate the need to use our understanding to guide our interventions, we exam -
ine two critical incidents in the treatment of an incest survivor. In these incidents, the 
therapist uses intervention techniques that have a highly significant impact on the client: 
validating the resistance and role-playing. It is not the intervention techniques in them -
selves that facilitate change, however. Both interventions are effective because they follow 
from the therapist’s understanding of what is transpiring in the current interaction, and 
because the therapist then is able to work with these issues in the immediacy of the client-
therapist relationship.
Early in treatment, Sandy had confided to her male therapist that she was an incest 
survivor. Grasping this profound betrayal, he anticipated that trust was likely to become a 
central issue in their relationship. Therapy had gotten off to a good start but, before long, 
progress began to slow as the material that Sandy presented became repetitious. About 
this time, Sandy recounted two different narratives in which the relational theme was 
feeling unsafe with men. Based on this and other material they had been talking about, 
the therapist hypothesized that, without being aware of it, Sandy was using these vignettes 
to broach the topic of trust in their relationship. As their relationship was becoming more 
important to Sandy, it seemed that her deep concerns about safety and betrayal were now 
being activated with him.
Responding to these embedded messagesabout their relationship, the therapist began to 
talk with Sandy about trust between them and asked about the different thoughts and feelings 
she was having toward him. Sandy genuinely liked the therapist and was finding him helpful. 
However, when the therapist explored the trust issue and asked specifically whether she felt 
safe with him, her affirmative response sounded half-hearted and unconvincing. It soon 
became clear to both of them that Sandy was emotionally removing herself from the therapist 
as they talked more directly about her abuse and safety in their relationship.
The therapist responded to Sandy’s concern by affirming both sides of her ambivalent 
feelings and, used immediacy to work with her concerns directly in terms of their 
relationship.
THERAPIST:
 I know that one part of you likes and trusts me, but it makes sense to me that an-
other part of you doesn’t feel safe. I think that both sides of your feelings toward me are valid 
and important for us to work with.
SANDY:
 (sheepishly nodding and gesturing vaguely to indicate that this was true)
Because they had been talking about issues of trust and betrayal for some time and 
groundwork had been prepared, the therapist thought that this might be an opportu -
nity to try to go further with these issues. Rather than trying to talk her out of these 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  311
concerns or convince her of his trustworthiness, the therapist validated Sandy’s distrust 
and actually went on to articulate and develop it more fully:
THERAPIST:
 If I violated your trust in some way after you had taken the risk to ask me to help 
you, it would be very bad for you. If I tried to approach you sexually or foster any other kind 
of relationship between us, it would hurt you very much. Maybe it would even hurt you so 
much that you might not be able to risk trusting or asking for help again—from anybody.
SANDY:
 (tearing, looks at the therapist and slowly nods in agreement)
The therapist continued to elaborate Sandy’s concerns about mistrust and exploita -
tion from men in general within the immediacy of their relationship:
THERAPIST:
 If I took advantage of our relationship in some way, I think you would feel hope-
lessly betrayed. I think you might become very depressed again, enter into other relationships 
that would be hurtful or exploitative, and may even start thinking again that you do not want 
to be alive.
As the therapist spoke and made the concerns that they had been discussing with oth-
ers overt in terms of their relationship, he observed that her entire demeanor changed. She 
remained tearful but became alert and present, solemnly nodding agreement with what 
he was saying. As they continued to talk together about this, the therapist went on to 
describe his own attitude, and reframe her distrust as a strength:
THERAPIST:
 Yes, I can see how much it would hurt you if I betrayed your trust, and no part of 
me wants you to have that wounding experience again. In fact, I respect the cautious part of 
you that isn’t sure about trusting me. That distrustful part of you is your ally
—
 it’s a strength 
of yours. We need her
—
 because she is committed to not letting you get hurt again. That’s why 
it’s so important that we go at your speed in here, that you have control over what we talk 
about, and that you can say no to me and know that I will honor your limits.
After the therapist responded so affirmingly to Sandy’s concerns, and worked with 
this previously unspoken but dreaded expectation of betrayal in terms of their relation -
ship, important changes occurred. Congruent with the literature that use of immediacy 
increases clients’ willingness to explore more deeply, and also their ability to experience 
and tolerate more intense affects, Sandy began to share more of her story (Hill et al, 2013; 
Hill et al, 2008; Kuutmann &  Hilsenroth, 2011; Mayotte-Blum et al, 2012). Whereas in 
the past Sandy had only alluded vaguely to her childhood abuse, she now chose to share 
it more explicitly. Over the next weeks, she recounted in painful detail and with strong 
emotions how she had been molested over a period of years by her stepbrother, who was 
12 years older. When she first went to her mother for help, her mother was not support -
ive, denied that the abuse was occurring, and told Sandy to “never talk about anything 
like that again.” Sandy did not even consider seeking protection from her stepfather, who 
had always been distant and unresponsive. After failing to receive help, Sandy recalled sit-
ting alone on the floor of her closet for long periods with the door closed, feeling afraid, 
ashamed, and “out of it.” Sandy said that this was the point in her life when she resolved 
that she was “always going to just be alone.” In response to this deep sharing, the thera -
pist was compassionate, validated her experience, and began to help her with the many 
significant connections she began to make between this familial tragedy and the symp -
toms and problems she was struggling with in her current life.
The therapist had already learned in their work together that role-playing was an 
effective intervention that Sandy enjoyed and found useful. During one of these sessions, 
the therapist talked with Sandy about using a role-playing technique to provide a different 
response to the abuse she had suffered, and Sandy welcomed the suggestion.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

312  CHAPTER 9
THERAPIST:
 I wish someone could have been there to stop him and protect you. No one was 
there for you but, if I had been there, I would have walked into your bedroom when he was 
there, turned on the light, and in a loud voice commanded, “Stop it! Get away from her and 
leave her alone right now! I see what you’re doing and it’s not fair. You’re hurting her, and 
I/uni00A0won’t allow it.”
After speaking this forcefully, as if he were actually saying it to the perpetrator, the thera-
pist rolled Sandy’s coat into a ball. Using it as a little Sandy doll, he spoke to it reassuringly:
THERAPIST:
 You’re safe now, and he’s gone for good. I’m going to call the police and help pro-
tect you so you’ll never have to worry about him hurting you again.
As the therapist metaphorically gave Sandy the protective response that she desper -
ately longed for as a girl but did not get, the full intensity of her isolation and shame was 
evoked. As these important feelings ran their course, Sandy became more composed and 
said, “I’m not all alone anymore. I’m going to be all right.” The therapist, still holding the 
rolled-up jacket tenderly, asked Sandy if she could join in and help him take care of this 
little girl who still needed help. Sandy’s affirmative response was almost joyous, and the 
therapist carefully tucked it in her arms.
THERAPIST:
 This is the little girl you were. She needs you to open up your heart to her and give 
her a home. You need to take care of her. Have compassion for her rather than shame
—
 like 
I’m feeling right now. Do not push her away anymore like they did then
—
 and you have done 
since. You need to hold her, talk to her, and listen to what she tells you. I want you to join me 
in taking care of this part of you, so this little girl is no longer alone behind the closet door.
Sandy readily accepted this responsibility and later bought a doll that she used to 
represent the part of her that needed to be cared for but had not been protected. She had 
always thought of herself as “unattractive” but went to considerable effort to find and 
purchase a doll for herself that she felt was pretty.
Sandy entered therapy almost 25 years after the abuse, anxious, unassertive, and 
almost incapable of leaving home alone. Just weeks after this session, however, she got her 
driver’s license renewed and began driving again for the first time in several years. She also 
got a job as a waitress— her first paid employment in six years. Although she had always 
foiled any type of success for herself, she enrolled in a local community college and began 
receiving As in many of her classes. Whereas Sandy had felt helpless, had characteristically 
acted as a victim, and had been repeatedly taken advantage of by others, she increasingly 
became more assertive and expansive. All of Sandy’s problems did not go away, of course, 
but long-standing symptoms were resolved and her life turned forward on a new trajectory.
What allowed Sandy to get stronger in these significant ways? Several factors made 
this role-play intervention effective. By using this technique, the therapist brought Sandy’s 
conflict into the therapeutic relationship and provided her with the reparative experiences 
she needed. In sharp contrast to what occurred in her family, this time Sandy experienced 
protection, validation, appropriate boundaries, and a supportive holding environment. 
This corrective experience with the therapist disconfirmed her pathogenic belief that she 
did not matter enough to be protected or looked after. The therapist’s compassionate 
response also helped Sandy shift from an identification with her parents’ rejection and dis-
missal of her— and her own resulting shame and self-loathing — to an identification with 
the therapist and his compassion for her (Neff, 2011). Eventually, this healthy new identi-
fication led her to be able to care better for herself and believe that she did matter and was 
not alone with her problems for the first time in her life. These far-reaching consequences 
were set in motion by the therapist’s affirming response to Sandy’s vulnerability. Even 
though it was enacted in role-play, the therapist provided Sandy with a CEE that played an 
important part in allowing her to become stronger and more capable of protecting herself.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  313
In this section, readers have been developing their ability to “see” and think about the 
interpersonal process that is transpiring between themselves  and the client. When  thera-
pists do not think their interpersonal process  is corrective or facilitative, (e.g., Therapist 
thinking to herself: “I’m not liking this...we aren’t going anywhere...”) their best way of 
intervening and changing it is usually with a process comment. Let’s explore this more fully.
U/s.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc P/r.sc/o.sc/c.sc/e.sc/s.sc/s.sc C/o.sc/m.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc /t.sc/o.sc P/r.sc/o.sc/v.sc/i.sc/d.sc/e.sc /a.sc/n.sc I/n.sc/t.sc/e.sc/r.sc/p.sc/e.sc/r.sc/s.sc/o.sc/n.sc/a.sc/l.sc  
S/o.sc/l.sc/u.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc 
Now, with more exposure to process comments (also referred to as immediacy inter -
ventions in the counseling literature and metacommunication in the family systems lit -
erature) we can explore further how therapists can use them throughout treatment to 
facilitate change. Researchers find that immediacy interventions can be used to strengthen 
the working alliance, increase session-depth and discussion of more personal issues, help 
clients experience thoughts and feelings more fully, help therapists and clients restore rup-
tures and negotiate problems in the therapeutic relationship, respond to resistance, and 
facilitate other interventions (Hill et al., 2008; Hill & Knox, 2009; Hill et al., 2013; 
Kuutmann & Hilsenroth, 2011; Mayott-Blum et al.,  2012;  Muran et al., 2009). These 
Immediacy Interventions are powerful interventions that bring real focus and intensity, 
but they are not for the faint of heart and are commonly viewed as the most challeng -
ing interventions for new therapists to learn. As we have seen, process comments require 
therapists to break the social rules and intervene in the here-and-now by talking with cli-
ents about what may be going on between them in their current interaction. For example: 
T
HERAPIST
:
 I’m wondering how you are feeling about me, and about us, right now
—
 since you 
have just risked sharing so much? 
In this way, all process comments make the interaction between the therapist and 
client overt and put the relationship on the table as a topic for discussion. As we explore 
different types of process comments in this section, we are always keying on the distinction 
between the overtly spoken content of what is discussed and the process dimension of how 
the therapist and client interact. As new therapists begin to try out these process-oriented 
interventions with their clients, the most common challenge is to contain their anxiety and 
work through how process comments often conflict with familial rules and cultural pre -
scriptions. For many trainees it was simply unacceptable or taboo to talk forthrightly with 
family members about their relationship and current interaction. Also, many trainees ini-
tially fear that it is too blunt or disrespectful to talk about “you and me.” The way we say 
it and the language we choose is very important (Wachtel, 2014). We have provided many 
process comments throughout the preceding chapters, in part, to illustrate that they can be 
respectful, collaborative invitations for straight talk, and should never be confrontational 
or intrusive in any way. Next, we (1) look at further guidelines for utilizing process com-
ments effectively; (2) highlight different types of process comment; and (3) see how pro -
cess comments can be used to make many other therapeutic interventions more effective. 
/one.alt. Guidelines for Utilizing Process Comments. The first guideline to help begin 
using these powerful interventions is to discourage trainees from using these types of pro-
cess comments in their personal lives . These immediacy interventions we are focusing on 
really are challenging to learn and apply in the beginning, although they will become sec-
ond nature with a few years of practice and experience. Learning to work in this process-
oriented way will be easier if you restrict process commentary to your clinical work. A 
clear boundary between your personal and professional life will help keep things simpler. 
Second, many trainees inaccurately slot these discussions about process interventions 
into their own familiar but problematic experiences of being painfully confronted, put on 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

314  CHAPTER 9
the spot, or intruded upon. Process interventions should never be confrontational, intru -
sive, or judgmental in any way. They are merely observations, tentatively suggested, about 
what may be occurring between the therapist and client. Therapists are judiciously using 
their own experience of clients to tentatively wonder aloud about what might be going on 
between them right now, and offer this as an invitation for further dialogue and mutual 
sharing of perceptions. As we have seen, process comments offered tentatively (“It sounds 
like…”; “I’m wondering if…”; “Maybe…”) are more effective than direct challenges (“I 
think you…”) (Miller, Benefield, & Tonigan, 1993). For example:
THERAPIST:
 As you’re talking about him and what went on between you two, I’m wondering 
if you might be saying something about our relationship as well. Has anything like that ever 
come up between us, too? 
CLIENT:
 Well, yeah, you’re the therapist
—
 you’re always in control of what goes on in here. 
THERAPIST:
 Thank you for speaking up so directly. I’m glad we’re talking about this right now 
so we can change it. It feels like I’m the one in control here. That wouldn’t feel very good
—
tell me more about this.
It is anxiety-arousing for most new therapists to pose questions such as this and ask 
the client so directly about what may be going on between “you and me.” For most of us, 
it just goes against the grain of how we have been socialized to talk and interact. However, 
that simple process comment revealed significant unspoken conflict between the therapist 
and client that otherwise would have continued, underground, to hamper treatment. 
Preparing clients for process comments during the initial session is important. Imme-
diacy interventions don’t work so well when clients aren’t expecting or prepared for them. 
When process comments that ask about our relationship or current interaction come out 
of the blue, clients are often surprised. They can be taken off-guard and, unsure of the 
therapist’s intentions, may feel defensive— as new therapists often fear. We don’t want this 
to occur, and the therapist can prevent it by educating or preparing clients by talking with 
them about this straightforward way of interacting during the initial intake or first ses -
sion. For example, the therapist can establish a new norm by overtly redefining the social 
rules that govern how directly the therapist and client will interact:
THERAPIST:
 One of the most helpful things about therapy is that you and I can change the so-
cial rules a little bit and talk more directly with each other than people usually do. One of the 
best ways you can help me to help you is to speak up whenever something I’m doing isn’t be-
ing helpful, doesn’t make sense, or just doesn’t feel right to you. How would it be for you to 
speak up with me like that and tell me if I was doing something that wasn’t working for you?
CLIENT:
 Well, kinda mixed. When I start talking to my wife or friends about how depressed I feel, 
I can tell they don’t really want to hear about it. They’re nice people but they feel uncomfort
-
able. So I like what you say about straight talk between us, that’s what I need. But I’m a Chris
-
tian and I was raised to be respectful…so it might be kinda hard for me be critical of you…
THERAPIST:
 I wouldn’t feel like you were criticizing me or being disrespectful at all. Actually, 
I’d/uni00A0feel like we were working together. If I were doing something that wasn’t working for you, 
I wouldn’t want you to get mad and go away, or be nice and go along. I’d want you to speak 
up and tell me so I could change it and be more helpful. 
CLIENT:
 Well, OK, when you put it that way, it sounds good.
THERAPIST:
 Good. I think it will help our work if we can talk frankly about our relationship at 
times, check in about how you and I are doing together, or if I can give you feedback about 
something I’m seeing or thinking about. Do you have any other thoughts or concerns I can 
answer about us working together in this forthright way? 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  315
In addition to educating clients about the treatment process, therapists can also ease 
the transition toward more forthright communication about “you and me” by providing 
contextual remarks  or prefatory comments that facilitate the bid for more open com -
munication. For example, the ﬁrst few times the therapist is going to make an immediacy 
intervention, he or she can create safety for clients by offering an introductory remark 
that acknowledges the shift to a different type of discourse: 
THERAPIST:
 May I break the social rules for a minute and ask about something that might be 
going on between us? 
Clients will respond well to process comments when therapists respond in a respect -
ful manner, share their observations tentatively (e.g., Sometimes I find myself wondering 
if…); invite collaboration (e.g., if…); invite collaboration (e.g., if That’s what I’m seeing— what do you think ?); and pro -
vide these types of contextual remarks (e.g., I’d like to speak more forthrightly about this 
than people usually do, would that be OK?).
 These contextual comments help clients understand the therapist’s good intentions as 
they help clients shift from surface conversation to a more straightforward approach that 
invites deeper personal engagement. Rather than being threatened by this invitation, most cli-
ents will welcome and be reassured by this bid to talk about what may be occurring right now. 
To work effectively with the process dimension, therapists also must balance the chal-
lenge of metacommunication with being  supportive and protective of clients’ self-esteem
(Kiesler, 1996). Process comments, like any other interventions, can be made in blunt, 
accusatory, or otherwise ineffective ways. Warmth, tact, curiosity, and a sense of humor 
can all go a long way toward making every intervention more effective. Finally, therapists 
also can check in with their clients and talk about the process intervention they just made. 
Consider the following: 
THERAPIST:
 I’m wondering how it was for you when I just asked how you were feeling about 
our work together? I know people don’t usually speak so directly about what’s going on 
between them. Your thoughts?
2. Different Types of Process Comments.Therapists can utilize different types of pro-
cess comments or Immediacy Interventions to achieve different goals. Let’s consider several.
Donald Kiesler, a wise pioneer in this work, discusses “therapeutic impact disclo -
sure.” With this type of process comment, therapists use their own immediate experience 
of clients— or what is going on between them right now— to provide feedback about how 
a client’s way of relating is affecting the therapist (and likely others, too) (Kiesler, 1986; 
Kiesler & Van Denburg, 1993). Here, the therapist is disclosing selectively chosen feed -
back about the impact the client is having at this moment. For example: 
THERAPIST:
 I feel like I’m having a hard time getting to know you
—
 like there’s a wall or distance 
between us. What do you think, have you ever heard anything like this from others too? 
CLIENT:
 Ya, others have said that
—
 I don’t let people get too close.
THERAPIST:
 Help me understand get closer and know you better?
CLIENT:
 I’m just not very open, I guess, it’s always been kinda hard for me to trust people…
Often, others in clients’ lives don’t want to give such feedback that could help cli -
ents, fearing it would “hurt their feelings” or “make them mad.” Therapists don’t want to 
avoid interpersonal feedback that could help with problems in clients’ lives, and we can 
do this with sensitivity to clients’ self-esteem. Providing contextual remarks, asking the 
client for permission to say something or making a prefatory comment that the therapist 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

316  CHAPTER 9
would like to say something that the client could take the wrong way — make all the dif-
ference. For example:
THERAPIST:
 Right now, Ruben, I’m feeling something that might help us understand what’s going 
wrong with some other people in your life. But I’m afraid if I start talking about my experience 
and offer this feedback, you could misunderstand my good intentions and feel blamed
—
 which 
I absolutely do not want to do. So, may I have your permission to speak forthrightly and offer 
some feedback about how you affect me sometimes, and maybe others as well? 
 Object relations and communication theorists use the term “metacommunication” 
to provide feedback about their current interaction, especially as a way to register the 
unspoken emotional quality of a relationship. For instance:
THERAPIST:
I could be wrong about this, Pat, but I have a feeling I would like to check out with 
you.
 Sometimes I feel that if I don’t always take your side completely, you won’t say 
anything to 
me but you’ll feel offended
—
 as if I’ve been disloyal. Like, if I say it sounds like your 
husband has 
a good point there and that seems like a reasonable thing for you to consider, you’ll walk out the 
door at the end of the session and I won’t see you again. Is this just me or is there something to it?
Here, as always, the challenge in providing interpersonal feedback is to provide con -
textual remarks that cue clients what you are about to do, make your good intentions 
overt, and check in with clients afterwards and ask how this was for them. These simple 
steps allow therapists to provide honest feedback and be helpful to clients without being 
disrespectful or blaming— as it may have been in other relationships. 
Another way therapists can use process comments to give clients useful interpersonal 
feedback that others are reluctant to provide is by acknowledging embedded messages .
This type of process comment makes overt the unspoken subtext or relational statement 
about “you and me” that may be present in what was just said. For example:
CLIENT:
 People are so critical. If you say anything to them, they just start telling you what you 
should do. 
THERAPIST:
 “People” are critical, and they tell you what to do too much. I can see why you 
wouldn’t like that. You know, I’m wondering if something like that has ever gone on between 
us. I wouldn’t want to be critical or tell you how you should live your life, but maybe I’ve made 
a mistake and done that without realizing it. Please be honest with me
—
 has there been a time 
when I’ve done that? If so, it would help our work together if we could talk about it.
CLIENT:
 Well, by the look on your face, I could tell that you were really thinking I did it wrong.
THERAPIST:
 I’m
glad we’re talking about this
—
 I think there’s been a misunderstanding. I don’t 
know what the look on my face was that you were referring to, but no, I wasn’t thinking you 
did it wrong. How about this: The next time you see “that look” on my face or think I’m dis-
approving of you, would you stop right then and tell me so we can sort it out?
Therapists can find safe ways to make these relationally-defining messages overt and 
approach, rather than avoid, such important embedded messages about “you and me,” 
rather than acting as if nothing important is occurring. Process comments can also be 
used to provide interpersonal feedback to clients that highlight contradictions, incongrui-
ties, or mixed messages in what the client just said, or help clients recognize discrepancies 
between what they are saying and doing. For instance: 
THERAPIST:
 You are telling me such a sad thing, Paul, but you are saying it in an off-handed 
way
—
 as if it doesn’t really matter. Help me understand the two different messages I’m 
getting
—
 such a heartbreaking story being told in a half-interested manner? 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  317
The challenge in providing interpersonal feedback, and for all process comments, is the 
way we say it. Tone of voice and nonverbal gesture often communicate more than our words. 
New therapists also will find the interpersonal feedback they are providing clients will be 
more helpful and effective if offered with a bid for the client to join and collaborate in refin-
ing it to make it more accurate. However, doing so may collide with an interpersonal coping 
strategy that many trainees bring to their training program: to be “nice,” and avoid potential 
interpersonal conflict. In order for many trainees to integrate process-oriented interventions 
into the way they work, instructors and supervisors will need to provide understanding and 
support for working through this common countertransference propensity. 
Let’s make an important distinction between the commonly used intervention, Self-
disclosure, and a seemingly similar process-oriented intervention, Self-Involving State -
ments, which are actually quite different. Whereas self-disclosing statements refer to the 
therapist’s own past or personal life experiences, (e.g., THERAPIST: My father did that, 
too…), self-involving statements express some of the counselor’s selected thoughts or fil -
tered emotional reactions to what clients have just said or done. Self-disclosing comments 
often take clients’ focus away from their own experience and shift it onto the therapist, 
which is especially familiar and problematic for clients who were Parentified or have 
a Preoccupied attachment style. In contrast, self-involving statements keep the focus on 
clients and reveal information about what is happening in the relationship or how some -
thing clients have said or done is affecting the therapist. For example:
THERAPIST:
 No, I don’t feel “judgmental” about what you did with him Saturday night, but 
I/uni00A0am feeling concerned about your safety and how you put yourself in situations where you 
could be hurt.
Using self-involving statements to share certain personal reactions to what clients 
have just said or done conveys personal involvement and resonance, and highlights rela -
tional patterns that are causing problems with others. Consider the following:
THERAPIST:
 Right now, Bob, I’m feeling uncomfortable. You’re talking to me in a loud voice 
right now
—
 which seems very angry. How do others usually react to you when you do this?
Therapists offer clients a gift when they provide such invaluable interpersonal 
feedback which others have shrunk from sharing. Our intention is to find supportive, 
noncritical ways to help clients see themselves from others’ eyes, learn about the prob -
lematic impact they have on others (such as regularly making others feel intimidated, 
overwhelmed, or bored), and function better by developing greater reflective capacity 
(Fonagy, Gergely, Jurist, & Target, 2002).
Use-of-Self is another type of process comment that help therapists work with 
resistance, and they can make overt unspoken problems or ruptures in the therapeutic 
alliance— giving therapists the opportunity to sort them through and resolve them (Safran, 
Muran & Proskurov, 2009). Indeed, the best time to use process comments in general is 
when the therapist is feeling that things are not going very well . For example, Use-of-
Self is a helpful option for trainees when they feel the interaction has become repetitive 
or “stuck,” or treatment has lost its focus. Therapist judiciously use their own personal 
experience in the moment as a way to intervene and help. Consider the following: 
THERAPIST:
 (thinking to himself: I don’t think this is taking us anywhere…so much happened 
last week
—
 but we’re not going anywhere today…)
. I’m feeling a bit lost right now. I’m not 
quite sure where we are going with this, or maybe I’m not getting what’s most important for 
you here. Can you help me out?
CLIENT:
 Yeah, I’m just wandering all over the place
—
 I can’t keep my mind on anything lately. 
Maybe I’ve been more anxious than I’ve realized since… 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

318  CHAPTER 9
As therapists become more experienced and conﬁdent, it will be much easier for them 
to take the risk of “not knowing” and explore more open-endedly what may be occurring 
in the client-therapist relationship. When feeling confused or stuck, for example, more 
confident therapists can thoughtfully use their own subjective experience to formulate 
and share their questions and concerns — filtered parts of their own internal dialogue —
with clients. For example: 
THERAPIST:
 I felt like we were really engaged
—
 focused and working well
—
 at the beginning of 
the hour. But now it feels like something has changed
—
 as if I lost you somewhere. Is this my 
misunderstanding, or maybe you’re feeling something’s not quite right either? What do you 
see going on between us? 
With such Use-of-Self, trainees often have the best opportunity to make their most 
significant interventions. To illustrate: 
THERAPIST:
 Right now, I’m wondering if you might be thinking that I, too, want you to “just 
forget about this and let it go”
—
 like your mother said when you told her that your uncle had 
molested you. 
CLIENT:
 Well of course you do
—
 isn’t that what therapists always do
—
 just tell you to forgive and 
forget or you’ll never get over it! 
THERAPIST:
 No, I’m not thinking anything like that at all. I support this strong part of you that 
doesn’t want to give in to the denial and go along with the pressure to stop disrupting the family… 
It can be a profound experience for clients when therapists are able to disconfirm 
their misperceptions in this way. As we see here, such Use-of-Self often gives therapists the 
opportunity to provide a far-reaching CEE. 
3. Process Comments Facilitate a Variety of Interventions.  These here-and-
now immediacy interventions that address “you and me” also help therapists utilize many 
other interventions more effectively. Yalom (2005) captures this best by calling process 
comments the “fuel cells” that make diverse interventions more potent; others would call 
them a “moderator variable” that shape the effectiveness of different interventions. Let’s 
look briefly at how this occurs with several of the interventions introduced previously. 
Process comments facilitate empathy and help repair ruptures (Mayotte-Blum, et 
al., 2012). Early in treatment, therapists are trying to establish a working alliance with 
clients, primarily through accurate empathy. To provide this, therapists’ intention is to 
repeatedly give clients the experience that, yet again as they talk about the next issue or 
experience, “My therapist gets me.” It’s not so easy to do this, however. Accurate empathy 
is much more than a “simple reflection” where the therapist basically restates what the 
client just said. Clients don’t like hearing very many of those. Empathy is far more chal -
lenging to provide. It is a “complex reflection” that discerns the key concern, primary 
feeling, or basic meaning in what clients just said. To be able to capture this consistently, 
therapists need help, and process comments provide it. Rather than thinking of empathy 
as a personal characteristic, therapists can approach empathy as a collaborative interper-
sonal process between the therapist and client. To illustrate: 
THERAPIST:
 As I listen, it sounds like you felt unimportant, almost erased, when he said that. 
Am I getting that right, or can you help me say it better?
Accurate empathy helps establish the working alliance, but the therapist’s empathic 
stance routinely falters as “ruptures” in the working alliance, or simple misunderstandings, 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  319
commonly occur (Safran et al., 2009). Unfortunately, researchers find that clients often do 
not voice their concerns and bring up the problems they are having with their therapists 
and, in turn, therapists often avoid or do not ask about them (Hill, Thompson, Cogar, & 
Denman, 1993). Unacknowledged and unresolved misunderstandings between client and 
therapist are not benign; they undermine the working alliance and lead to poor treatment 
outcomes (Johnson, Taylor, Tzanetos, Rhodes, & Geller, 1995). Rather than ignoring the 
conflict, or responding in kind with blame or disengagement, therapists can use process 
comments to provide a relationally affirming way to address the problem as it is occurring. 
The goal is to neutrally observe, adopt a curious stance, or tentatively wonder aloud about 
potential problems or misunderstandings that may be occurring. For instance:
THERAPIST:
 Right now, it seems to me as though you keep asking me for direction, but I keep 
trying to get you to lead and then join what you initiate. Let’s work this out better
—
 what do 
you see going on between us?
Treatment stalls unless therapists and clients can talk about problems in their rela -
tionship and sort them through. Working them out as they arise also provides a valuable 
social laboratory where clients can learn how to address and resolve conflict with others. 
However, most new therapists find it far easier to be supportive than to inquire about 
potential conflict between “you and me” or try to sort through problems directly. As with 
their clients, many trainees did not learn to address or find that they could resolve prob -
lems in their families of origin where, too often, there was no secure mechanism to restore 
the ruptures that occurred with their own attachment figures. 
Process comments also provide a way to respond to strong feelings. We have encour-
aged student therapists to invite and overtly welcome the full intensity of whatever feel -
ings the client is experiencing into the immediacy of the therapist-client relationship 
(Greenberg, 2014; 2002). Often, the most significant way therapists can respond to 
clients’ strong feelings is through Use-of-Self and self-involving statements that include 
selective disclosure of personal reactions. For example: 
THERAPIST:
 I can see how much this has hurt you, and how sad you’re feeling. I feel connected 
with you right now, and hope you’re not feeling alone as you said you have felt in the past. 
How is it for you to risk sharing this special part of yourself with me? 
CLIENT:
 I am sad, but this is different. I’m not alone with it …it’s not so overwhelming. 
Responding in this new and different way to clients’ feelings is often one of the powerful 
ways for therapists to provides an impactful CEE (Bridges, 2006).
In addition, actively exploring and trying to understand the current interaction 
between the therapist and the client also facilitates work with transference or schema/
IWM distortions. To illustrate:
THERAPIST:
 How do you think I am going to react if you decide to do that? What am I going to 
be thinking or feeling, privately, toward you? 
CLIENT:
 Well, I know you’re a good person, but I know that inside you will have to be judging me… 
Early in their training, it seems unimaginable for many new therapists to ever pose 
such a question. However, process comments are powerful uncovering techniques. They 
highlight clients’ IWMs— their pathogenic beliefs about themselves and faulty expecta -
tions of the therapist and others — which helps to clarify the treatment focus. For most 
trainees, the slowest skill to develop is learning how to develop a treatment focus-it is 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

320  CHAPTER 9
complex and initially ambiguous. However, process comments that inquire about clients’ 
perceptions of therapists’ thoughts and reactions will reveal clients’ key concerns and 
help both therapist and client discern what’s really wrong (Bennett et al, 2008).
Finally, let’s highlight how process comments help bring about the CEE (Berman et al, 
2012). A unifying theme in all of these process-oriented interventions is to link clients’ issues 
and concerns with others to what is currently going on between the therapist and the client. 
In this way, clients’ problems with others are not just talked about abstractly; they often 
are re-experienced and potentially resolved in the real-life relationship with the therapist. 
In turn, this in vivo or experiential relearning with the therapist empowers clients to begin 
changing how they are responding to similar problems with significant others in their lives.
To illustrate, suppose a client continues to relay narratives where the basic relational 
theme is that he is repeatedly getting locked in control battles with others. To begin 
resolving this client’s problem with others, the therapist’s intention is to find an effective 
way (not blaming or confrontational but tactful) to make this control issue overt and put 
it on the table for discussion. The therapist does this by wondering aloud or tentatively 
inquiring about this possibility, so the therapist and client together can begin to explore it 
directly in terms of their relationship.
THERAPIST:
 Does this type of control battle that you have been describing with others ever get 
going between us, too? Does it ever seem like you and I are jockeying over-control in our 
relationship?
Yes, making such a process comment and bringing clients’ concerns with others into 
the here and now can seem a dreadful prospect to new therapists. However, by judiciously 
taking this risk, the therapist can bring real-life immediacy to therapist-client interactions. 
Problems with others are not just being talked about intellectually; instead, for the first 
time perhaps, they are being addressed honestly and constructively with someone as they 
occur. If therapists wait for their own sense of good timing (e.g., the therapist finds her -
self feeling: This might work right now), the potential for change is at hand.
New therapists need examples of addressing and sorting through conflict with cli -
ents, so let’s consider a range of three progressively more challenging responses to the 
therapist’s query about control issues in their relationship.
R/e.sc/s.sc/p.sc/o.sc/n.sc/s.sc/e.sc /one.alt: A D/i.sc/s.sc/c.sc/o.sc/n.sc/f.sc/i.sc/r.sc/m.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc R/e.sc/s.sc/p.sc/o.sc/n.sc/s.sc/e.sc I/s.sc L/e.sc/a.sc/s.sc/t.sc C/h.sc/a.sc/l.sc/l.sc/e.sc/n.sc/g.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc 
An example of a disconfirming response from the client might be:
CLIENT:
 No, I don’t feel like we are in a control battle
—
 that’s not going on here.
Per client response specificity, that would be enough for most clients. However, 
because control has been a problem in so many other relationships for this client, the 
therapist doesn’t want to settle for just a superficial understanding, but explores further. 
For example, the therapist can use the client’s response to begin exploring what is differ-
ent about their relationship.
THERAPIST:
 Good, I’m glad that’s not a problem for us. Any ideas about what makes our rela-
tionship different?
The client’s answer often provides useful information:
CLIENT:
 You treat me with respect; that’s what’s different.
Honing a treatment focus, the therapist can follow up on this comment by explor -
ing the client’s concerns about not being respected in other relationships — a significant 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  321
relational statement and point of entry. The therapist also can build on it to establish that 
mutually respectful relationships could be developed with some others in his life as well. 
Further, the therapist is modeling for this client how he can find more effective ways to 
talk with others when he feels that an unwanted control battle is coming into play.
R/e.sc/s.sc/p.sc/o.sc/n.sc/s.sc/e.sc 2: C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc M/a.sc/y.sc A/v.sc/o.sc/i.sc/d.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc I/m.sc/m.sc/e.sc/d.sc/i.sc/a.sc/c.sc/y.sc /o.sc/f.sc T/h.sc/e.sc/i.sc/r.sc C/o.sc/n.sc/f.sc/l.sc/i.sc/c.sc/t.sc/s.sc  
/b.sc/y.sc D/i.sc/s.sc/c.sc/o.sc/u.sc/n.sc/t.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc T/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc/a.sc/p.sc/i.sc/s.sc/t.sc’/s.sc R/e.sc/l.sc/e.sc/v.sc/a.sc/n.sc/c.sc/e.sc
CLIENT:
 We’re not in a control battle because this isn’t a real relationship. You’re just my therapist.
Clients make far more significant gains in treatment when this (common) distancing 
defense is addressed and resolved. At this point, it is essential to clarify that the therapist 
and the client really are two people who have been having a relationship for some time, 
even though there are constraints on their relationship (e.g., Therapist: Yes, I am your 
therapist, so in many ways our relationship is different from a social one. I’m wondering, 
though, what about this makes it not feel like a real relationship.). The therapist can then 
begin to explore the threats aroused for the client by more meaningful involvement. For 
example:
T
HERAPIST
:
 If this relationship did feel more “real” to you, what would be different between 
us...or what might go wrong here that goes wrong with others?
CLIENT:
 Well, then I might have to worry more about what you might need or want from me.
The therapist and the client can then agree to watch for these newly highlighted con-
cerns that come into play in the client’s daily life, and address them if they arise in their 
relationship. It is usually more effective if therapists do not bring up these relational pat -
terns in the abstract (e.g., at the beginning of the next session because the therapist has 
been thinking about them) but wait until they think the client might be experiencing 
them, right now - in their current interaction, before addressing them. 
R/e.sc/s.sc/p.sc/o.sc/n.sc/s.sc/e.sc 3: C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc/s.sc M/a.sc/y.sc R/e.sc/s.sc/p.sc/o.sc/n.sc/d.sc /t.sc/o.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc T/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc/a.sc/p.sc/i.sc/s.sc/t.sc’/s.sc 
Q/u.sc/e.sc/s.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc/uni00A0A/f.sc/f.sc/i.sc/r.sc/m.sc/a.sc/t.sc/i.sc/v.sc/e.sc/l.sc/y.sc
CLIENT:
 (in an exasperated tone)
 Of course you’re in control! You insist that we stop at 10 to the 
hour, whether I’m finished or not. And you’re subtle about it, but I see you trying to take con-
trol all the time and make things go where you want.
Many new therapists fear such an “accusing” response and may eschew process 
comments to safeguard against such criticism. Too often, student therapists take clients’ 
comments at face value and believe that they have done something wrong or have been 
too controlling if the client disapproves of them in this way. Perhaps the therapist actu -
ally has been too controlling — this possibility must always be considered and “owned” 
if necessary. If, upon reflection, it still seems that clients’ reactions have more to do 
with their own cognitive schemas than they do with the reality of how the therapist has 
responded, however, rather than posing a problem, this actually provides an important 
point of entry.
Openly acknowledging that the same conflict clients have with others is also occur -
ring right now with the therapist creates the opportunity to explore this issue directly and 
begin working together to try and resolve it in their relationship. Why do we keep return-
ing to this same point? As long as this client is feeling controlled by the therapist, the ther-
apist is not going to succeed in helping the client change this problem with others either. 
However, by utilizing the therapeutic relationship as a social learning lab, therapists can 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

322  CHAPTER 9
use their interactions with clients to begin changing this maladaptive pattern or schema in 
the following ways:
1. By remaining non-defensive and accepting the validity of clients’ concerns whenever 
possible:
THERAPIST:
 Yes, we do have to stop at 10 to the hour, and that is an unnatural ending for you. 
I/uni00A0can see how the control issue is brought up by those time constraints. 
2. By exploring clients’ perceptions further and working with them to understand them 
better:
THERAPIST:
 What do you think is going on for me when I try to take something we talk about 
in a certain direction? What does it seem like I am trying to do at those times
—
 what might 
my intentions be? 
3. By “differentiating” the therapist from other figures in clients’ lives:
THERAPIST:
 Yes, I have had ideas about where we should go, but I have also been interested 
in following your lead, too. In fact, I may be different from some other people in your life 
because I genuinely liked it when you disagreed with me last week and told me what you 
thought. I like it when neither of us feels controlled and we can both say what we want. It 
makes our relationship feel more engaged and alive to me. And how is this for you?
4. By offering to be sensitive to this concern in their relationship, expressing a will-
ingness to handle the issue differently in the future, and inviting clients to tell the 
therapist right then whenever they think this conflict is occurring between them— so 
together they can talk it through and change it before continuing:
THERAPIST:
 I don’t want you to be controlled in our relationship as you have been in others. 
That’s no good for you or anybody else. Let’s try to do something about it. From now on, 
I/uni00A0will watch the clock and let you know when it’s five minutes before we have to stop. And 
any time you feel like I am directing you away from where you want to go or being control-
ling in any way, tell me, and we’ll stop right then, sort through what’s happening, and change 
it. What else could we do to help with this? Tell me your ideas.
Adopting these approaches will work easily with some clients, whereas other clients 
will insist on reestablishing the same constricted relational patterns. However, if thera -
pists are willing to remain non-defensive and tolerate their own discomfort for a few 
moments, most clients will become significantly more engaged in the therapeutic rela -
tionship and motivated to explore this and other related issues more fully. As clients 
repeatedly find that the expected but unwanted old scenario does not repeat with the 
therapist, they experience greater interpersonal safety than they have known before. As 
a result, important new issues, pathogenic beliefs, and previously threatening feelings are 
now safer to emerge, providing new material for exploration and clarifying the treatment 
focus. Routinely, many clients will make attempts during the next week to try out this 
new way of relating with others and test out what they have just experienced with the 
therapist. Clients often will return to the next session or two and report on their attempts 
to change these same types of patterns and respond in a different way to someone in their 
life. Next, we explore several reasons therapists are reluctant to work with the process 
dimension and offer some practical guidelines to help therapists take the leap and begin 
utilizing process comments with their clients.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  323
THERAPISTS’ INITIAL RELUCTANCE TO WORK 
WITH/uni00A0THE PROCESS DIMENSION
Karen, a first-year practicum student, was seeing her first client. Everything her client talked 
about seemed unimportant—about seemed unimportant—about seemed unimportant she just rambled on about nothing. Karen felt bored, and even 
though she knew inside that the client also felt like this wasn’t going anywhere, neither one 
wanted to say anything. A few sessions went by like this and Karen’s awkward, bad feeling 
just got worse. She stopped enjoying their sessions and almost began to dread them, know-
ing that nothing meaningful was occurring and feeling like she was failing. Karen developed 
a knot in her stomach as she sat politely with the client and worried to herself: “Being a 
nice, empathetic person who just listens isn’t going anywhere. Maybe I’m in the wrong 
field—I’m not sure I can do this...”
Karen’s supervisor listened to her distress and tried to help. He suggested that Karen 
talk with the client about what she was feeling and check things out—talk with the client about what she was feeling and check things out—talk with the client about what she was feeling and check things out maybe the client was 
feeling the same way, too? For example, the supervisor suggested that Karen reflect aloud on 
their interaction, and he tried to show her how by role-playing things she might say, such as:
“Sometimes I’m wondering if what you’re talking about feels like what’s really most 
important for you”;
“How does it feel for you to talk with me — or others— about problems or personal 
things that are meaningful for you?”; or
“What’s it like for you to come each week and talk with me? What feels good and 
what isn’t being helpful?”.
Karen knew that this is what she should do, but there was absolutely no way she could 
bring herself to say things like that. She couldn’t be so forthright; she couldn’t do that 
with her client or with anyone— she just couldn’t. Karen had never talked this way in her 
family or with any of her friends, and felt torn apart about by the possibility that she might 
hurt her client’s feelings by being so direct, or not know what to do next if the client did 
respond.
Karen’s client didn’t show up, or call to cancel, for their fourth session. Karen wasn’t 
surprised and thought this was coming, and felt like she had failed, knowing that this could, 
and should, have been so different. Her supervisor was kind, and offered a suggestion— and 
a challenge. He said that Karen could try calling the client and inviting the client to come 
back and attend just one more session, to talk about what did and did not feel good about 
coming, to consider other ways they could work together if the client wanted to continue, 
or to have the opportunity to say goodbye, end their relationship, and get another referral 
if the client did not want to continue. The hope of being able to restore the relationship 
outweighed her anxiety, and Karen called the client and said almost the same words her su-
pervisor had role-played with her. Karen hit the issue on the mark when she said they could 
talk about other ways of working together. The client asked, “What do you mean by that?”, 
and Karen spoke up directly and said she was often quiet in their sessions and the client 
might benefit if she was a more active therapist and provided more feedback. The client 
responded immediately, saying Karen was “a very nice person, but she did need more help.” 
The client agreed to attend one more session, and they continued this forthright discussion 
about how they could work together more effectively. Karen was more active, forthright, 
and engaging in this session and the client decided to continue in treatment. Karen felt 
hugely relieved after the session and, for the first time, had the good feeling that she had 
been a helpful therapist. 
In this section, we explore why some beginning therapists, like Karen, may be reluc -
tant to make process-oriented interventions and talk with clients about their relationship 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

324  CHAPTER 9
and interaction together. Although the best vehicle for effecting change is often the thera-
peutic relationship, it can be anxiety-arousing for new therapists to take the plunge and 
say, for example:
THERAPIST:
 Does that kind of problem
—
 feeling ignored or dismissed, ever go on here, too
—
 you 
know, between us?
Talking together so directly about issues between two people breaks the cultural 
norms and family rules that most therapists grew up with. As a result, and because of 
the immediacy that such forthright communication creates, some beginning therapists 
are reluctant to make process comments in the beginning and explore how clients may 
be experiencing parallel problems with the therapist that they are having with others 
Spangler et al, 2014). Let’s examine six concerns new therapists often have about begin-
ning to use immediacy Interventions. 
/one.alt. Uncertainty about When to Intervene. Because new therapists have not had 
much experience attending to the process dimension or tracking it with clients, they are 
often unsure when or how to use process comments. As trainees gain more experience 
and begin to integrate all of the complex new information their clinical training presents, 
most will become more comfortable intervening with the process dimension. The usual 
sequence is, at first, therapists will find that they are beginning to recognize when some -
thing important is going on between them, but they cannot speak up and apply what they 
are observing. Although this is often frustrating for new therapists, developmentally, it’s a 
good place to be. Typically, if they can “see” the process dimension, it is often just weeks 
or months later until they will feel confident enough to begin speaking up and inquir -
ing about this possibility with clients. It is something of a personal risk for therapists to 
suggest:
THERAPIST:
 I’m thinking about something that might be going on between us right now, and 
wondering if...
Although therapists will be accurate with some of their process observations, the cli -
ent will not resonate with others. Therapists have not failed in any way or made a mistake 
when the observation they have tentatively suggested is inaccurate; they are simply trying 
to understand, and clients usually appreciate these good intentions. As emphasized earlier, 
the therapist’s aim is not to be “right.” Instead, he or she is trying to initiate a mutual col-
laboration or dialogue with clients— so that together they can consider and explore what 
may be going on between them. For instance:
THERAPIST:
 (non-defensively, in a friendly and welcoming tone)
 OK, what I’m suggesting doesn’t 
quite fit. Help me out. What are your words for what might be going on between us here?
New therapists should not be in a hurry to make process comments or use other 
interventions that create immediacy until they feel ready to do so. Forcing such responses 
will not be good for therapists or effective for clients. If therapists do not feel in control of 
choosing how and when they intervene with their clients they are disempowered and, in 
turn, will not be capable of empowering their clients.
How can therapists discern when clients’ conflicts are being reenacted between them? 
Let’s follow this sequence. First, it is helpful if the therapist has tried to identify clients’ mal-
adaptive relational patterns with others. By formulating working hypotheses about what 
goes wrong with others— and how those same patterns or similar themes could come about 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  325
in their interaction— the therapist is better prepared to respond to what a particular client 
is likely to present in treatment. Thus, when therapists can anticipate the types of expecta-
tions, schema-driven distortions, and reenactments that a client is likely to enact with them, 
therapists do not have to think on their feet as much. They can better see what is going on 
between them or hear what the client is really saying— right now as the client is saying it, 
rather than “getting it” later (e.g., a trainee reviewing a tape recording of his session might 
think to himself: “She’s telling me that ‘everybody’judges her. She’s probably telling me that 
she’s worried that I’m judging her and being critical, too. Why do I get it now, when it’s too 
late, and not right then when she’s saying it to me? This always happens!”).
Second, these working hypotheses will help therapists make sense of their own 
experience and recognize when they are starting to feel or respond as others do with this 
client. For example, when clients are leading the therapist to feel bored, impatient, or 
overwhelmed, these working hypotheses will help the therapist consider the possibility 
that he or she is beginning to react as others in the client’s life often do— that is, that his 
or her feelings and reactions toward the client may be signaling that the same scenario 
that causes problems with others may be underway here, too.
Third, this is a good time for the therapist to consult with a supervisor and check out 
together what may be occurring in the therapeutic interaction. If it does seem that a reen-
actment may be underway, supervisees can explore any concerns they may have about 
making this interaction overt the next time it comes up and talking it through with cli -
ents. Looking for effective ways to explore this possibility, therapists can also role-play or 
rehearse alternative responses with the supervisor. Again, it is not realistic for therapists-
in-training to be able to explore and try out these process-oriented interventions without 
active guidance from a supportive supervisor.
Fourth, with this preparation, therapists can wait to broach this possibility with cli -
ents the next time they feel this reenactment may be occurring. It is more effective to 
intervene at the moment when the interaction is occurring (immediacy) rather than bring-
ing it up in the abstract (e.g., at the beginning of the next session). Recall the therapist 
earlier who realized, after the session, that his client likely was feeling judged or criticized 
by him as well. He did not start the next session by bringing up this possibility and talk -
ing with the client about it — as he wanted to do. Instead, he listened to his supervisor’s 
advice to wait until he thought this issue might be occurring between them again, which 
did indeed happen about 20 minutes into their next session, and successfully inquired 
about this possibility as it was occurring—as it was occurring—as it was occurring which holds so much more salience and mean-
ing for the client.
Fifth, beginning therapists are encouraged to wait until they feel that this interven -
tion (or any other) is likely to work. We need to respect our own sense of timing. As 
emphasized, it is important that therapists choose whether to make this or any other 
intervention, and when to try it — compliance is just as problematic for therapists as it is 
for clients.
It will often take a year or two before these responses feel natural and come easily —
but they will. Good advice for the novice therapist is to practice and rehearse with 
classmates, ask your instructors/supervisors to role-play these immediacy interventions 
with you, and watch demonstration videos— it’s very different to see rather than just read 
about them (see Spangler et al., 2014 for further guidelines).
2. Fear of Offending the Client. Some beginning therapists are concerned that cli -
ents will feel therapists are being too blunt, personal, or intrusive if they ask, “How does 
it feel to be talking with me about this?”
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

326  CHAPTER 9
Speaking respectfully yet forthrightly about what may be going on may break unspo-
ken social rules, and many trainees are concerned that clients may be surprised or taken 
back by this. To help ease the transition toward this more genuine dialogue, the first few 
times that therapists make a process comment they can create safety by offering an intro-
ductory remark that acknowledges the shift to another level of discourse:
THERAPIST:
 Can I be forthright with you and speak directly about something?
Therapists will not be too blunt, take clients off guard, or offend clients if they 
respond respectfully, invite collaboration (e.g., “What do you think?”), and provide con-
textual remarks that help clients recognize therapists’ good intentions. Rather than being 
threatened by this invitation for more forthright communication, most clients appreciate 
this more authentic and substantive discussion. Welcoming it from the beginning, they are 
reassured by the therapist’s willingness to get down to business and talk in plain terms 
about what’s really wrong in their lives— something they have often wanted but not been 
able to do with others.
3. Therapists’ Own Insecurities and Countertransference Issues. To work 
with clients in the highly personal manner described here, therapists are challenged to 
take the risk of engaging in a genuine relationship with clients. In the interpersonal pro -
cess approach, therapy is a two-way street where each participant is willing to be affected 
by the other. Process comments lose their impact when therapists are not willing to be 
emotionally present and engaged in the “real relationship” with the client (Gelso, 2014, 
2011; Gelso & Samstag, 2008). Clients receive a contradictory or mixed message from 
therapists when therapists make a process comment and invite a more genuine dialogue, 
but do not follow through. This mixed message occurs when therapists become defensive 
and distance themselves from the client or when therapists are unwilling to consider the 
potential validity of the client’s criticism or dissatisfaction. For example:
THERAPIST:
 What do you think as I say that to you?
CLIENT:
 Well, I feel like you’re criticizing me a little bit there, and I guess it doesn’t feel very good.
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
(defensive tone)
 Well, of course I’m not being critical
—
 geez, you really 
are sensitive to feeling criticized! Do you overreact like this to other people, too?
In contrast, when therapists are willing to remain non-defensive and talk with clients 
about their participation in problems and what is occurring between them, sessions become 
more intense and productive— and most clients appreciate the genuineness and honesty. As 
an alternative to the previous therapist’s reaction, a non-defensive therapist might respond:
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 I’m sorry it feels like I’m critical
—
 that sure wouldn’t feel very good. 
I don’t want to be critical in any way, but I do want to give you feedback in a way that’s not 
judgmental. So, thanks for being honest with me, it’s helpful, and please tell me more about 
the part that felt “critical.”
Therapists’ willingness to be personally affected by clients and to look at their own 
contribution to their interpersonal process will at times be anxiety-arousing. We wouldn’t 
want it to be otherwise — nothing ventured, nothing gained. An impactful CEE does not 
occur unless the relationship is significant and holds real meaning for both the client and 
the therapist . By looking honestly at their own contribution to problems or misunder -
standings in the relationship, therapists facilitate an egalitarian relationship that holds gen-
uine meaning for both. Of course, this increasing mutuality will activate therapists’ own 
personal problems or countertransference issues at times (Gelso & Hayes, 2007; Hayes, 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  327
Gelso & Hummel, 2011; Mitchell, 1993). For example, in order to respond more authen-
tically, therapists need to be able to relinquish hierarchical control over the relationship, 
which will arouse anxiety for some therapists who need to be the authority, in control of 
what happens next, or one-up in relationships (e.g., Dismissive therapist Marmarosh et al, 
2014). Therapists may also be concerned that this genuine responsiveness or emotional 
presence with clients will lead to a loss of appropriate therapeutic boundaries and result 
in over-involvement or acting out. However, by consulting with a supervisor and applying 
the guidelines on optimum interpersonal relatedness from Chapter 6 and countertransfer-
ence in Chapter 8, therapists will be able to recognize when their own countertransference 
issues are prompting them to become too close to— or too distant from— the client.
In making process comments, how do therapists know whether what is going on is 
due to client-induced or therapist-induced countertransference? For example:
THERAPIST
 (internally):
 Is this just me, or does she make everybody feel this way?!
First, new therapists need a supportive supervisor who helps them track the therapeutic 
process, especially in the beginning. It is unrealistic to expect trainees to be a participant-
observer who can maintain a balance of emotional relatedness and objectivity without 
ongoing assistance. This is a normative, developmental issue in clinical training. Although 
new therapists should be thinking about this distinction and working diligently to clarify 
what is the client’s issue versus what is their own, they should not feel badly if they are 
having trouble distinguishing this in the beginning. It is complex and ambiguous, and it 
becomes easier as you learn better to recognize your countertransference propensities, so 
let your supervisor help you.
Second, beginning therapists can safeguard against confusing their own and clients’ 
issues by tracking and observing the therapist-client relationship, but not jumping to con-
clusions or intervening as soon as they think something significant may be occurring. It 
is more effective for therapists to generate working hypotheses first, and then wait to see 
whether the observation also applies to subsequent exchanges between therapist and cli -
ent. If the issue or concern is relevant for clients, it will repeat as a theme or pattern. If it 
does not keep coming up, then it is likely that therapists’ own issues are involved or that 
it is not an important concern and this hypothesis should be discarded. Thus, therapists 
don’t wish to be cavalier about making process comments. When in doubt, it is best to 
wait, gather additional information about the therapeutic process, and/or consult with a 
supervisor before raising issues with clients. Remember, too, that all process comments 
are simply observations. They are offered to the client tentatively, as possibilities for joint 
exploration and mutual clarification— not as truth or fact.
Across varying treatment approaches, there is strong empirical evidence that the 
therapist’s relationship with the client may be the most significant means of effecting 
change (Barber et al., 2009; Najavits & Strupp, 1994; Norcross & Beutler, 2011). At 
the same time, one of the reasons for treatment to terminate prematurely is that clients’ 
interpersonal coping strategies have activated therapists’ own conflicts and they have 
become stuck in a reenactment. Therapists always need to remain open to the possibility 
that their own countertransference issues may have come into play, and should generate 
working hypotheses about how each client’s conflicts could be reenacted in treatment 
(see Appendix B, Part 6). Likewise, beginning and experienced therapists also honor the 
therapeutic enterprise when they:
 /uni25CFmake a lifelong commitment to exploring and remaining open to their own counter-make a lifelong commitment to exploring and remaining open to their own counter-make a lifelong commitment to exploring and remaining open to their own counter
transference propensities,
 /uni25CFconsult with supervisors and colleagues as an ongoing career activity, and
 /uni25CFseek their own personal therapy when countertransference issues persist.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

328  CHAPTER 9
Countertransference issues are most likely to create problems when clinicians disre -
gard them. The red flag goes up when clinicians are not willing to consider their own par-The red flag goes up when clinicians are not willing to consider their own par-The red flag goes up when clinicians are not willing to consider their own par
ticipation or potential contribution to the conflict . In contrast, therapists who are aware 
that they are susceptible to countertransference and who discuss possible instances of 
countertransference with supervisors as they arise should feel unfettered about working 
with clients in a process-oriented manner.
4. Concern about Appearing Confrontational. The most common problem we 
find in helping new therapists explore and try out process comments is they misconstrue 
them as confrontations. Many new therapists are reluctant to make a process comment 
because they anticipate that clients will be mad about being “confronted,” view the thera-
pist as hostile or accusatory, and will leave treatment. There should be nothing confronta-
tional about a process comment or any other immediacy intervention. A process comment 
is an invitation from the therapist to the client for a dialogue about what may be going on 
between them right now. If you think that the process comment you are about to make 
is going to make a client feel accused or blamed, or that it will put the client on the spot, 
then don’t make it. Instead, wait for another time that feels better or, preferably, talk with 
the client about your reservations about sharing this observation. For example:
THERAPIST:
 There’s something I’m thinking about right now, but I’m hesitant to talk about it 
with you. I suppose I’m concerned that you might feel criticized or blamed
—
 confronted in 
some way, which is not my intention. Can we talk about this?
Some therapists may also worry that responding more forthrightly, accurately reflect-
ing the key concern or core message, or capturing the central feeling in what clients just 
said, may hurt clients. These expectations of client vulnerability are often inaccurate, and 
reflect therapists’ own countertransference issues about becoming more effective, having 
more impact on clients, or acting stronger. Virtually all clients will welcome the invitation 
for a more authentic, forthright dialogue about what’s really wrong in their lives and about 
what’s going on between the therapist and the client. In fact, we believe that one reason 
why clients drop out of treatment prematurely is because they don’t get this straight talk 
and direct personal engagement with the therapist. As clients find that it is safe and help-
ful to speak with the therapist about what goes on between them at times, new therapists 
will be reassured that they can be both sensitive and direct at the same time.
A different concern about hurting clients— and being hurt, takes on far more personal 
significant for some therapists with a Fearful attachment style who grew up with double 
binding family communications. Confusingly, there was a great discrepancy between what 
was actually being done (e.g., the child routinely being ostracized, ridiculed, threatened 
or hit and what was being said and presented to others (e.g., “We are a close and loving 
family. There are no problems, everyone is fine.”). The essential element with these dis -
crepant messages is the clearly understood but unspoken family rule that the child cannot 
acknowledge the incongruence in any way. For example, the child in such a double bind-
ing situation cannot make these contradictory messages overt by metacommunicating and cannot make these contradictory messages overt by metacommunicating and cannot make these contradictory messages overt
saying, “You’re telling me to clean my plate, but later you’ll make fun of me for being fat. 
Stop it— you’re driving me crazy!”
 Such double binding communications occur in many dysfunctional families, and are 
routine in substance-abusing and in physically and sexually abusive families. An endur -routine in substance-abusing and in physically and sexually abusive families. An endur -routine in substance-abusing and in physically and sexually abusive families. An endur
ing legacy of such mystifying developmental experiences (i.e., “What’s real?!”) is that, 
years later, these therapists still may be intensely afraid that if they break the family rule 
and speak directly about what is behaviorally transpiring, something very dangerous will 
result— even though they cannot quite name the threat. Old threats can be evoked — but 
also resolved— by breaking double binds and no longer complying with or being ruled by 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  329
covert family rules about how members must communicate. Thus therapists with these 
developmental experiences may find it threatening (or liberating as they work toward 
earned security) to begin using process comments and make overt what is occurring. 
However, such countertransference issues are most appropriately resolved in therapists’ 
own counseling, rather than in the supervisory relationship.
5. Feeling Inadequate: “What do I say next?”. Some developing therapists recog-
nize that process comments enliven the therapeutic interaction, bring clients’ feelings and 
problems into bolder relief, and make them accessible for the therapist and client to work 
on in the here-and-now. But this good news now poses a new problem for an inexperi -
enced therapist—as expressed in the following questions: 
“What do I say next?” (when clients share strong feelings) 
OR
“What do I do now?” (when clients begin talking about a significant problem in more depth).
With little training and experience, understandably, novice therapists are in a new 
and challenging position at these important moments. Uncertain about how to proceed 
or what to say next, some new therapists step away from process comments to avoid 
these anxious moments where they don’t know what step to take next and help the client 
move forward or make progress, and feel they are failing. However, putting on the brakes 
and remaining on the surface by avoiding interventions that will bring forth clients’ feel-
ings and problems with more clarity and immediacy is not the way to cope. Not know -
ing what to do or say next is a developmental stage in clinical training, and as we will 
illustrate next, it is resolved as new therapists get better at developing a treatment focus 
(Tufekcioglu & Muran, 2015). 
As supervisors, we can still recall decades ago when we were trainees struggling with 
these same anxious feelings. We feel empathy for our trainees, and we’d like to focus on 
two topics to try and help. First, when supervisees are saying, “What should I do next?”, 
they usually are really saying, “I don’t understand what this means.” So, rather than tell 
our supervisees what to say next, which doesn’t empower them, we first try to help them 
understand what clients just said. This will give them clear direction for what to say or 
for where they are trying to go. For example:
SUPERVISEE:
 I don’t know what to say right here.
SUPERVISOR:
 What do you think the client just said to you? What might that have meant?
SUPERVISEE:
 I don’t really know…what do you think?
SUPERVISOR:
 I heard the client saying
—
 in so many words, that she was afraid of being left
—
afraid of being alone. She mentioned that her sister is joining the army and moving to Georgia. 
That’s a significant loss for many teen-aged girls
—
 but a far more profound loss for this girl. 
As you recall from the intake we discussed, her mother overdosed and died when she was 10. 
So right here, I’m hearing this client telling you that the painful and far more significant loss of So right here, I’m hearing this client telling you that the painful and far more significant loss of 
her mother is also being evoked by her sister moving—and that combined it’s just too much. 
What do you think?
SUPERVISEE:
 Yes, I didn’t connect that bigger but unspoken part about her mother in the ses-
sion, but as you say it now, that’s exactly what’s going on. But what should I have said? This 
will probably come up again.
SUPERVISOR:
 Yes, I think so too. I think we are trying to hear what was most important
—
 most 
meaningful to the client, in what the client just said. If we can grasp that, usually by considering 
the broader life context or related themes, then that’s what we want to respond to. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

330  CHAPTER 9
SUPERVISEE:
 Yeah, but what would you say?
SUPERVISOR:
 I would try to reflect all of her feelings of loss, but in a modest or graduated way. 
And things always work best when we approach them with empathy. So I would say some-
thing like: “Your sister is joining the army and moving far away from you. And it sounds like 
you don’t know when you will be seeing her next. It makes sense to me that you are distressed 
about this, about this, especially because you have already lost so much.” How would some-
thing like that work for you?
SUPERVISEE:
 Yeah, that gets right to the heart of what she’s really telling me…it is her sister
—
but this conversation is also about her Mom. It makes perfect sense now, but why can’t I hear 
this on my own? It’s so frustrating!
SUPERVISOR:
 You’re doing fine. In a year or two, as you keep learning how to listen for themes 
and develop a treatment focus, you will be much better at hearing what your clients are saying 
to you as they are saying it. 
In their next session, the supervisee waited until the client brought up her sister’s 
move again, made a response similar to the supervisor’s suggestion, and the client moved 
into her deep and unresolved sadness, and her previously unacknowledged anger, over her 
mother’s death. Greatly advancing treatment, the client also expressed her shame-based 
belief that she was “worthless…unlovable” because her mother “chose drugs over me.”
The supervisor was able to hear the core meaning in what the client said (attachment 
trauma), which led simply and clearly to what the supervisee wanted to say and do next. 
The supervisor was able to provide this fuller understanding because she could contex-
tualize what the client just said (i.e., think about the meaning of her sister moving within 
the broader developmental context of having lost her mother). Knowing that develop -
mental experience, the supervisor was attentive to themes of loss that this client might 
present— and the supervisor had highlighted the importance of this theme to the super -and the supervisor had highlighted the importance of this theme to the super -and the supervisor had highlighted the importance of this theme to the super
visee before their first session. Understandably, however, learning to listen for relational 
patterns, affective themes, and trying to understand the client’s presenting problem within 
the broader developmental context of her life is a new way of thinking that takes most 
therapists two or three years to learn and apply. As this conceptualizing ability develops, 
student therapists will get better at refining a treatment focus, hearing the core concern in 
what the client just expressed, and knowing what they want to say or do next— just as this 
supervisee succeeded in doing.
Second, when supervisees ask, “What should I say next?”, we find that they often 
have useful questions and apt observations in mind that they don’t consider using. Draw-
ing more on Use-of-Self, we often ask supervisees what they are thinking or wondering 
about as they are listening to the client and feeling stuck or uncertain of how to proceed. 
It just doesn’t occur to many supervisees to try and find a way to utilize the observations 
or connections they are making as they are listening to clients. Although a few may be too 
quick to speak without filtering their own responses, the much bigger problem we see is 
student therapists being overly inhibited with clients and too reluctant to use their own 
experience and engage clients with their own thoughts, questions, and perceptions . This 
Use-of-Self is much different than being directive, self-disclosing, or problem-solving. 
Finally, as developing therapists become more experienced and confident, it will be eas-
ier for them to take the risk of “not knowing” and explore more open-endedly what may be 
occurring in the client-therapist relationship. When feeling confused, for example, a more 
experienced therapist may be able to inquire simply, “How did we end up here, anyway?”
6. Concerns about Owning Personal Power.A pervasive but generally unacknowl-
edged issue in clinical training is therapists’ concerns about owning their own personal 
power. Many new therapists feel uncomfortable about allowing themselves to become 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING WITH THE PROROR CESS DIMENSION  331
someone who is important to clients and having a significant impact on their lives. Espe-
cially in the beginning, it is also anxiety-arousing to make strong interventions that can 
influence clients profoundly and to accept the responsibility that comes with exercising 
such personal power. As a result, many beginning therapists over-qualify their comments 
and water down the impact of their interventions.
Therapists’ own effectiveness can arouse anxiety for many reasons. Some clinicians, 
for instance, were parentified or aggrandized as children. For these therapists, legitimate 
competencies can be readily exaggerated into unrealistic all-powerful or all-responsible 
grandiosities. Initially, as children, it may have been exciting to be special and powerful 
vis-à-vis their parents in this way, but it soon becomes lonely, intimidating, or burden -
some. As a result, these therapists may undo, or quickly retreat from, strong interventions 
they make or may avoid them altogether.
Some developing therapists are reluctant to have a significant impact on clients 
because of their own separation anxiety or separation guilt. For these therapists, com -
petent or independent functioning in their families of origin threatened their emotional 
ties to parental caregivers (i.e., they lacked a Secure Base). As the young child began to 
explore independently and move toward greater autonomy, caregivers may have looked 
sad or hurt (instilling separation guilt), withdrawn physically or emotionally (instilling 
separation anxiety), demanded more or belittled the child’s attempts at mastery (instill -
ing feelings of inadequacy and shame), or otherwise paired anxiety with healthy com -
petence and individuation strivings. Therapists for whom these types of developmental 
experiences were ongoing or characteristic may retreat from their own effective interven-
tions, and frequently may be heard making comments like, “I don’t know what to do,” 
“I’m afraid of hurting the client,” or “I’m so screwed up myself that I have no right to 
try to help somebody else.” All therapists have their own personal problems and limi -
tations. However, when such comments persist, it may indicate that therapists want to 
avoid the anxiety evoked by effectively addressing clients’ problems — in the same way 
that effectively differentiating from their attachment figures and demonstrating compe -
tence and independence was (and is) anxiety-evoking because it violated unspoken “rules 
of attachment.” 
What can help trainees with these concerns? An affirming supervisory relationship is 
crucial if therapists are to embrace their own personal power and be as effective as they 
can be. The supervisor-supervisee relationship is most productive when supervisees:
 /uni25CFfeel personally supported by the supervisor,
 /uni25CFreceive conceptual information and practical guidelines when needed,
 /uni25CFobtain nonjudgmental assistance in sorting out their own conflicted reactions toward 
clients that have been triggered by clients’ eliciting maneuvers or by therapists’ own 
personal issues, and
 /uni25CFare able to address and resolve the interpersonal conflicts (restore ruptures) that are 
likely to arise in the supervisor-supervisee relationship.
Ideally, supervisors will help supervisees evaluate the effectiveness of interventions 
and consider alternatives without taking away supervisees’ own initiative. Supervisors do 
best when they collaborate actively so therapists feel ownership of the treatment process. 
(See the Motivational Interview literature for the powerful effects of using this collabora-
tive approach (Miller & Rollnick; Miller & Rose, 2009, 2013; Moyers et al., 2005)). 
It may take several years before therapists can allow themselves to have as significant an 
impact on clients as possible and to possess their own personal power fully; this is a gradual 
developmental process. If student therapists do not progress along this feeling-of-adequacy 
dimension as they move through their training, they should discuss this issue with their 
supervisors as they go through their training program and/or seek treatment for themselves.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

332  CHAPTER 9
CLOSING
This chapter has drawn primarily from process-oriented concepts in the group therapy, 
family therapy, and existential psychotherapy, and from the counseling literature on Imme-
diacy interventions. As developing therapists begin to work in other rewarding treatment 
modalities such as couple counseling, group therapy and family therapy, attending to the 
process dimension will become even more central. In all three modalities, the therapist is 
sharing observations about the way clients are interacting (their interpersonal process) 
rather than just the content of what they are discussing (e.g., Marital Counselor: You two 
are arguing about who takes out the garbage, but I’m wondering if the argument is really 
about who has the power to make household decisions or tell the other what to do. What 
do you two think – would it be helpful to talk about that more directly?). As in individual 
therapy, process comments that describe the current interaction with the therapist, or 
what is transpiring between group members or family members, can be used to identify 
and change relational patterns.
The underlying assumption in all interpersonally oriented treatment approaches is 
that the therapeutic relationship will come to resemble other prototypic relationships 
in clients’ lives. Clients’ problems will emerge in the therapeutic relationship, especially 
if therapists track the process dimension and attend to how their on-going interaction 
together could be similar to and reenacting, or different from and reparative, what the 
client has experienced in other important relationships. If therapists are willing to make 
process comments and work with clients’ problems in the immediacy of the therapeutic 
relationship, they can offer clients a genuinely meaningful, real-life experience of trust, 
empowerment, and change.
CHAPTER EXERCISE
Imagine you had a situation where someone you trusted and cared about was going to 
give you feedback that would be difficult to hear but was intended to help you. How 
would you like this benevolent person to bring up and talk with you about that feedback? 
What could that person do that would both make it easier, and more difficult, for you to 
be able to consider and discuss it non-defensively? 
SUGGESTED READING
We suggest that straight talk and immediacy interventions facilitate more helpful 
relationships, and invite trainees to read further on this topic (See Clara Hill’s (2014) 
Helping Skills, chapter 14). Simultaneously, we encourage clients and therapists to develop 
self-compassion for the struggles and challenges they face on this journey toward self-
awareness and change. See Kristin Neff, Self-compassion, (New York: HarperCollins, 2011). 
Visit CengageBrain.com for a variety of study tools and useful resources such as interactive 
exercises, flashcards, and quizzes.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

333
CHAPTER 10
Working-Through and 
T ermination
CONCEPTUAL OVERVIEW
Working-through and Termination are two distinct phases of treatment. As clients con -
tinue to change dysfunctional patterns with the therapist and find that familiar but 
problematic scenarios do not reoccur in this relationship, they begin to generalize this 
experience of change beyond the therapy setting. Based on the experience that emotional 
needs can be met and conflicts can be resolved in the therapeutic relationship, clients 
begin to explore how they can make the same types of changes in other relationships 
as well. This working-through phase of treatment is an exciting period of growth and 
change as clients try out with others the emotional relearning that has occurred with the 
therapist. As progress is consolidated in this stage, treatment evolves to a natural close.
Next and finally, the termination phase provides an opportunity to re-experience and 
further resolve conflicts, internalize the helping relationship the client has had with the 
therapist, and successfully end treatment. Although termination is considered an ending, 
it is in reality a transitional phase to clients’ next stage of development. It ends the treat-
ment phase where therapist and client have worked together to address the clients’ pre -
senting problems; it also signals the next stage of life where clients feel more contained 
and better able to manage life with more balance and flexibility. This also includes know-
ing and feeling comfortable with asking for help, should that become needed.
THE COURSE OF CLIENT CHANGE: AN OVERVIEW
New therapists usually lack a conceptual overview of how client change comes about. 
Often, because they have not worked with many clients or may not have experienced their 
own successful therapy, student therapists do not have a sense of the ordered sequence in 
which change typically occurs. We begin this section on working-through by providing an 
overview of the change process. We will describe when and how clients tend to resolve 
their presenting problems and adopt new, more adaptive responses with others. 
For some clients, change begins as soon as they decide to enter treatment. These cli -
ents are in the committed, or action, stage of the change process (Prochaska & Norcross, 
2006). They recognize that a problem exists and are no longer going to deny or avoid their 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

334  CHAPTER 10
problem. Furthermore, they are now ready to devote time and energy to addressing the 
problem(s). These clients, by entering treatment, are also acknowledging that they cannot 
resolve their problems alone and need help. Some clients recognize that their resolution 
to seek help is a healthy step forward, and they feel good about making this decision. 
Sadly, others may experience it as a failure, as evidence of their inadequacy, disloyalty to 
their family, or as a violation of their cultural values and beliefs. When clients can allow 
themselves to feel good about the decision to seek help, or when therapists can help cli -
ents reframe their need for help so they can have more self-empathy and self-compassion 
(Neff, 2011), some initial relief of symptoms— such as anxiety or depression— may result. 
This internal commitment to seek help is a crucial first step. Change is less likely to occur 
if clients enter treatment because someone else is telling them to. For example, Therapist 
in the initial intake:
THERAPIST:
 OK, that’s what your wife thinks you should do. But I would like to hear what you 
want to work on in therapy
—
 what you want to change, what is causing you trouble?
Some changes in feelings and behavior may also occur during clients’ initial sessions 
with the therapist. Clients are reassured when the therapist:
 /uni25CFinvites them to express their concerns directly and fully;
 /uni25CFlistens intently with respect and empathy for their distress;
 /uni25CFis able to enter their subjective worldview and grasp the core meaning that these 
concerns hold for them;
 /uni25CFworks collaboratively with clients on clarifying what’s wrong and needs to change in 
a way that yields hope;
 /uni25CFhelps them feel connected to a caring other; and
 /uni25CFdemonstrates a practical ability to help solve at least some small part of clients’ 
immediate problem or symptom (e.g., by providing practical information about 
discipline/child-rearing, teaching relaxation techniques for anxiety, identifying 
thought processes or behavior patterns that are maladaptive, role-playing new 
behaviors that will help with an upcoming situation).
Consider the following case example:
Ella, a 20-year-old African-American student at a community college, came to the initial 
session saying she wanted to know how to help her depressed cousin who was isolating 
himself from others. As the intake progressed, Ella repeated, “He doesn’t really know what 
a hard time really means.” Taking the cue and responding to this point of entry, the thera-
pist gently asked, “What has been hard at times for you, Ella?” She began to tear and ex-
plained that she and her older sister had been repeatedly ridiculed and “shoved around” by 
their stepfather. Neither she nor her sister had ever told anyone or even talked to each other 
about it except to acknowledge to each other minimally what was happening at the time. 
As soon as they were able to work and could afford an apartment, however, they moved 
out of the family home together.
THERAPIST:
 You told no one….Did your mother or biological father know you were being 
mistreated?
ELLA:
 I don’t know...
(tears become sobs)
.
..
I think maybe...
THERAPIST:
 You’re not quite sure.
...
Do you think they didn’t know?
ELLA:
 My dad wasn’t in the picture by then. He was gone. I didn’t tell my mom, though, even 
though I think she knew. I wanted to protect her from really knowing.
THERAPIST:
 You didn’t tell her because you wanted to protect her...you didn’t want her to 
reall
y know?
reall
y know?
reall
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGHROUGHR H AND TERMINATION  335
ELLA:
 Yes, I wanted her to be safe...safe from really knowing...keep her protected, you know.
THERAPIST:
 You wanted to protect her from having to deal with all of this, and maybe that left 
you feeling alone and needing someone to protect you and keep you safe? Ella, this is difficult 
to think about....I’m glad you are bringing me in on this
—
 you’ve been alone with it for so 
long. What’s been the hardest part?
ELLA:
 She knew, I know my mother knew. She had to hear it, and see the bruises we had. I just 
didn’t want to make her feel badly because if I was to say, “Ma, can’t you see what he’s doing to 
us?” what could she do? Besides, if I did say anything to her, she’d have to choose, us or him.
THERAPIST:
 You’re saying she didn’t want to hear about this physical abuse because it would 
disrupt her marriage, and that you think she might have chosen him over you and your sister? 
Am I getting that right?
ELLA:
 Yeah, I think she ignored what was going on for us just to keep her life easier. That’s proba-
bly been the hardest part. Even now, my sister won’t talk about any of it. He was one of those 
ragers, you know. It’s probably why both of us still feel scared all the time….
As clients find that the therapist can understand their experience and respond com -
passionately to them, a working alliance is established that also reduces anxiety and 
depression. Such validation and support do not resolve most clients’ conflicts but does 
engender hope and help to relieve their distress. Finding this Safe Haven in the therapeu -
tic relationship, clients are no longer alone in their problems — they have the benevolent 
ally they need who can see and understand what’s wrong. As we have emphasized, the 
essence of a secure attachment is that children are secure in the expectation that when 
they are distressed, the caregiver will see or register the distress and try to help them 
solve their problem  (a secure attachment has nothing to do with common misconcep -
tions about warmth, friendliness, being nice, or “bonding” through common interests and 
activities). The key, which is also our role as therapists, is to provide clients the sense of 
safety that they are no longer facing their problems alone— as with Ella. 
In the therapeutic relationship, needs, concerns, and fears can be shared, fully reg -
istered and understood, and empathically responded to. This then would be followed 
with helping clients discern who in their environment is also safe to share their con -
cerns with— and who isn’t. This process of providing clients with a Safe Haven to bring 
their emotional needs and struggles to is also accompanied by actively listening for and 
encouraging their own voice— to clarify and claim what they like, believe in, and choose. 
The therapist’s task goes beyond empathic attunement and also includes a Secure Base - 
respectfully challenging clients’ faulty schemas and beliefs about how relationships must 
and always will be (Bernier & Dozier, 2002; Bowlby, 1988; Dozier & Tyrrell, 1998). 
Here the client is encouraged and supported in developing a differentiated sense of self. 
This does not mean disconnection from others; rather, it refers to connection to a coher -
ent, reflective, and integrated inner voice that is the foundation for self-efficacy and self-
agency. Taken together, these interventions form the bedrock of therapeutic effectiveness 
for therapists working within most theoretical orientations and treatment modalities.
Change occurs as clients experience the therapist as a “go-to” person when in need 
and a source of support in exploration. The next phase where changes are observed is 
when the therapist succeeds in focusing clients inward on their own thoughts, feelings, 
and response patterns and away from their preoccupation with the problematic behavior 
of others. This seismic shift occurs as clients explore their own internal and interpersonal 
reactions, begin to recognize how their behavior contributes to an interpersonal conflict, 
and realize they may be able to change their own part in the unwanted, problematic prochange their own part in the unwanted, problematic prochange their own part -
totypic interactions that keep occurring. Adopting an internal focus for change is also 
an important way to identify maladaptive schemas and reframe how clients think about 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

336  CHAPTER 10
their problems (Levenson, 2010). Redefining the conflict with the other person as, in part, 
an internal problem usually reveals a wider array of new and more adaptive alternatives 
that clients can begin to try out with others.
When the client experiences the therapeutic relationship as different and finds that 
familiar but unwanted expectations are not confirmed, the door to change opens with 
others in two major ways and we enter the working-through phase of treatment. First, the 
therapist begins in earnest to assist the client to actively transfer the client’s here-and-now 
relearning to other relationships, as in the following exchange:
THERAPIST:
 Good, it’s getting clear between us that I’m really not judging or criticizing you. 
How is this going with others in your life?
CLIENT:
 I’m not sure what you mean.
THERAPIST:
 Who consistently does this to you? And who in your life doesn’t?
CLIENT:
 (chuckles)
 The list of doers and non-doers. Well, my dad is definitely at the top of that 
list of doers, and I’m thankful to say that my boyfriend is a non-doer.
Second, under their own initiative, many clients will come back to the next session, 
following a CEE with the therapist, and share successes and failures in their attempts to 
relate in this new way with others in their life. For example:
CLIENT:
 I tried speaking up with my girlfriend this week, you know, like I did with you.. It felt 
good—she listened to me this time. She said it was because I was talking about “our prob-
lems” and not just “her problem”.
 At this point in the change process, the therapist often acts as a “coach” to help 
clients deal with the positive and negative responses of others to their new ways of relat -
ing. Through behavioral rehearsal or role-playing, and direct guidance or teaching, the 
therapist helps clients transfer the new ways of interacting that have occurred with the 
therapist to others in their lives, as with the following statement:
THERAPIST:
 I can see how she might have appreciated you speaking to her differently, not blam-
ing. Using those “I” statements we talked about really are different than starting a sensitive 
conversation with “You…”
With this overview of the sequence of change in mind, let’s now enter the working-
through phase of therapy more closely, and explore how the changes that occur with the 
therapist can be generalized to others.
WORKING-THROUGH
T/h.sc/e.sc W/o.sc/r.sc/k.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc-T/h.sc/r.sc/o.sc/u.sc/g.sc/h.sc P/r.sc/o.sc/c.sc/e.sc/s.sc/s.sc
When clients change, it usually begins in the therapeutic relationship. Some clients, espe -
cially those who generally function well, can successfully adopt new behavior with just 
the therapist’s validation and support, enhanced perspective taking, and education/skill 
training. When the new behavior is integrally linked to their core conflict, however, most 
clients will need to practice this new response in the therapeutic relationship. Thus, thera-
pists will need to encourage clients to try out new ways of responding with them in the 
therapy setting and check out with clients if they have slotted the therapist’s response into 
old schemas and the problematic ways that clients have grown to expect from others. It 
is crucial that therapists convey verbally and enact behaviorally their support of their cli-
ents’ new behavioral repertoire, and that clients register that this new response does not 
fit the old template. Therapists can anticipate that their clients will soon test them and 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGHROUGHR H AND TERMINATION  337
try out these anxiety-arousing new responses (e.g., by being more assertive or disagree -
ing with the therapist). If therapists pass the clients’ test— respond affirmingly to the new 
behavior, rather than unwittingly repeat unwanted but familiar responses — then clients 
have the real-life experience that change can occur.
This CEE is the linchpin in clients’ reworking of their inflexible interpersonal cop -
ing strategies, rigid schemas, and dysfunctional internal working models. As previously 
observed, one corrective episode with the therapist is not usually sufficient to effect 
sustained change. Most clients will need to reenact this and other reparative relational 
themes multiple times in the therapeutic relationship. As a rule of thumb, the more clients 
have been hurt or maltreated, the more often they will need to re-experience a new and 
safer response that doesn’t fit the old schema or template. However, once clients have 
seen that at least one relationship can be different, therapists can actively engage clients in 
generalizing this new experience of change beyond the treatment setting . Thus, working-
through is not about gaining insight or exploring the past— it is about linking the changes 
that have occurred with the therapist to changes with significant others in their current 
lives. Typically— but by no means always — clients try out new ways of responding with 
others in the following progression.
Change often occurs first in clients’ relationships with the therapist— especially if the 
therapist is working actively with “you and me” and asking about and sorting through 
what’s going on this relationship. Clients then change with acquaintances they do not 
know well or with others who are not especially important to them— i.e., where the stakes 
are not so high if things go poorly. This is often followed by change with supportive oth-
ers who are important to the client, such as caring friends, teachers, or mentors. Some 
clients will become interested in trying to change old response patterns with the develop -
mental figures with whom the conflicts originally arose, such as caregivers and important 
family members. In contrast, other clients will want to explore potential changes in their 
internal reactions and behavioral responses to primary others with whom the conflict is 
currently being lived out, such as spouses or children, and subsequently transition to for-currently being lived out, such as spouses or children, and subsequently transition to for-currently being lived out, such as spouses or children, and subsequently transition to for
mative issues with developmental figures. These final two arenas are the most challeng -
ing because the consequences have so much greater import. Although this may co-occur 
to some extent for many clients, as a rule of thumb, clients generally will try to make 
changes first in the interpersonal sphere that feels safest or most likely to succeed.
During the working-through stage of therapy, some clients will rapidly assimilate the 
new ways of responding and readily apply them throughout their lives. Other clients, who 
have more pervasive conflicts or who have been traumatized or deprived more severely, 
will work through their problems more slowly (i.e., less capacity for trust to use the thera-
pist as a Safe Haven or a Secure Base). An example would include adult clients with a 
Fearful attachment style, who have experienced overt rejection from a parent, or grew up 
in families where familial rules prohibited talking about or making overt mistreatment 
that was occurring. Others who have been deeply “un-done” by pervasive invalidation 
of their experience (and been left anxiously unsure of the validity of their own thoughts, 
feelings, and perceptions), will need to confront and address the same fears and expecta -
tions repeatedly. The therapist’s aim is to clarify how the same relational pattern, affective 
theme, or faulty belief is being played out in this particular situation too, and help clients 
find a better way to respond to this manifestation or exemplar of their core conflict. In this 
regard, the core conflict will be repeatedly expressed in four areas of client functioning:
 /uni25CFIn the current interaction or interpersonal process that is transpiring with the therapist;
 /uni25CFWhen reviewing crisis events in clients’ lives or the crisis events that originally 
prompted clients to seek treatment;
 /uni25CFIn current relationships with friends and significant others in which clients’  
emotional problems are being activated;
 /uni25CFIn developmental relationships with attachment figures.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

338  CHAPTER 10
For many clients, their attachment style and history will have an impact on this 
working-through phase. For example, clients with secure attachments are better able to 
risk exploring their issues in more depth, address and sort through real conflict with 
therapists, and better use therapists as a Secure Base from whom to effectively “launch” 
(Mallinckrodt et al., 2005; 2014; Romano et al., 2008). That is, they are able to be emo-
tionally close to their therapists and are also able to transfer what they have learned in 
their relationship with the therapist to relationships outside the therapy setting. 
In contrast, clients who have preoccupied attachment styles, while able to go to their 
therapists to express their distress and needs, are anxious that the therapist will not be 
consistently available and that their needs will not be met. They often talk about their 
problems in diffuse, overwhelming terms, or in a global or superficial manner. Coupled 
with their inability to trust others, it is difficult for these clients to accept and internalize 
therapists’ ability to sustain a dependable and benevolent responsiveness toward them 
and so they have difficulty developing a sustained, coherent sense of self. Thus, working-
through—which requires becoming more reflective and considering different perspectives, 
exploring new ways of being with others (based on real rather than magnified needs), and 
discerning more selectively with whom to disclose and trust—will be a significant chal -
lenge for these clients. 
Unlike clients who have a preoccupied attachment style, those who have a dismissing 
style are likely to have difficulty recognizing and disclosing their needs, and engaging emo-
tionally with the therapist. As we have seen, these clients are especially apprehensive about 
intimacy and vulnerability. The relational message they convey, overtly and nonverbally, is 
that they need no one and can manage on their own. One of the primary tasks here is to help 
these clients find that “being-in-relationship” does not inevitably hold the threats of intru-
sive control from others, or insensitivity or indifference to their distress when it does emerge. 
The other task is to help these clients see that disclosing needs and asking for help some -
times is separate from “weakness.” Dismissive clients fail to see that realistically assessing 
strengths and needs and asking for help when appropriate is a healthy and natural process. 
Thus, the best way to help both Preoccupied and Dismissive clients become more 
capable of sustained intimate relationships is to help them have a meaningful relationship 
with their therapists—one that is safe or reparative because it isn’t overwhelming or dis -
tant. Only then, as they are having the real-life experience that the unwanted responses 
they expected are not occurring in this relationship, can these clients begin to translate this 
reparative experience to relationships outside the therapy room where they repeatedly have 
been hurt in these familiar ways. This resolving process, or earned security, is a healthy sign 
of emotional well-being and it facilitates improved functioning in many ways (Farber & 
Metzger, 2009; Mallinckrodt et al., 2005; 2014; Townsend & McWhirter, 2005).
In terms of the treatment process, many therapists find that the working-through 
phase is one of the most rewarding phases of treatment. Therapists have the opportunity 
to take pleasure in clients’ newly obtained efficacy and celebrate with them as they suc -
cessfully adopt new responses in progressively more challenging situations. During this 
stage, as change occurs, therapists can also become more actively involved in answering 
direct questions and in providing suggestions and information to help clients enact new 
behavior or solve problems. For example:
THERAPIST:
 Maybe you could try saying something like this to her...
Therapists also can provide more interpersonal feedback about how clients come 
across to the therapist and others (Brammer & MacDonald, 1996). For example:
THERAPIST:
 Hey, that wasn’t that “small voice” we’ve been talking about. You sounded strong 
and clear as you said that to me—it held real conviction. It’s great to see you like this. Have 
you been acting stronger like this with others, too?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGHROUGHR H AND TERMINATION  339
Therapists often find that cognitive interventions and behavioral procedures for 
rehearsing alternative responses are especially helpful during this phase. Once the inter -
personal process is enacting a corrective experience, clients become more responsive to 
other types of intervention, such as assertiveness training and parenting education, self-
monitoring and self-instructional training, role-playing and other modeling techniques, 
and educational inputs or readings (Gold, 2011, 2005; Goldfried & Davila, 2005). The 
nature of the therapeutic relationship also changes during this period. As clients improve 
through the working-through period, they will increasingly perceive the therapist in more 
realistic terms. Once the transference projections and eliciting maneuvers have been 
jointly identified and are being resolved, therapists can disclose more personal infor -
mation to clients and enjoy further mutuality. However, therapists are still prepared to 
respond to the reenactments, faulty beliefs, maladaptive coping patterns, and resistance 
that clients will continue to present, especially when distressed.
As clients live out and continue to experience a different and corrective relationship 
with their therapist, they will find that new ways of relating with others in their lives are 
possible. This is a critical juncture in treatment. Now, the therapist’s task becomes help-
ing clients anticipate and negotiate the successes and failures that are likely to follow . As 
rigid schemas and IWMs expand, clients need to be informed that, although some indi -
viduals will respond positively to the clients’ new changes, others will not. It certainly will 
be empowering when some people respond affirmingly to clients’ healthy new behavior. 
However, therapists must also help clients discern who is likely to respond poorly (e.g., 
when a client stops adopting a pervasive caretaking role and begins to say no sometimes). 
Therapists also need to help clients anticipate realistically how it will feel, and how they 
are likely to react, if the other person responds in the familiar, unwanted way to their 
healthier new behavior. This is especially important in primary relationships with spouses 
and parents, where it can be so deeply discouraging when clients, yet again, receive the 
same unwanted but familiar responses. To illustrate, consider the following statement:
THERAPIST:
 It’s great that your husband has been able to listen to you better, and take your 
concerns more seriously now that you are expressing them more directly. But I’m wondering 
how this will go with your mother when she visit this coming three-day weekend. What if you 
speak up more strongly for yourself with her, as you have been doing with me and others, 
but she keeps turning everything back around to her needs, what she wants, and what you 
“should” do? Let’s think this through before you see her.
Therapists can help clients anticipate potential disappointments, which are an inevi -
table part of the working-through and change process. As clients find that they can safely 
respond in new ways with the therapist, and then make successful changes with certain 
supportive individuals in their current lives , their expectations of change in some other 
relationships may become unrealistically high. For example, suppose an adult survivor of 
childhood abuse has been deeply understood and validated by an effective therapist. Fol-
lowing this success with the therapist, the client risks disclosing this shame-laden secret to 
her husband, and then to her best friend, and they both respond affirmingly as well. Next, 
the client’s lifelong wish that the abusing parent can now acknowledge the reality of what 
occurred long ago is evoked, or that the other parent, who could not be protective at the 
time, will now hear or believe the client.
 With expectations buoyed by successes with others, this client may address parents 
or other family members, only to encounter the same invalidation, scapegoating, and 
threats of ostracization that she received decades ago. Or, some clients may be profoundly 
discouraged to find that, unlike the therapist and some others in their lives, their part -
ner cannot change or respond positively to their healthy new behavior. Thus, in order to 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

340  CHAPTER 10
manage these disappointments that are an inevitable part of the change process, thera -
pists can prepare clients in the following ways:
1. By helping clients realistically anticipate how each new person is likely to respond to 
their changes. For example, if the client is a married woman, what will her husband 
probably say and do when she acts more assertively with him for the first time?
CLIENT:
 He’s likely to smile at me like I’m a cute child or something, and then just change the 
topic as if I didn’t even say anything;
OR
CLIENT:
 He’s likely to say, “You’ve gotten so selfish and stopped thinking about anybody else 
since you got that degree and started working.”
2. By helping clients spell out in detail how they are likely to feel, and what they are 
likely to say and do, if they receive a version of the old unwanted response to their 
healthier new behavior.
CLIENT:
 I think I’d feel ashamed. You know, feel stupid for trying to stand up for myself. And 
then just get quiet and withdraw inside
—
 and go along again like I’ve always done;
OR
CLIENT:
 I’d feel anxious and keep trying to convince him to understand how I feel but, you 
know, then I’ll just give up and go get a glass of wine
—
 or maybe two or three.
3. By role-playing and providing new, more adaptive responses that, after rehearsing 
in therapy, clients can use at this discouraging moment, instead of repeating what 
they have usually done in such circumstances in the past. Recalling the concept of 
“change from the inside out,” the key concept is trying to help clients change their 
own response in problematic interactions, rather than focusing on the often futile at-
tempt to get others to respond in new or better ways. For example:
CLIENT:
 I’m trying to help our marriage and tell you something important right now, but you’re 
not taking me seriously. I don’t like feeling dismissed like this. Are you willing to take this 
more seriously or should we just stop this conversation now?
OR
CLIENT:
 I’m trying to tell you something about me, but you keep making this conversation about 
you. Would you just listen and hear me out first, and then I will listen to whatever you want 
to say next. Let’s make it so we can both feel heard. 
Clients will continue to have experiences with others that reenact hurtful old sce -
narios and confirm their pathogenic beliefs. However, by helping clients walk through 
these same three steps throughout the working-through stage, therapists can help them 
find ways of changing their own internal and interpersonal responses — even when oth -
ers are unable to change . For example, clients can learn that they are not to blame for, 
or deserving of, the way they were mistreated — even though family members still cannot 
affirm them. Or, maybe a married woman who’s been belittled by her husband can learn 
that she can still advocate for herself. Although her husband might not be able to change, 
she does not have to go along or comply with his dismissal in the same disempowered 
way she has in the past; she can establish new relationships with others where her limits 
or opinions can be respected. In this process, clients become less anxious and depressed 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGHROUGHR H AND TERMINATION  341
and are empowered as they learn that they can change their own responses, even when 
significant others in their lives are not supportive.
Through each setback with a significant other, therapists and clients both gain fur -
ther awareness of clients’ habitual response patterns, deeper access to the painful feelings 
and faulty assumptions that accompany them, and have more opportunities to continue 
exploring new responses that clients might try out the next time they are in that situation. 
Therapists can explore each successive step with clients by saying:
 /uni25CFWhat were you thinking and feeling inside when he dismissed you like that?
 /uni25CFTell me what you did when he said that to you.
 /uni25CFWhat would you like to be able to say to him instead the next time this comes up?
 /uni25CFWould you like to role-play that together and try it out to see how it might go?
Although clients are improving during the working-through period, they will still be 
struggling with their core conflicts, especially when they feel vulnerable or distressed. 
Therapists will need to continue helping them to work through the distortions, faulty 
expectations and nonproductive response patterns that stem from their old schemas 
and IWMs. In addition, most clients will become discouraged at times by the repetitious 
working-through process. Seeing that a variation of the same old conflict or scenario 
is confronting them again, clients may lament that “nothing has changed” and feel it is 
futile to keep trying. Therapists can make no guarantees of change, of course, and cannot 
assume responsibility for clients’ motivation to continue. At these critical junctures, how-
ever, therapists want to reach out and extend themselves to their clients. Only as student 
therapists incrementally develop a new worldview and increasingly grasp the profound 
influence of early maladaptive schemas in shaping the subjective experience of “reality” 
can they be empathic with clients’ discouragement. Although clients may realize it intel -
lectually, experientially it really does seem to them as if this is the only way that relation-
ships can be:
C
LIENT
:
 Why do I 
always
 have to be the responsible one who takes care of everything!
Therapists help clients by holding steadfast that there can be another another way - 
that some some relationships can be different. Therapists can help clients identify 
instances where other (reparative) ways have occurred, affirm their appreciation of how 
frustrated or discouraged clients may be feeling right now, and convey that they remain 
committed to working together with clients to find a better way. It is therapists’ resolve 
to effect change in the relationship with the client, and their personal commitment to 
helping this client change with others, that pulls the client through these expectable crisis 
points in the working-through phase. And crucially, it is therapists’ ability to continue 
interacting with the client in reparative ways that provide hope that some relationships 
can be different and change can occur. In providing these CEEs, therapists provide clients 
with a safe person that can help them fundamentally reorganize how they see themselves 
and others, and meaningfully integrate their thoughts and feelings into a more secure and 
cohesive self (Elliott et al., 2004; Pos et al., 2003).
As an illustration of the working-through phase, we now consider an extended case 
example in which the client changes first in her relationship with the therapist and then, 
with the therapist’s assistance, is able to extend that change to other relationships in her 
life. The episode in which client change first emerges — the critical incident —critical incident —critical incident may be an 
overt, interpersonal conflict with the therapist or a compelling, transference-laden misun-
derstanding. More likely, however, as in this case study, it is a subtle aspect of the interac-
tion with the therapist that could easily go unnoticed unless the therapist, informed by 
working hypotheses, has been prepared to look for this relational theme or pattern.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

342  CHAPTER 10
Tracy, a 26-year-old, moving-toward client habitually responded to others in a compliant, 
pleasing manner. She usually went along with others, acting as if her wishes and feelings 
didn’t matter. Tracy told her therapist that she didn’t believe that others would be very in-
terested in listening to her or doing what she wanted to do— she long had felt that either 
she had to “go along or be alone.” Collaboratively, they had linked Tracy’s compliant be-
havior to her dysthymia, especially her presenting symptom of crying spells, and went on 
to explore Tracy’s low self-esteem and feelings of worthlessness. In addition, the therapist 
actively encouraged Tracy to respond differently in their relationship. The therapist 
behaviorally demonstrated that she cared about what Tracy had to say and invited her to 
express her own opinions in counseling—express her own opinions in counseling—express her own opinions in counseling even if that meant disagreeing with the therapist. 
During their next session, Tracy tested to see whether the therapist meant what she said and 
risked this significant new behavior in the therapeutic relationship:
TRACY:
 You’re right. I guess I never have felt very good about myself.
THERAPIST:
 From other things you’ve said, it seems to me that your mother just wasn’t there for 
you as a child. You didn’t get the support you needed from her. Maybe we should explore that 
further.
TRACY:
 No, I don’t really want to talk about her. I remember her more fondly. My father is the 
one who was pretty harsh.
THERAPIST:
 (exclaiming happily)
 You just said “no”, you don’t want to talk about your mother 
and that I was wrong about her!
TRACY:
 I’m sorry; sure, we can talk about her. What do you want to know?
THERAPIST:
 You just disagreed with me! You just told me you didn’t want to do what I wanted 
to do and suggested what you thought would be better. That’s great!
TRACY:
 What?
THERAPIST:
 You just did what we have been talking about. You expressed your own opinion, 
said what you thought, and disagreed with me. I am so happy for you!
TRACY:
 Aren’t you put off by that? Didn’t I seem disrespectful?
THERAPIST:
 Oh, no, we can disagree and still be close. That was a strong thing you just did.
TRACY:
 So.
..
I guess what you’re saying is that maybe it is OK for me to say what I think 
sometimes?
THERAPIST:
 Sure it is! I care about what you think. I want to know what you feel, and I want to 
do things your way, too.
TRACY
 (tearing)
TRACY
 (tearing)
TRACY
 :
 But you’re safe. It’s easier to do that with you—you’re not like other people.
THERAPIST:
 OK, I am “safe,” and it is easier to do things like that with me than with other 
people. But you have changed to be able to do that with me; you’ve grown. You couldn’t do 
that before, you know.
TRACY:
 Yeah, that’s right.
THERAPIST:
 And if you can value yourself enough to express what you think in here with me, 
then you can begin to do that out there with certain others as well.
TRACY:
 You really think so?
THERAPIST:
 Yes, I think you can. If you can do it with me, you can do it with some of them.
TRACY:
 Oh, I would love to be able to do this with my boyfriend.
THERAPIST:
 Tell me how this usually plays out with your boyfriend.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGHROUGHR H AND TERMINATION  343
TRACY:
 (describes the usual scenario)
THERAPIST:
 OK, what do you want to be able to say to him instead?
TRACY:
 (describes an alternative scenario)
THERAPIST:
 Would it be helpful to you if we role-play that together? You can be him
—
 and say 
the things that he’s likely to say that will be hard for you to deal with. And I’ll take your part 
and role-play ways you might want to respond to him. Then we can talk through together 
what might work for you and what wouldn’t
—
 where the problems might develop if you 
decide to try some of that with him.
Why is the therapist so enthusiastic about such a seemingly small change? Is this 
single manifestation of a new behavior all that is necessary for Tracy to resolve her prob-
lems? No, but this highly significant event brings her to the working-through phase of 
treatment. Within the safe orbit of the therapeutic relationship, Tracy was able to try 
out a new behavior that taps into the most significant issue in her life and that arouses 
intense anxiety. For Tracy, adopting such a seemingly insignificant self-assertive behavior 
arouses lifelong feelings of worthlessness. At the same time, she is discarding the primary 
means she has developed to protect herself from these painful feelings — that is, to “move 
toward” and go along with others. In order to resolve her painful conflict, Tracy will have 
to experience the following sequence repeatedly:
1. Her old relational pattern is activated—Her old relational pattern is activated—Her old relational pattern is activated she has to “go along” and act as if every-
thing is OK even when things are painfully wrong.
2. She tries out a new and more adaptive response with the therapist, which is to assert 
her own preference.
3. She receives a different and more satisfying response from the therapist, She receives a different and more satisfying response from the therapist, She receives a different and more satisfying response from the therapist who affirms 
Tracy’s initiative.
4. She generalizes the new behavior to others beyond the therapy setting by considering 
how she typically behaves with significant others in her life and, specifically, what 
she might want to say and do instead the next time she is in this situation with her 
boyfriend. This repetitious reworking of the new behavior and the old conflict is 
typical of the working-through phase.
The following week, Tracy was able to initiate the same type of assertive behavior 
with her boyfriend for the first time. This successful experience, in turn, encouraged her 
to confront the same issue in another more threatening relationship — with her father. 
During the next session, the following exchange took place:
TRACY:
 (beaming)
 Guess what? I did it! I’ve been dying to tell you all week!
THERAPIST:
 (enthusiastically)
 Ha! What did you do?
TRACY:
 I did what we talked about with my boyfriend. He was talking about something he 
thought we should do, and I disagreed with him—just like we role-played, and told him what 
I thought we should do instead. It felt great, and I don’t think he minded, either.
THERAPIST:
 Good for you! You’re on your way.
TRACY:
 I can’t believe how easy it was. 
(pause)
 I wish it could be that easy with my father. He’s 
always putting me down when I say something.
THERAPIST:
 Maybe you’re ready to start changing your relationship with your father as well. 
How do you respond to him when he puts you down?
TRACY:
 I get real quiet when he does that. I feel like crying, but I don’t. I wish I could just tell 
him that I don’t like it and I want him to stop.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

344  CHAPTER 10
THERAPIST:
 Yeah, speaking up at the time he does that and setting limits with him would cer
-
tainly change your relationship. It would be saying to him
—
 and to yourself
—
and to yourself
—
and to yourself
 that you value 
who you are and what you have to say, and you’re not going to “go along” and let him hurt 
you like that anymore.
TRACY:
 But I could never do that. I’d like to, but I just couldn’t.
THERAPIST:
 Yes, this sounds challenging. You haven’t been able to speak up with him in the 
past, but you have been changing in here with me, and now with your boyfriend, too. So 
maybe you can do something different with your father as well. What holds you back from 
setting limits with him? What are you most afraid of?
TRACY:
 He wouldn’t take me seriously; he’d just laugh at me.
THERAPIST:
 How would that make you feel?
TRACY:
 Worthless. 
(begins crying)
THERAPIST:
 So that’s where that awful feeling comes from.
TRACY:
 Yeah. 
(long pause)
 It makes me mad, too.
THERAPIST:
 Yes, that makes absolute sense. It hurts you very much when he diminishes and de-
means you like that, and you have every right to be angry.
TRACY:
 It’s not fair! I don’t want to let him do that anymore. It’s not good for me.
THERAPIST:
 That’s right, it’s not good for you, and you don’t deserve it. Right now, you are 
making the transition from feeling worthless to feeling worthy
—
 that you do matter. Now that 
you are seeing this so clearly, maybe you don’t have to go along with it the way you used to.
TRACY:
 But what could I do?
THERAPIST:
 Let’s think this through and explore some options together. What would you like to 
do the next time he does that?
TRACY:
 Well, maybe I could just tell him to stop it
—
 tell him that I don’t want to be treated like 
that anymore.
THERAPIST:
 Yes. That would be a strong and appropriate response on your part. But before you 
try it, let’s explore further how that conversation might play out. Maybe we can identify the 
trouble spots and role-play some responses to help you through them.
In ever-widening circles such as these, clients confront and work through the same rela -
tional patterns in the different spheres of their lives.
Notice that the critical incident in this case was very subtle: When the therapist sug -
gested that Tracy talk about her mother, Tracy said she didn’t want to. Therapists could 
easily miss such slight shifts in behavior unless they have formulated working hypotheses 
about how the client’s conflicts with others are likely to be reenactedin the therapeutic rela-
tionship. If Tracy’s therapist hadn’t anticipated that Tracy would tend to comply with her, 
and if the therapist hadn’t been alert for any budding sign of self-direction or assertiveness 
from Tracy, this particular opportunity for change would most likely have been lost. The 
therapist might have responded by focusing on the content (by saying, for example, “Well, 
ok, but I think it’s important to look at your relationship with your mother because...”), 
rather than on the process (Tracy’s self-assertion). In that case, Tracy would have complied 
with the therapist and dutifully talked about her relationship with her mother. Then, how-
ever, the interpersonal process between Tracy and her therapist would be repeating her 
problematic pattern, and little change with others in her everyday life would result.
When working with a client who seems unable to change, the therapist may even -
tually grow discouraged and become frustrated with, or disengaged from, the client. In 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGHROUGHR H AND TERMINATION  345
those circumstances, the therapist should consult with a supervisor and consider how 
their interpersonal process subtly may be reenacting the client’s maladaptive relational 
patterns. That would explain why the client to change, even though the therapist and 
client continue to talk about adopting more assertive behaviors with others, the thera -
pist sincerely supports and encourages this, and the client learns useful skills that should 
facilitate the new behavior. Such subtle reenactments along the process dimension are 
expectable. Further, if therapists utilize process notes (Appendix A) and generate working 
hypotheses (Appendix B), they can identify possibilities for how each particular client’s 
conflicts might be expressed or played out in the therapeutic relationship. They can then 
check these possibilities out with the client at opportune times. By considering potential 
issues and themes that may be especially important to listen and watch for with this client, 
such tentative working hypotheses will help therapists better recognize such reenactments
in the moment as they are occurring,and be prepared to respond more effectively to them.
In the working-through phase, the therapeutic action is primarily in the present. 
Many of the significant events that take place in treatment are current interactions with 
the therapist that disconfirm pathogenic beliefs and maladaptive schemas. As these repar-
ative interactions occur, they also lead to internal reworkings of clients’ schemas as new 
behavior comes into play (Akhtar, 2007). These cognitive changes are necessary to help 
clients assimilate and maintain these new and more effective ways of relating after treat -
ment ends. The process of experiencing a different response from the therapist, along 
with new ways of thinking about self and others, contributes meaningfully to affect self-
regulation Following these changes in clients’ relationship with the therapist, the next 
step is to generalize these corrective experiences and expand clients’ interpersonal range 
beyond the therapy setting as they now try out these new ways of thinking, feeling, and 
behaving with others. As we have seen, clients will have both successes and disappoint -
ments as some individuals will welcome clients’ changes, whereas others will insist on 
continuing along well-worn, problematic lines.
As clients explore the potential for change in current relationships and come to terms 
more realistically with the possibilities and limits of these relationships, two new sub -
phases in the working-through process may emerge. First, clients, on their own, often 
start to look back in time in order to understand the formative experiences that originally 
shaped the problems they now are resolving. To elucidate this process, we will examine 
therapeutic guidelines to help with this family-of-origin work. Second, as clients develop 
a more realistic narrative that helps them better make sense of their life experiences and 
how they have become who they are, they also begin to look ahead. They begin to think 
more about what they want their life to be in the future and to reformulate plans to fit 
the person they are becoming. This subphase, often ushered in by the emergence of the 
Dream, will be explored second.
F/a.sc/m.sc/i.sc/l.sc/y.sc-/o.sc/f.sc-O/r.sc/i.sc/g.sc/i.sc/n.sc W/o.sc/r.sc/k.sc
It can be liberating for clients to explore the familial interactions and developmental 
experiences that shaped their current conflicts. As they gain an understanding of the fam-
ily rules, roles, and childhood dilemmas that shaped how they learned to cope and adapt, 
they become more accepting of the choices, compromises, and “best effort” adaptations 
they have had to fashion in their lives (Russell & Fosha, 2008). During this time, thera -
pists can help clients feel more empathy for:
 /uni25CFthemselves and what they have endured or suffered,
 /uni25CFhow they have chosen to cope, and
 /uni25CFthe personal limitations or difficult life circumstances that led their caregivers to 
respond in the problematic ways they did.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

346  CHAPTER 10
Clearly, thinking about clients’ experiences within this developmental context can 
be profoundly enriching. In most cases, however, it is not productive for therapists to 
lead clients back in time, make historical interpretations, or try too readily to make links 
between current relational patterns and formative family relationships. Although these 
developmental connections may indeed be highly accurate, many clients will not find 
them helpful or relevant to their current problems if they come from the therapist. Per 
client response specificity, some clients may be able to utilize familial connections — and 
therapists can assess whether they are likely to be helpful for this particular client. How -
ever, many clients will not find these developmental links relevant to their current prob -
lems— especially early in treatment, and when they have not been jointly or collabora -
tively formulated, even though they may be quite accurate. For example:
THERAPIST:
 I keep hearing the same theme: that what you are complaining about with your 
spouse seems in some ways to be similar to what used to occur with your mother.
CLIENT:
 My mother? I don’t see what my mother has to do with this. She was pretty great, and 
my wife’s driving me crazy. Besides, she passed away almost 10 years ago, so I’m really not 
sure why we’re talking about my mother.
THERAPIST:
 Sure, what I’m suggesting doesn’t resonate for you—doesn’t ring true. So let’s get 
back to your thoughts. How do you make sense of what’s going on between you and your 
wife? You’ve been thinking about this a lot—how do you understand it?
Many clients will not be able to use this type of developmental connection to make prog-
ress in treatment. Although the familial suggestion may be apt, and at a later point in 
treatment it may shed some light on the scenario that’s recurring, it is often too far from 
their current experience to hold meaning for them. Instead, a more collaborative, mutual 
exploration of familial and developmental experiences may teach therapists (and clients) 
a great deal about the faulty schemas and coping strategies that clients originally learned, 
how these are shaping problems in current relationships, and the corrective experiences 
that clients need to find now in treatment with the therapist. Although this developmental 
understanding will not help some clients with their current problems, it does offer thera -
pists a great deal of help in generating working hypotheses about the themes and patterns 
that are likely to go on between them in their interpersonal process. Toward this differ-
ent purpose of assessment and formulating a treatment focus , for example, the therapist 
might ask: “What was it like to be a child growing up in your family?” or “Tell me about 
your parents’ marriage. Can you bring it to life for me?” To illustrate more fully: 
THERAPIST:
 Tell me how your parents responded, what they would say and do, when you were 
successful or felt proud of an accomplishment.
CLIENT:
 I’m not sure what you mean
—
 why are you asking about that now?
THERAPIST:
 I’m wondering if this depression didn’t start right after you got that promotion and 
pay raise? That possibility is what’s leading me to ask, “What was the look on your mother’s 
face when you showed her that spelling award years ago?”
CLIENT:
 (pensively) 
Well, I don’t think it was a very happy face. I don’t know why, but she 
almost seemed sort of sad or hurt.
THERAPIST:
 Uh-huh, your success seemed to hurt her in some way, maybe almost as if she might 
have felt it as a loss. But whatever caused her to respond that way, it sure would make it hard 
for a girl to feel good about her success experiences. How did your father respond when you 
told him about winning?
CLIENT:
 There was nothing subtle about that
—
 he didn’t like it and told me to stop bragging in 
front of my brother.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGHROUGHR H AND TERMINATION  347
Clearly, this client will need her therapist to take unambiguous pleasure in her suc -
cess experiences and personal strengths. Early in treatment, however, most clients will 
not be able to make meaningful bridges between current and past relationships from this 
developmental exploration. When the therapist highlights seemingly obvious connections, 
the relational patterns may not come alive for clients until they first have experienced a 
corrective response to these old relational patterns with the therapist. Here is the key: 
Following this corrective experience, many clients on their own will recall and initi -
ate leading the therapist back in time to the developmental experiences that originally 
shaped the current problem being discussed. These client-initiated explorations, which 
usually occur immediately after clients have a CEE with the therapist, or have successfully 
adopted a new response with others, continue throughout the working-through period. In 
this sequence, the explorations are not sterile interpretations or abstract concepts. Instead, 
they are enlivening for clients, feel salient and informative, and contribute to productive 
change with others.
Let’s pause and highlight the important sequence of change that is being clarified 
here. In contrast to many other counseling theories, the interpersonal process approach 
does not suggest that behavior change leads to insight or, conversely, that insight leads to 
behavior change. Both of these change processes certainly occur, but a different mecha -
nism of change is emphasized here. Both meaningful insight and sustainable behavior 
change follow or result from clients’ new or reparative experience with the therapist 
(Levenson, 2003; Wachtel, 2008; Weiss, 1993).
Addressing Family-of-Origin Issues with Primary Caregivers . As clients make 
their own meaningful links between formative and current relationships, which therapists 
can join in expanding and developing, clients often ask therapists what they should do about 
problems and patterns that are continuing in their current relationships with family mem-
bers and attachment figures. We now examine two broad guidelines to help clients with this 
family-of-origin work. First, recall the “internal focus for change” described in Chapter 4. 
We will again see how clients can learn to change how they respond in current problematic 
interactions with family members— rather than engage in futile attempts to try to get par-rather than engage in futile attempts to try to get par-rather than engage in futile attempts to try to get par
ents or others to be different and change how they have always responded. Second, we look 
at the concept of “grief work,” in which clients mourn and come to terms with what they 
have missed developmentally. Working in both of these areas results in an interpersonal and 
internal resolution of family dynamics that helps clients attain earned security.
Clients who struggle with more pervasive or long-standing problems usually have 
family-of-origin work to do. Many clients do not wish to discuss problems from the past 
with caregivers or family members, and therapists should not press clients to do so. How-
ever, other clients will want to acknowledge or address past conflicts with caregivers and 
other family members, as a way to stop current and ongoing participation in them or sim-
ply to better resolve them. It is deeply gratifying — and a powerful impetus for change —
when such rapprochements succeed.
 As we emphasize, however, such current resolutions of historical problems often do 
not work out or sustain over time. Sometimes caregivers have grown and changed over 
the years and can talk more openly or non-defensively for the first time about hurtful 
interactions that once occurred. However, in many cases, and especially with more seri -
ous problems or abuse, clients will often receive the same invalidating, guilt-inducing, or 
threatening responses as they did years ago in childhood . This is especially painful when 
clients’ motivation for talking with the attachment figure is the unrecognized wish to 
get the parental approval, validation for what did occur, or protection that they missed 
developmentally and have always longed to receive. If therapists have not realistically 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

348  CHAPTER 10
prepared clients for the possibility that this deep disappointment may well occur, clients prepared clients for the possibility that this deep disappointment may well occur, clients prepared
may despair and feel hopeless about change occurring in any relationship. Often, clients 
will be breaking unspoken but strongly held family rules against acknowledging that any 
family problems or that a certain specific conflict with a parent ever existed and, in many 
cases, punitive homeostatic mechanisms will be set in motion.
 For example, when Tracy did choose to speak up and set limits with her father when 
he put her down, he again disparaged her— just as he had for the past 25 years. As if that 
doesn’t make change difficult enough, look what happens next in the family system. Pres-
suring Tracy to just go along with this mistreatment as if nothing significant is occurring, 
her mother threatened to disown her for being so disrespectful and ungrateful, and the 
next day her depressed and obese sister telephoned from another city and tried to make her 
feel guilty for “hurting Daddy” and “stirring up trouble.” For clients like Tracy, change is 
not easy and problems are not simple. They are deeply embedded in a larger familial and 
cultural context that, sometimes, works actively and overtly against changes in treatment 
in order to maintain status quo in the family and keep clients in their same childhood role. 
As we see here, the problem is not simply the parent’s mistreatment of the child. If 
that occurs but the mistreatment can be “named” or spoken about in the family, the child 
has a problem but it is much easier to resolve. That is, it’s not just the content — (what 
happened), but the process — (how others responded to it) that shapes the meaning of 
what occurred. Instead, far more serious consequences — such as the shame-based sense 
of self, bulimia and long-standing dysthymia that Tracy suffered — result when either of 
the following occur: (1) the parent and extended family system make the adult offspring 
again feel responsible for, or deserving of, the parent’s original and current mistreatment; 
or (2) the child and the child’s experience are invalidated— as if everyone seems to be in 
agreement that nothing significant or problematic occurred (mystification).
Clients often feel hopeless and blame themselves when parental caregivers and the 
broader family system cannot change, especially if therapists haven’t prepared them for 
this possibility. Although these clients may go on to act helpless in other current relation-
ships, in actuality they are not. Their resolution does not rest on getting the parent/family 
to change or acknowledge realistically what occurred. Instead, it rests on how clients 
change their own behavior and how they now respond in current interactions with living 
parents or, equally important, in their ongoing internal relationship with deceased care -
givers. In order for clients to make enduring changes in these formative relational con -
flicts, they can change their own responses in these prototypical interactions—regardless 
of how others continue to respond. For example, Tracy’s father was too limited to be able 
to hear her concern and talk with her about the problem. However, Tracy stopped going 
along with or participating in her father’s disparagement of her. Instead, she was able to 
change how she responded to him, and began setting limits with her father by bravely 
metacommunicating with him, as in the following example:
TRACY:
 I keep asking you to stop it when you put me down, and you laugh at me and keep 
doing it. I can’t make you stop, but I don’t have to pretend it’s OK anymore. It hurts, and 
I/uni00A0don’t like it.
Although her father stayed in the same disparaging mode and again made fun of her, 
things did change profoundly for Tracy when she changed how she responded to him in 
their current interaction. As she was able to sustain this stronger stance toward him and 
the family system over the next few months, she felt less insecure and intimidated with 
them—and with others in her everyday life, than she had ever been. Her long-standing 
feelings of worthlessness and depression significantly improved, and her intermittent bat-
tles with bulimia largely disappeared. These far-reaching changes occurred for Tracy even 
though her father— as well as her mother and sister who pressured her to comply and “go 
along” again— could not change.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGHROUGHR H AND TERMINATION  349
Grieving for the Caretaking They Needed but Did Not Receive. As they work 
through family-of-origin issues, clients make further progress by changing how they re -
spond in current interactions with significant others in their lives. Clients also change by 
doing grief work— coming to terms with the feelings left in them by hurtful or emotion -
ally depriving caregiver-child interactions. Clients do not need to discuss with caregivers 
problems in historical relationships. However, they do need to:
1. stop disavowing and acknowledge to themselves what was legitimately wrong;
2. stop their own participation in any ongoing or current mistreatment; and
3. grieve for the support, protection, or validation they wanted but have missed.
That is, they have to grieve the loss of the “wished for” caregiver. Many adult clients 
struggle mightily with highly ambivalent relationships with their painfully inconsistent 
caregivers. Often it is especially important to help them become aware that sometimes the 
unrealistic feeling of hope for their idealized parent can emerge when they glimpse brief 
episodes of kindness in their caregiver that regularly occur, yet the caregiver cannot sus-
tain this benevolent responsiveness and soon returns to the usual stance of being largely 
self-centered, overtly favoring a sibling, undermining independence or success, respond -
ing contemptuously, and so forth. Helping clients be realistic in their appraisals, provid -
ing support in their grief, and changing their own current responses to their caregivers’ 
predictable behavior helps clients sustain emotional stability in the face of hurtful familial 
interactions. Thus, regardless of whether formative attachment figures can change — and 
whether they are living or deceased — clients can resolve these problems through their 
own internal work.
Exploring the potential for better relationships with family members is often impor -
tant but, as we are emphasizing, it may or may not lead to improved relations. Often, 
aging caregivers and other family members cannot change, so therapists need to prepare 
adult clients that when they introduce healthier new behavior into their family systems it 
will often be met with significant resistance. Even if the family system has improved over 
time, however, grown offspring will still function better in current relationships when 
they can more realistically acknowledge what was wrong (and what was right) in the past 
and mourn what they missed developmentally - moving-toward earned security. Recalling 
Safe Haven, the therapist’s intention is to provide a supportive holding environment that 
allows clients to come to terms with the sadness, anger, shame, and other feelings that 
were too threatening or unacceptable to contain on their own before.
 However, to succeed in this work, therapists are encouraged to remember that clients 
will be safe to discuss the problematic aspects of the caregiver (or spouse) only after being 
reassured that therapists also appreciate and affirm the good or well-intended parts of 
these relationships as well.  The therapist’s goal is to integrate the ambivalence without 
making clients’ attachment figures or themselves “all good” or “all bad” , which are the 
dichotomizing or splitting defenses that clients have relied on in the past.
In another way, therapists must also help clients come to terms with both the good 
news and the bad news about their current situations. The good news is that through 
grief work, clients can disconfirm the pathogenic belief that they were in some way to 
blame for their abandonment, exploitation, rejection, or parentification . Clients remain 
“unresolved” for trauma or loss if they still believe they were somehow responsible or 
to blame (shame-worthy) for their own childhood maltreatment. The bad news is that 
clients’ developmental needs— such as the need for secure attachment ties— were not ade-
quately met then, and these original developmental needs cannot now be met or fulfilled 
in current adult relationships (e.g., with a spouse, friend, therapist, or exciting new part -
ner). Only after such losses or deprivation can be acknowledged and mourned, rather 
than disavowed, can clients go on for the first time to get appropriate and realistic adult 
versions of their emotional needs met in current relationships. Finally, once clients have 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

350  CHAPTER 10
accepted both the good news and the bad news associated with their caregivers, they are 
then free to accept some of those same characteristics in themselves, and relinquish their 
own rigidity and expectations of perfectionism in themselves.
Countertransference Impedes Family-of-Origin Work.  Two countertransfer -
ence propensities can prevent therapists from helping clients achieve resolution of such 
family-of-origin work. First, because of their own splitting defenses or strong dichoto -
mous thinking, therapists sometimes do not have the personal integration to help clients 
accept both what was good and what was problematic in their development. Therapists’ 
countertransference propensities may lead them to make one of two errors. On the one 
hand, some therapists characteristically want to downplay or minimize the extent and 
continuing influence of painful developmental experiences. For instance:
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 That was then. You need to forget about what happened in the 
past. Let’s try to do something about the problems you’re having now. Besides, forgiveness is 
such a liberation.
On the other hand, in contrast to this denial, other therapists only want to blame the 
caregivers, make them “bad,” and ignore the strengths, positive contributions and love 
that also were usually present in conflicted attachment relationships, as in the following 
example:
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 (judgmental tone)
 Your father was just toxic! What’s wrong with 
him? I can’t imagine anyone wanting anything to do with him after that.
Instead, therapists need to affirm the full reality of what went wrong in formative 
relations, while appreciating the need to support whatever positive ties can be preserved. 
Except in extreme circumstances, therapists generally want to discourage clients from 
breaking off all contact with conflicted caregivers if possible. When clients cut off all 
communication with family members, meaningful and sustained change is more difficult. 
Clients will struggle with self-acceptance and coming to terms realistically with their own 
strengths and limitations. Further, therapists often will be idealized and clients will be 
compelled to recreate this “split” in other relationships, with idealization and devaluation 
applied to themselves and to others. Therapists will be far more effective— and clients will 
be better able to stay with this difficult work— when therapists can acknowledge realisti-
cally what was wrong without demonizing parental figures and making them “all bad”. 
For example:
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 I can see how much it hurt you when he did that. He does go way 
over the top sometimes. Those times must have been really tough for you. I wonder what was 
going on for him when he lost it like that
—
 you know, what led him to such a disconnected 
place that he was so oblivious to the pain he was causing you?
VERSUS
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 I can’t believe he did that to you. What a destructive SOB. 
The second countertransference propensity that interferes with family-of-origin work 
is that therapists often want to bypass the work of mourning . As highlighted above, 
clients become able to acknowledge realistically to themselves the ways in which they 
were hurt developmentally or missed what they needed, painful feelings of loss are 
evoked. Sometimes therapists find it difficult to help clients come to terms with accepting 
their deprivation or how much they were hurt. They can do so, however, simply by being 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGHROUGHR H AND TERMINATION  351
able to remain emotionally present and compassionately affirming. Most clients do not 
want to end the hope or wish of getting what they missed; a few will even become angry 
when therapists acknowledge these disappointments or limitations. 
The problem occurs when clients’ reluctance to see and feel their sadness or loss coin-
cides with therapists’ own reluctance to be responsive to these difficult feelings. Routinely, 
when this occurs and therapists either move clients away from their sadness or grief - 
or over-react to it, therapists’ own unfinished family-of-origin and grief work are being 
defended against. Typically, therapists with a preoccupied attachment style are activated 
by the client’s loss, deprivation and separation/abandonment themes and hyperactivate 
themselves— no longer able to remain differentiated and provide a secure holding environ-
ment. Alternately, therapists with a dismissive attachment style minimize and avoid the 
client’s sadness and fail to respond empathically to these vulnerable feelings (Mikulincer & 
Shaver, 2005; Rubino et al., 2000). When Dismissive therapists try to bypass the work of 
mourning and move too quickly to a problem-solving approach, clients may not be able to 
act on or sustain practical suggestions— even though they may be useful ideas. Only after 
original losses have been acknowledged and integrated (grieved) in a supportive relation-
ship can clients open up their adult emotional needs and feel sustained by new relationships 
in a healthy way they have not been able to risk or find before. As clients improve in these 
significant ways, they achieve earned security and become able to leave the past behind—to 
turn the page and begin looking ahead to a different and better future.
T/h.sc/e.sc D/r.sc/e.sc/a.sc/m.sc: T/h.sc/e.sc F/u.sc/t.sc/u.sc/r.sc/e.sc
Clients make behavioral changes and feel more well-being as they work through their 
problems. As they improve, the focus of therapy often expands beyond developmental 
conflicts and current interpersonal problems. In a very positive transition, the therapeutic 
dialogue often begins to include future plans that reflect clients’ life-enhancing aspira -
tions and goals. Referencing the literature on the psychology of hope, for example, thera-
pists can help clients explore how they would like to be— “imagining possible selves” and 
clarifying what they might like to become (Russell & Fosha, 2008; Snyder, 1994). Simi -
larly, therapists can work in an existential tradition with issues regarding personal choice 
and explore the question: How can clients create more meaning in their lives, live more 
authentically, and make the most of the time and relationships they have?
 This freedom to explore what they really want — what matters most to them in life, 
develop their own personal voice more fully, and risk making choices and life changes based 
on self-discovery—often follows experiencing the therapist as a Secure Base and learning 
that change does not lead to the unwanted outcomes they had learned to expect. This pro-
cess is liberating and allows for more authentic and meaningful living. In general, therapists 
are watching for points of entry throughout treatment when they can acknowledge health 
features or affirm personal strengths in clients. One special opportunity to provide this 
Secure Base occurs during this exciting transition from solving problems to leading a fuller 
and more meaningful life—which is often signaled by the emergence of the Dream.
In his classic books, The Seasons of a Man’s Life and The Seasons of a Woman’s 
Life, Levinson (1978, 2000) describes the profound influence of the Dream in shaping the 
structure of adult life and the course of adult personality development. As Levinson points 
out, the Dream does not refer to casual waking or sleeping dreams but, in the largest sense, 
to the kind of life that one wants to lead . At first, the Dream may be poorly articulated 
and tenuously connected to reality, but it holds imagined possibilities of self in the adult 
world that generate vitality. It is central in Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s historic “I Have a 
Dream” speech or in Delmore Schwartz’s story “In Dreams Begin Responsibilities.”
The Dream has roots in the grandiose and unrealistic hero fantasies of adolescence, 
but it is more than that. In early adulthood, the Dream still has the quality of a vision— of 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

352  CHAPTER 10
who and how we would like to be in the world. In this way, the Dream is inspiring and 
sustaining for the individual, even though it may be mundane to others. For example, 
individuals have Dreams to be a good mother or responsible husband, a respected com -
munity leader, an ethical attorney, a skilled craftsperson, a successful but honest busi -
nessperson, an artist or a spiritual leader. If the individual is to have purpose and a sense 
of being alive, occupational and marital choices need to incorporate some aspects of the 
Dream. When the Dream has been abandoned or set aside, life will not be infused with 
vitality and meaning, even though the person may be successful.
Up until the working-through phase of therapy, therapists are usually responding to 
the despair of broken dreams, the disillusionment of unfulfilling dreams, and the cynicism 
of abandoned dreams. Often, the life-infusing Dream that Levinson has articulated has 
not yet been addressed in treatment. In the working-through phase, however, clients are 
resolving their problems and emerging as healthier individuals. At this point, therapists can 
help clients to better articulate and reclaim their Dream and to find ways of incorporating 
aspects of their Dream in their everyday lives. To achieve this, therapists first need to be 
able to differentiate the Dream from the broken dreams that contribute to clients’ present-
ing symptoms. These broken dreams usually reflect clients’ failed attempts to overcome or 
rise above conflicts through their interpersonal coping styles, as discussed in Chapter 7.
In the process of working-through, therapists repeatedly help clients recognize these 
compensatory strivings to cope and adapt by pleasing others (moving-toward), achiev -
ing success and power (moving-against), or becoming safely aloof and cynically superior 
(moving-away). Therapists help clients progressively relinquish these inflexible coping 
styles and adopt a wider interpersonal range. In doing so, clients stop avoiding or minimiz-
ing their generic conflict, which presents the opportunity for clients’ core conflicts to be 
expressed and resolved within the therapeutic relationship— and then generalized to others.
However, therapists can anticipate that when clients relinquish these defensive coping 
strategies they may experience a sense of failure or loss of self-esteem. Thus, one impor -
tant component of helping clients resolve their problems is to replace these defensive, 
unrealistic strivings with clients’ own attainable, yet sustaining, Dream. Clients need to be 
actively encouraged at every stage of treatment, but especially here, to explore and formu-
late their own personal dreams based on their own genuine interests. Many clients have 
never had the opportunity in their families of origin to know themselves, to clarify what 
their genuine interests and passions might be, or to choose their own goals and pursue 
their own ambitions. This phase of therapy enlivens clients as therapists provide a CEE 
and support this exploration. Here, the client’s “Dream” is encouraged and facilitated.
As clients begin to improve during the working-through phase, the Dream will often 
emerge. To help clients change and create a more meaningful life for themselves, therapists 
can support and encourage the Dream in many ways. First, therapists can listen actively for 
the issues that genuinely enliven clients, engage their intrinsic interests, and bring them plea-
sure. By attending closely to what clients really want to do and inquiring about what feels 
right for them, therapists can help clients discover and articulate their Dream. More specifi-
cally, therapists can ask questions that will help clients clarify what they like, find interest-
ing, or want in order to make a better life for themselves. For example, clients may respond:
 /uni25CFI want to stop losing my temper— I want my children’s respect back.
 /uni25CFI want to make peace with my father and bury the hatchet.
 /uni25CFI don’t want to keep driving to this same dead-end job. I want to finish school and 
get my credential.
 /uni25CFI want to be less reclusive and spend more time with my family and a few true friends.
For other clients, their Dream is completely undeveloped and they cannot articulate 
what they want in any meaningful way. Often, their caregivers didn’t track their experience 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGHROUGHR H AND TERMINATION  353
or keep their “mind” in mind very well, and didn’t empathically register what they were 
feeling or join them in their interests. These clients, with a less developed sense of Self, are 
unaware not only of what they want to do in life but, more basically, even of what they like 
or dislike. Therapists can help these clients begin to attend to and discover their feelings, 
interests, and values, and ultimately formulate and pursue their Dream by repeatedly:
 /uni25CFinviting clients to attend to what they are experiencing at different moments;
 /uni25CForienting clients to listen to themselves and become mindful of what they want to do 
in different situations— even if they cannot always act on their wishes (e.g., to real-
ize, “I“I“ ’m not enjoying this right now— I want to leave”);
 /uni25CFbeing interested in and entering the clients’ subjective experience (“joining” them);
 /uni25CFcalling attention to, and trying to participate supportively in, whatever seems to hold 
interest, meaning or enjoyment for clients;
 /uni25CFacknowledging and taking overt pleasure in what clients do well; and
 /uni25CFencouraging clients to act on their own feelings or preferences when possible (e.g., 
for some, just beginning with something as simple as recognizing, “I“I“ ’m sleepy— I’m 
going to take a nap”).
Although many clients have a more developed Self than this, some will need help to 
begin attending to their own internal experience in these very basic ways. It is rewarding 
for therapists to help clients differentiate a self by responding— perhaps for the first time 
in their lives— to their own feelings and interests. Clinicians working within many theo -
retical orientations have emphasized this process, such as the concept of “mirroring” in 
Self-psychology (Kohut, 1977), “experiencing” in the client-centered tradition (Carkhuff, 
1999), or “attuned responsiveness” in attachment theory (Bowlby, 1988).
As clients begin to experience their inner life more fully, and the therapist responds 
affirmingly, their Dream will start to emerge. At this point, therapists can do several 
things to help clients bring aspects of their Dream into their current lives. For example, 
therapists can provide a “practicing sphere” in which clients can discuss and explore vari-
ous possibilities of their Dream without having to become committed prematurely to any 
action. Therapists can also help clients tailor their Dream to reality and find ways to 
express aspects of their Dream in their everyday lives. Although most clients can’t quit 
their day job and become, say, full-time performers, a client who loves music can sing in 
the choir, take piano lessons, put together a garage band, or get a degree in music. Thera-
pists can also help clients identify training or education routes that will facilitate realiza -
tion of their Dream, and give clients permission to develop close relationships with others 
who can act as mentors in their chosen fields and pursuits.
Finally, clients will confront the same core conflicts in exploring their Dream that 
they have experienced in other aspects of their lives. Thus, therapists will also have to 
help clients work through variations of their old conflicts that are aroused by pursuing 
their Dream. In particular, therapists will have to help clients differentiate between their 
Dream and their interpersonal coping style and family role. This might include strivings 
to feel secure by being loved by everyone, to disprove their shame and gain a sense of 
personal adequacy or worth by compulsively pursuing wealth or power, or to escape criti-
cism or rejection by being safely aloof and removed. Progress usually will not be simple 
or straightforward, however. For many clients, actively pursuing what they really want 
to do, or successfully attaining what they want in life, commonly threatens attachment 
ties and arouses both separation anxiety and separation guilt —ties and arouses both separation anxiety and separation guilt —ties and arouses both separation anxiety and separation guilt leading clients to retreat 
from progress or undo their success in treatment . However, as clients successively work 
through these conflicts and find that they do have a right to their own life, they can get 
better at following through on realistic plans for attaining aspects of their Dream without 
self-sabotage. With this success, treatment evolves to a natural conclusion.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

354  CHAPTER 10
TERMINATION
C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc E/n.sc/d.sc/s.sc T/r.sc/e.sc/a.sc/t.sc/m.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc E/a.sc/r.sc/l.sc/y.sc
Premature termination (attrition) has long been recognized as a serious problem in psy -
chotherapy (Arntz et al., 2015; Garfield, 1994; Gelso & Woodhouse, 2002; Reis & 
Brown, 2006). However, there is no consensus in the field on the definition of premature 
termination (Dew & Brown, 2005) or real understanding of why it occurs so frequently. 
Significantly, “drop-outs” are not even reported in the majority of treatment outcome 
studies (Ravitz et al., 2011).
 Does premature termination refer to dropout after the first session or dropout any 
time prior to clients meeting their treatment goals? Bergin and Garfield (1994) have sug -
gested “premature termination” be considered whenever an individual has attended a ses-
sion and then discontinues on his or her own by failing to come to future scheduled 
appointments. According to published data, disturbingly, approximately 30 percent of 
clients drop out after completing only an intake, and 40 to 60 percent before experiencing 
sustainable benefits. And, on average, clients attend only three to six treatment sessions 
(Callahan & Hynan, 2005; Garfield, 1994; Hansen et al., 2002; Wierzbicki & Pekarik, 
1993). Why are we failing to help so many clients? A substantial focus of the early drop -
out literature has been on demographic and lifestyle characteristics of those who termi -
nate early. These include people who come from deprived backgrounds, those of minority 
status, individuals who have a history of substance abuse, and those with a history of 
involvement with the criminal justice system (see O’Brien et al., 2009). Researchers also 
find that premature termination is associated with non-contemplators, mandated to treat-
ment, male gender, high anger-hostility, child maltreatment (especially physical abuse) 
and loss, and other characteristics (Arntz, Rutenfrans & Bloo, et al., 2015).
Although these and other client and therapist features are important, we believe the 
primary issue for therapists is understanding what clients are actually experiencing in 
treatment; in particular, considering what clients are not getting or finding in their ther -
apy that leads to such extensive dissatisfaction and disengagement (Muran et al., 2005; 
Safran et al., 2005; Swift & Callahan, 2008). Research suggests that one important factor 
implicated in early termination of treatment results from clients’ unmet expectations —
i.e., their expectations of what they would gain from being in treatment don’t match 
what they actually experience. Many therapists have interpreted this to mean they need 
to engage in further “role induction” (i.e., giving clients more explanations about what 
therapy entails). We believe, however, that role induction is but a small and structural 
feature of therapy and not the major reason clients disengage early. We believe that it is 
the therapy process itself and clients’ experience, especially in that important first session 
as therapists are trying to begin a working alliance, that is key to whether clients will con-
tinue in treatment (Norcross & Wampold, 2011).
 As clinical supervisors and training clinic directors, we find that beginning therapists 
struggle with knowing or understanding their own role vis–à–vis the client. They consider 
one stance to be that of functioning in a guidance or directive mode (here they would tell 
clients, from a more “expert” perspective, how to structure their day, give them home -
work, advise them on decisions, etc.). Another role they often take is a passive, “neutral” 
stance, where they are simply in the same room with the clients, are respectful and nice 
but convey very little of themselves to clients, avoid questions clients ask as much as pos-
sible, superficially reflect what clients say without capturing the most important message 
or emotion (simple vs. complex reflection), and function as non-directively as possible. 
Their hope here is that clients will somehow know they are trying to be fully accepting, 
nonjudgmental, and are not trying to direct clients’ lives or tell them what to do. Still 
others fall back on what they know best and already do well—adopting the familiar role 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGHROUGHR H AND TERMINATION  355
of “friend.” These trainees are supportive, conversational and sociably on the surface—
avoiding points of entry for distress and conflict that may be awkward or too personal.
 The problem with each of these stances, however, is that clients come to therapy 
because they have real problems and they want to find: a responsive and engaged per -
son who is fully present, clearly wants to be with them, and enters their experience with 
genuine interest and concern (not self-disclosure); establishes credibility by demonstrating 
some real understanding about what’s going on for them; has the capacity to more clearly 
discern the key issues or grasp what’s really distressing them; and has enough expertise 
to offer them something helpful in a practical way right from the first session. They want 
the experience of being seen and heard - fully met, and want to feel that their therapist is 
trying to understand their personal issue or problem as they view it and join with them 
in clarifying what they need. The goal here is that before clients leave the session, the 
therapist needs to give clients the experience that there is someone here who is worth all 
the trouble and expense of coming to talk to . And, rather than just making assumptions 
if the session seemed to go well, brings this up and asks clients whether this has occurred 
(e.g., “How was this first session for you today? What felt good, and what could I do dif-
ferently next time to be more helpful?”). Thus, in this first session in particular, but also 
in subsequent sessions, therapists need to:
 /uni25CFGive clients a sense of hope that they can get the help they need in this setting by 
“hearing” what is most pressing, painful, or important for them right now;
 /uni25CFHelp clients clarify what’s really wrong and what they can begin doing now to help 
with this issue;
 /uni25CFWork with clients to discern what clients need most, today, before they leave each 
session;
 /uni25CFProvide hope that by working together it is possible to find ways to make the future 
be different and see that it does not have to repeat the past; nor do they have to face 
their challenges alone;
 /uni25CFActively engage with clients and provide them with the sense that therapists are 
going to be a highly involved collaborators with them on this journey— actively 
sharing ideas and questions, observations, alternatives, differing points of view, and 
feedback, but without making decisions or telling them “what to do” or how to lead 
their lives; and especially,
 /uni25CFRe-define the social rules and make it safe to talk more forthrightly together about 
what is going on in the client-therapist relationship, clarifying that this will be done 
collaboratively and respectfully, and never in a confrontational, argumentative or 
blaming manner.
We find that when student therapists (1) stretch their personal comfort zone and 
actively engage with clients in these ways right from the beginning; and (2) are able to 
“get” what is most important to the client and provide empathic understanding, few cli -
ents drop out prematurely.
In this vein, Sue & Zane (2009) write eloquently about the importance of offering 
the client a “Gift”— this needs to be something that demonstrates behaviorally that you, 
as a therapist, are someone who has the ability to be helpful and make a difference (i.e., 
demonstrate or achieve credibility). This capacity to offer a Gift, and your behavioral 
communication that you are going to be a present and actively engaged helper, will have 
your clients leaving the session with a sense of hope;it also increases clients’ likelihood of 
returning. This Gift can include:
 /uni25CFsimply giving clients the experience of feeling affirmed, such as understanding and 
validating the burdensome impact on clients of growing up as a parentified child,  
or the lifelong anxiety instilled in a child by lying in bed at night and listening to  
elevated parental wrangling;
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

356  CHAPTER 10
 /uni25CFletting certain clients know that you understand that some children were not pro-
tected, got hit or molested, and that you are a safe person to talk with about those 
issues that many others have not wanted to hear;
 /uni25CFproviding clients with basic educational information about sex education or sexual 
dysfunction so they no longer feel so different or alone;
 /uni25CFrole-playing how to approach an upcoming situation or person that is particularly 
troubling;
 /uni25CFproviding an overwhelmed parent with positive parenting strategies or other ways to 
regain control and discipline a child, and so forth.
An important component of all sessions, but the initial session in particular, is that 
clients leave feeling a sense of connection, collaboration, and hope that they will get the 
help they need, and not feeling that, primarily,  they are merely answering questions for 
the therapist so he or she can complete the agency’s intake form or make a provisional 
diagnosis for a new patient chart. Find a balance: make real contact with clients, provide 
a Gift if you can, and then tell them that you need to shift gears and ask some different 
questions in order to complete some needed paperwork. For example:
THERAPIST:
 Welcome. I’m glad you’re here. We spoke briefly on the phone, but let’s just get to 
work and try to understand what’s troubling you. Why don’t you tell me more about what’s 
wrong and bringing you in, and then we can start sorting things through together. 
You want your clients to have the feeling that “this is a person who has something 
to offer me that other people in my life can’t offer me right now, and I can benefit from 
what is being offered.” In terms of role induction, it is useful to communicate to clients 
that improvement or recovery from treatment takes longer than most expect (e.g., 50 per-
cent of clients improve after eight sessions and most need 13 to 18 sessions; see Swift & 
Callahan, 2008). Clients may also benefit from knowing that therapy may evoke painful 
feelings or difficult memories but that you will be with them through all the challeng -
ing moments of this journey. As we have seen, however, for therapists working within a 
process-oriented approach, role induction role induction for clients also emphasizes edu-
cation about the therapeutic relationship and redefining social norms to include straight 
talk about what might be going on between the client and the therapist . Because we find 
that this is so effective in successfully helping clients enter treatment, and it seems that 
few do it with any depth or real engagement with clients’ responses, let’s illustrate it 
again. Toward the end of the initial intake appointment, the intake worker can say:
THERAPIST:
 Bob, here’s the best way that you can help the therapist help you. We can be more 
direct here in therapy, and you can let the therapist know what you need, and what is and 
what’s not working for you. Things won’t go as well if you just try to be nice or polite, and 
don’t tell the therapist if somethings isn’t working for you. How does this sound—is this 
something you could do?
CLIENT:
 Well, I don’t usually talk that that way to others, but I can see that it might be helpful. 
But what if I say something I don’t like or isn’t working for me, and the therapist continues 
the same way—you know, doesn’t change?
THERAPIST:
 If you bring up a problem with the therapist or some dis-satisfaction with treat-
ment, and the therapist doesn’t listen to your feedback, talk it through with you, and try to 
respond to it in a way that works better for you, it’s probably not a good match. I’d recom-
mend that you ask to be transferred to a different therapist who can work with you as a 
partner, and can hear and respond to your needs.
Stemming the premature terminations that pervade our field necessitates that in the 
initial sessions therapists go beyond being “nice” or “passively” present. Therapists need 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGH AND TERMINATWORKING-THROUGH AND TERMINATWORKING-THROUGH AND TERMINA ION  357
to be actively engaged, assume a consistent mentalizing perspective in which they have 
the client’s “mind in mind,” so that what is most distressing or urgent for this client is 
carefully discerned and clearly articulated (Allen, 2013; Fonagy & Bateman, 2006). Fol-
lowing this sustained accurate empathy, therapists will need to respond in the corrective, 
reparative ways we have been discussing. If this is accomplished, the client and therapist 
will have co-created a productive therapeutic space where termination is most likely to 
occur only after meaningful and enduring treatment goals have been met.
C/l.sc/i.sc/e.sc/n.sc/t.sc /a.sc/n.sc/d.sc T/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc/a.sc/p.sc/i.sc/s.sc/t.sc T /a.sc/l.sc/k.sc /a.sc/b.sc/o.sc/u.sc/t.sc T/h.sc/e.sc/r.sc/a.sc/p.sc/y.sc E/n.sc/d.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc
Termination is an important phase of therapy and needs to be negotiated thoughtfully 
(Binder, 2004; Gelso & Woodhouse, 2002;Wachtel, 2002). Ending the therapeutic rela -
tionship will often be of great significance to clients. For some, this may be the first 
positive ending of a relationship they have ever experienced. How it is managed is so 
important that it often influences how well clients will be able to manage future separa -
tions, endings, and losses in their lives. If carefully planned, it provides an opportunity 
to convey to clients that they have been valued, allows therapists and clients time to 
talk together about areas of growth and anticipate where clients’ future challenges may 
emerge, influences clients’ ability to enter into new relationships in the future, and pro -
vides a healthy model for ending relationships (Many, 2009; Rappleyea et al., 2009). 
Most beginning therapists greatly underestimate what an important experience a suc -
cessful termination can be for clients. It holds the potential to diminish the changes that 
have come about in treatment or to help clients consolidate and further their gains — and 
better be able to maintain these changes after treatment has ended. Therapists will want 
to make the most of this significant opportunity for further change.
Early in their training, therapists often ask, “How will I know when it’s time to 
end therapy?” It is time to end when clients have achieved significant relief from their 
symptoms, can respond more flexibly in current situations rather than slotting diverse 
experiences into narrow , predisposed categories, and have begun to take steps toward experiences into narrow , predisposed categories, and have begun to take steps toward experiences into narrow
promising new directions in their lives. Therapists know that clients are ready to termi -
nate when they receive converging reports of client change from three different sources:
 /uni25CFfrom clients— when clients report that they consistently feel better and can respond 
in more adaptive ways to previously problematic situations;
 /uni25CFfrom their own observations— when clients can consistently respond to the therapist 
in new ways that expand their old coping styles and do not reenact their maladap-
tive relational patterns; and
 /uni25CFfrom significant others in clients’ lives— when people give clients feedback that they 
are different or make comments such as, “You never used to do that before.”
Before going on to discuss what therapists need to do to make terminations successful, we 
must distinguish between two types of endings: natural and unnatural.
The termination sequence just described is a natural ending because the clients’ 
work is finished. One of therapists’ primary goals in these natural endings is to affirm 
both sides of clients’ feelings about ending — wanting to go but also wanting to be sup -
ported. Thus, therapists are trying to provide a secure base during the termination phase 
by taking unambiguous pleasure in clients’ independence and actively supporting their 
movement out “on their own.” However, a Secure Base also means providing continu -
ing support as clients differentiate and emancipate, so to the extent possible , therapists 
can let clients know that they will accept their request for help or contact in the future 
if the need arises. Also, clients’ old schemas, transference distortions, and faulty expecta-
tions will often be reactivated toward therapists as they begin to discuss ending. To cor -
rect these transference distortions, therapists need to clarify overtly that they will not be 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

358  CHAPTER 10
disappointed, burdened, or troubled (as many clients will inaccurately expect) if clients 
want to send a letter to share important life events such as marriages and births, or to 
contact the therapist for help or a referral if they have problems in the future.
The key issue here is that so many clients have not had permission to be both sepa -
rate and related at the same time. For example, growing up, becoming more independent, 
and differentiating from their caregiver by pursuing their own interests, goals, and rela -
tionships often meant losing their emotional support and attachment ties. Or, staying 
connected and emotionally supported too often meant being compliant and remaining 
dependent or not having their own voice, views, or feelings distinct from those of the peo-
ple they were with. Thus, the termination phase provides these clients with an important 
opportunity to further increase their capacity to be both separate and related at the same 
time, and enhance their capacity both for greater autonomy and intimacy in the future.
Therapists offer many clients a far-reaching reparative experience when clients are 
assured of the therapist’s support for both sides of their ambivalent feelings. Many clients 
benefit greatly from finding that therapists take pleasure in their success and welcome 
their independence yet are still available and interested in their well-being if clients need 
to contact them (or another therapist) in the future. With this support for both sides 
of this separateness-relatedness continuum, clients can further internalize the therapist 
and keep all that was offered, solidify their own sense of self and personal efficacy, and 
successfully terminate.
Unfortunately, most graduate student therapists do not have the satisfaction of see -
ing many cases evolve to a natural close. Instead, therapy often ends before clients are 
finished for a number of reasons. As discussed previously, sometimes clients initiate the 
termination and simply do not return to the next scheduled appointment. In better cir -
cumstances, therapy ends because graduate students must move on to another placement, 
the school year ends, or the training clinic provides only time-limited services. Sometimes 
the therapist and client have made substantial gains when treatment has to stop, and other 
times the treatment process may be only in midstream and much is unfinished. In any case, 
significant therapeutic gains can still be made during the termination phase. To accom -
plish this more difficult task, however, it is essential that therapists and clients address and 
work through the complex issues that an unnatural or externally imposed ending arouses. 
Because graduate student therapists often have to initiate terminations before clients are 
ready, we will focus on unnatural endings in the discussion that follows. It is necessary to 
examine unnatural or imposed endings closely because they routinely evoke angry, blam-
ing, and distancing reactions in clients. These expectable responses are often difficult for 
new and unexpecting therapists. Recalling “client negativity”, this can readily activate 
therapists and evoke guilt, defensiveness, and other countertransference reactions that may 
diminish gains that have been made.
When it has come to hold meaning for both, it is often difficult for both therapists 
and clients to end their relationship. This occurs commonly because the ending stirs up 
unresolved losses that are far more intense and significant than either the therapist or the 
client had anticipated (e.g., evoking loved ones who have died; divorces, where a child 
loses a relationship with a parent in the aftermath of the breakup; important relation -
ships that ruptured and could not be repaired; emotional deprivation and other lasting 
disappointments with a caretaker; attachment figures who became emotionally unavail -
able because of alcohol or drug abuse; parental anxiety and awkward disengagement as a 
child enters puberty). As a result, therapists and clients regularly collude to deny the real-
ity of the impending ending and avoid the difficult feelings it arouses for both of them.
When therapists and clients stumble in this way and do not address the ending 
squarely, their interpersonal process will often reenact aspects of clients’ core conflicts 
and prevent them from resolving their problems as fully as they could have. As we 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGHROUGHR H AND TERMINATION  359
highlight, this becomes especially important with clients who have a history of painful 
and unresolved interpersonal losses, which so many clients bring to treatment. In particu-
lar, clients who received little validation or support for previous interpersonal losses now 
need a new and reparative type of ending with the therapist that differs from the unac -
knowledged, unpredictable, unplanned, and unpaced losses in their pasts (Many, 2009). 
Thus, the single most important guideline for negotiating a successful termination is to 
unambiguously acknowledge and sensitively address the reality of the ending . Even with 
clients who are ready to terminate treatment, old issues of loss and abandonment are 
unexpectedly but commonly evoked as termination approaches. Consider the following:
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 We have three more sessions left before the school year ends and we 
have to stop. Let’s talk about what this ending is going to mean for both of us.
The therapist and client can then discuss all of the client’s positive and negative reac-
tions about the ending, especially the client’s emotional reactions toward the therapist . 
Although therapists and clients may both want to avoid this topic, therapists cannot let 
that happen. Once a therapist and client mutually decide that the client is ready to ter -
minate, or that the therapist must terminate because of external constraints, they need to 
establish the specific date for the final session and then explore the client’s reactions to 
ending their relationship. For example:
THERAPIST:
 Our last session will be in three weeks, on Thursday, December 9, at 4:00. What are 
your thoughts as I acknowledge that?
Because therapists and clients need time to work through their ending, the final ses -
sion should be scheduled at least two or more weeks hence. If a client announces, out 
of the blue, that he or she has decided to terminate today and this is the last session, the 
therapist should invite and encourage the client to return just one more time in order to 
sort through what this ending might mean for the client and to have a better opportu -
nity to say goodbye to each other. We always want to support clients’ individuation and 
autonomy, but this type of abrupt and unilateral ending is usually a red flag for some type 
of reenactment or rupture.
In some cases, it will be difficult for therapists to set a specific termination date and 
discuss the ending because this arouses therapists’ own conflicts over the ending— or more 
commonly, endings in general. Further, setting a clear termination date will also often 
bring to the fore clients’ presenting symptoms and core conflicts again. For some clients, 
it may be necessary to rework aspects of these issues once more. It is not uncommon for 
some clients to retreat temporarily from the changes they have made when termination 
becomes a reality, or to have difficulty attending the next session. In particular, therapists 
may need to share with certain clients (e.g., clients who have experienced extensive loss 
in their lives that they are concerned that clients might “forget” the last session and will 
want to talk through this unwanted possibility with them). For example:
THERAPIST:
 If I am sitting here alone next Thursday at 4:15, what will have kept you from 
coming?
For all of these reasons, therapists need to acknowledge the termination forthrightly, 
count down to the final sessions, and invite clients to discuss their reactions to the termi -
nation by asking questions and making statements such as:
 /uni25CFAfter today, we will have only three sessions left. How is it for you to hear me say that?
 /uni25CFWe have only two sessions left now, and I think it’s important that we talk together 
about our ending. What comes up for you when I acknowledge that soon we are 
going to have to stop working together?
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

360  CHAPTER 10
 /uni25CFNext week will be our last session. We’ve accomplished some things together, but 
problems remain and our work is unfinished. What do you find yourself thinking 
about our relationship and the time we have spent together?
 /uni25CFThis is the last time we are going to be able to meet. I’m feeling some sadness about 
that, and I’m wondering what kind of feelings you’re having.
This type of countdown precludes any ambiguity, bargaining, or denial that clients 
may have about the ending. For example, it will prevent clients from asking, at the end of 
the last session, “So, will I be seeing you next week?” It also keeps the therapist from act-
ing out and avoiding the separation as well— for example, by saying at the end of the last 
session, “Oh, I see our time is up. Well, I guess that’s it.”
When therapists do not address the termination directly they are often avoiding their 
own separation anxieties or unresolved losses. They may have their own unresolved feel -
ings from unwanted and painful endings in their own lives that were not responded to 
supportively and that they had to negotiate on their own—which is problematic because 
they dovetail so often with their clients’ own unresolved feelings over past painful end -
ings. Consequently, the termination phase is especially likely to evoke therapists’ own 
potential for counter-transference, and expressed  via their attachment style. For example, 
Dismissive therapists may not be able to approach and empathize with the client’s sad or 
vulnerable feelings about endings, loss and grief. Preoccupied therapists can hyperactivate 
as their heightened sensitivity to loss and abandonment are activated. This challenges 
their ability to differentiate their own feelings from the client’s distress and provide a 
holding environment. In these ways, unresolved conflicts over ending relationships may 
be the most common countertransference issue that therapists bring to treatment. When 
this occurs, therapists can reassure themselves that these are common and understandable 
problems to have, but they also need to do something about them . They can seek con -
sultation from a supervisor or colleague, or better, find a therapist who can understand 
and help resolve this. Studies find graduate clinicians’ personal therapy is associated with 
significantly better treatment outcomes and lower drop-out rates for their clients (Gold & 
Hilsenroth, 2009; Gold et al., 2014).
Because both clients’ transference distortions and therapists’ countertransference 
reactions are especially likely to occur around unnatural terminations, and at the end of 
time-limited treatments, we need to explore these issues further. Both therapists and cli -
ents often have experienced painful endings with significant others as “just happening to 
them.” In many cases, they:
 /uni25CFwere not prepared in advance for the separation,
 /uni25CFdid not understand when or why this particular ending was occurring, or
 /uni25CFwere not able to participate in the leave-taking by discussing it with the departing 
person or by saying goodbye.
Such problematic endings have left many therapists and clients feeling powerless in 
regard to some of the most important experiences in their lives. In contrast, the approach 
suggested here enhances clients’ efficacy by allowing them to be active, informed partici-
pants in the ending. Clients know when the ending is occurring (experience some predict-
ability), have the safety to express their feelings (whether appreciative, disappointed, or 
angry), receive a non-defensive response, and have input on future challenges. Why is this 
so important? Especially with unnatural endings, they often activate early maladaptive 
schemas and leave clients feeling that this relationship has just failed in the same way that 
others have in the past. Let’s explore this expectable problem more fully.
As the old saying goes, children are supposed to grow up and put their feet under 
their own table, but it’s hard to get up from the table when you’re still hungry. The emo-
tional deprivation that many clients bring to therapy is activated when treatment ends 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGHROUGHR H AND TERMINATION  361
prematurely or before they feel ready to stop. Routinely, clients’ anger and disappoint-
ment about what they have wanted but missed in formative relationships — even their 
sense of abandonment or betrayal — may be directed toward therapists , no matter how 
clearly the treatment parameters were explained at the beginning of treatment. The fol -
lowing guilt-inducing accusations from clients can be very difficult to hear for new and 
experienced therapists alike:
 /uni25CFYou’re just like my mother. You’re leaving me, too.
 /uni25CFOur relationship never meant much to me, anyway.
 /uni25CFNothing’s really changed for me in therapy, I’m just the same.
The success of treatment in these cases depends in part on therapists’ ability to remain 
non-defensive and tolerate clients’ protests— rather than feel guilty, become defensive, and 
make the following ineffective attempt to talk clients out of their feelings:
INEFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 But you have changed. You’re not as depressed as you used to be, 
and now you can do _____, and before you couldn’t do that.
Instead of these defensive, futile attempts, therapists need to begin by acknowledging 
clients’ immediate feelings.Consider the following response:
EFFECTIVE THERAPIST:
 You’re really angry at me as our relationship is ending, and I respect 
those important feelings. Right now, it just seems like nothing meaningful has occurred and 
that nothing has gotten better for you.
By accepting clients’ angry protests in these ways — without agreeing that their fac -
tual content is true— therapists give clients a reparative response that doesn’t match their 
IWMs or previous experiences. In turn, this affirmation of their current frustration or dis-
appointment may allow clients to connect their strong emotional reactions to the devel -
opmental figures who originally disappointed or left them. Thus, what therapists often 
find hardest about unnatural endings — and about time-limited treatment —and about time-limited treatment —and about time-limited treatment is managing 
their own guilt or defensiveness in the face of clients’ anger over the ending. However, by 
drawing on the guidelines outlined here, therapists can help clients see how this ending 
is in fact different in some important ways from other unwanted endings in their past —
even though it feels as if the same unwanted scenario is happening to them again. Thera -
pists can help resolve this unfinished grief work from the past in the following ways, by:
 /uni25CFtalking with clients about the ending in advance;
 /uni25CFinviting clients to share their angry, disappointed, or sad feelings and being able to 
accept those feelings without becoming defensive;
 /uni25CFtalking with clients about the meaning the termination holds for them, and clarifying 
how it is similar to, and different from, other important endings in their lives;
 /uni25CFvalidating clients’ experiences by acknowledging the ways that this ending may be 
evoking other painful or unwanted endings with others;
 /uni25CFdiscussing the meaning this relationship has held for the therapist and sharing some 
of the therapist’s own feelings about ending this relationship; and
 /uni25CFensuring that therapists and clients can say goodbye to each other.
In other previous endings that have been problematic, clients were not able to have 
such experiences with the departing person. Although most clients will have difficulty 
recognizing these differences initially, therapists offer clients an opportunity to resolve 
long-standing problems by helping them differentiate this type of mutually acknowledged 
ending from the incomplete or unsatisfying endings with which they have had to cope 
in the past. In this way, successfully managing the termination also becomes the pro -
totype for learning how to cope effectively with future endings and losses. One of the 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

362  CHAPTER 10
illuminating pioneers in short-term treatment (Mann, 1973), and others since (Binder, 
2004), write informatively about these issues and the strong feelings of loss that are acti -
vated for so many clients during termination.
In the face of clients’ withdrawal or blaming accusations that their termination is 
“just like” prior losses and disappointments, therapists, too, may lose sight of the real dif-
ferences that exist between this termination and clients’ problematic past endings. Thera-
pists need to keep in mind that this ending really isn’t “just like” previous losses (e.g., 
there was a date mutually set for the ending; the client can, within reason of a few weeks’ 
time, choose the exact ending date; they are talking about the ending and the client is not 
suddenly being left without explanation or preparation).When therapists lose sight of 
these real differences, they are far more likely to accept the clients’ blame, feel guilty, and 
avoid the ending — or respond defensively and invalidate the clients’ sad, disappointed, 
or angry feelings by trying to talk clients out of them. When this occurs, paradoxically, 
therapists make clients’ accusations come true: They metaphorically reenact important 
aspects of clients’ past conflicted endings. Therapists do better by acknowledging the sim-
ilarity of clients’ feelings at termination and at past separations, and then exploring with 
clients what they can do together to make this termination different and better from such 
problematic endings in the past.
As therapists track clients’ reactions to the ending, they will often see how clients’ 
core conflicts are simultaneously being aroused in two contexts. First, clients’ primary 
feelings about termination (such as guilt over feeling better and no longer needing the 
therapist; or feeling rejected, abandoned, or let down by the therapist) may match clients’ 
feelings about the formative relationship in which the core conflict originally arose. Sec -
ond, clients’ reaction toward termination may also match the feelings that were aroused 
in the crisis situation that originally brought them to treatment. By responding affirm -
ingly to clients’ feelings, and clarifying their connection to these two sources when appro-
priate, therapists help clients further resolve their core conflicts.
Finally, to help with all of this challenging material, clinical researchers (Gelso & 
Woodhouse, 2002; Marx and Gelso,1987) emphasize three main steps in effective 
terminations:
1. looking back and reviewing what has changed;
2. looking ahead and making realistic plans for coping with the problems that are 
likely to come up; and
3. saying goodbye.
Exploring effective terminations further, a useful intervention for the termination phase 
is to go through a Review-Predict-Practice sequence with all clients. Therapists review prog-
ress, accomplishments, successful changes and transitions, and unfinished issues with cli -
ents. Especially important, therapists help clients predict the challenging events or anxiety-
arousing situations that are likely to activate old wounds or bring up their dysfunctional 
coping patterns in the future . To help clients maintain the changes they have achieved, it 
is essential to anticipate these potentially problematic situations or relational scenarios. 
Therapists want to identify these activating circumstances or triggers as specifically as pos-
sible. As illustrated with Tracy, earlier in this chapter, the therapist might ask:
THERAPIST:
 What is your Dad likely to say and do if you speak up and set limits with him? And 
how is that going to make you feel inside, and how are you likely to behave—what are you 
initially going to want to say and do, when he does that?
Finally, practice in dealing with these triggering issues or familiar patterns also pre -
pares clients to succeed on their own. Therapists can provide this by role-playing effec -
tive and ineffective responses to the threatening or unwanted interactions that clients are 
likely to face in the future.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

WORKING-THROUGHROUGHR H AND TERMINATION  363
E/n.sc/d.sc/i.sc/n.sc/g.sc /t.sc/h.sc/e.sc R/e.sc/l.sc/a.sc/t.sc/i.sc/o.sc/n.sc/s.sc/h.sc/i.sc/p.sc
Although some clients will re-experience their presenting problems at the time of ter -
mination, many will not. Both clients and therapists still need to talk about the ending, 
however. For example, therapists can talk with clients about the different ways in which 
they have seen clients change over the course of treatment. Therapists can also acknowl -
edge the limitations of their work together and the unfinished issues that clients will need 
to continue to work with on their own or perhaps with another therapist at some point 
in the future. Fearing that they are being disloyal, some clients will need explicitly spo -
ken permission from therapists to work with another therapist if they have problems in 
the future. Therapists need to reassure these clients that they would be happy to know 
that clients are taking good care of themselves and are getting the help they need. Recol -
lections of close moments, awkward misunderstandings, risks ventured, and humorous 
incidents also can be shared. Therapists can also share some of their own feelings about 
clients, including the significance of a particular relationship for the therapist and what 
the therapist has learned, enjoyed and will remember about this person.
In natural and unnatural endings, we have seen that termination brings therapists 
and clients back to the issue of being both separate and related. In the case of natural end-
ings, therapists will want to give clients permission to leave. Clients need to know with 
absolutely no uncertainty that the therapist enjoys their success, is pleased by their inde -
pendence, and takes pleasure in seeing clients become committed to new relationships 
and activities. Therapists want to be a Secure Base and help clients celebrate and feel sup-
ported as they transition out of treatment into a new phase of life. Clients:
 /uni25CFhaving connected with the therapist, can now feel more competent or confident 
about relating to others;
 /uni25CFhaving struggled with emotional or behavioral dysregulation and needed help with 
this, can now self-regulate with more balance or flexibility; and
 /uni25CFhaving arrived at an understanding that change is also an opportunity, can view 
this “loss” as signaling the transition to the next stage in life (in much the same way 
leaving home to attend college consists of both “loss” and “success”— so that feeling 
nervous or sad, as well as feeling excited and delighted, both make sense).
A thoughtful termination is extremely helpful in clients’ ability to trust in the pos -
sibility that future relationships can be nurturing and stable. The model presented by the 
therapist is important — it conveys that stable, emotionally nurturing, and attuned rela -
tionships do exist, and that these can end in caring, manageable, and affirming ways. 
Addressing termination overtly is also an opportunity to observe mutually clients’ “devel-
opmental progression” and how much more connected they now are to their own voice 
and authentic self or how much more confident they may now be about engaging with 
others. Although treatment is often incomplete when the relationship comes to an end, 
when clients can live out with others what they have experienced with the therapist, and 
therapists can appreciate what they have learned from and given to the client, both will 
have been enriched by this relationship.
CLOSING
This book has followed the course of therapy from beginning to end and provided a foun-
dation for clinical training. Just as clients still have unresolved problems when treatment 
ends, many questions about therapy still remain unanswered for therapists-in-training. 
Challenging personal issues and complex interpersonal processes have been introduced 
here, and therapists will need further reading, supervision, and experience to help with 
the myriad exceptions that occur in every therapeutic relationship. However, readers have 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

364  CHAPTER 10
learned essential guidelines for understanding the interaction taking place in therapeutic 
relationships, and for using the process dimension to help clients change. The conceptual 
framework presented here will help new therapists work more effectively with their cli -
ents and, we hope, better integrate training from a variety of theoretical perspectives.
The theme of this text is that enduring and substantive change occurs within the con-
text of significant relationships. Therapists working withing client-centered, cognitive and 
behavioral approaches, interpersonal and dynamic frameworks, attachment, family sys -
tems and other theoretical traditions can all utilize the interpersonal process approach to 
make their own work more effective. Accordingly, therapists are encouraged to use them-
selves, and the relationships they provide, to help clients change.
CHAPTER EXERCISE 
Thinking of a major loss you have experienced (e.g., the death of someone important to 
you or unexpectedly and suddenly being left by a significant other), what would you have 
liked others to have said to you? If you didn’t want anyone to try and respond to your 
loss, what contributed to that feeling in you?
SUGGESTED READINGS
Developing therapists who have found the ideas presented here helpful, but new and 
challenging, are encouraged to read the chapters you need help with from the excellent 
text on basic skill development, Helping Skills: Facilitating Exploration, Insight, and 
Change, 4/E (Hill, 2014). More experienced trainees who would like to enter further into 
this way of working with clients are encouraged to read: Interpersonal Reconstructive 
Therapy (Benjamin, 2006), Between Therapist and Client (Kahn, 1997), Brief Dynamic 
Therapy (Levenson, 2010), and A Secure Base: Clinical applications of attachment theory
(Bowlby,/uni00A01988).
Visit CengageBrain.com for a variety of study tools and useful resources such as interac-
tive exercises, flashcards, and quizzes.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

365
APPENDIX A
Process Notes
Client______________ Session Number_________ Date__________
1. Issues Presented. Key concerns or distress expressed by client or noted by therapist: 
2. Themes. Repetitive patterns that the client presents recurrently (e.g., feeling alone, 
unappreciated, overwhelmed):
3. Relationship and Resistance. Did the client make any overt statements or covert ref-
erences (embedded messages) about you or your interaction together (e.g., difficulty 
trusting, not feeling heard or understood)? Did the client exhibit any ambivalence or 
concerns about being in treatment (e.g., feeling disloyal to family, discomfort with 
asking for help)?
4. Interpersonal Process. In this session, did you and the client become more engaged 
with each other? What can you learn about your client’s problematic interactions 
with others from your own personal reactions toward the client (e.g., do you feel 
bored, frustrated, protective)? How is your interaction or internal response similar 
to or different from the way others respond to the client?
5. Transference and Countertransference. Are there characteristic ways in which the cli-
ent tends to distort or misperceive you and others? Does this client respond to you 
as he or she does to significant others— or differently? Are there ways in which your 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

366  APPENDIX A
own personal history or current life circumstances are activated by this client and 
influence how you respond to him or her?
6. Evaluating Interventions. What were your primary interventions (e.g., empathic 
understanding, reframing, role-playing)? What was effective or ineffective? What 
might you want to do differently next time?
7. Treatment Focus. Did the client present issues in this session that were closely related 
to your treatment focus? Were you able to use these as points of entry to intervene 
and provide more focus and direction in this session?
8. Critical Incidents. Identify potential legal, ethical, or reporting concerns for consultation 
with supervisor (e.g., child, elder, and dependent abuse; danger to self and others):
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

367
APPENDIX B
Guidelines for  
Treatment Planning
Although writing a case formulation is often challenging, completing one is important 
because it helps therapists provide more focused treatments. 
1. Formulation of the problem(s). Summarize the client’s presenting problem(s). Why is 
the client seeking treatment now? What organizing themes or history characterize the 
client’s most important experiences with others?
2. Treatment focus. Identify the maladaptive relational patterns and beliefs that recur 
for the client. Thinking of the client’s IWMs, ask yourself the following questions: (1) 
What does the client want from others (e.g., to be cared for, to have autonomy sup -
ported)? (2) What does the client expect from others (e.g., to be criticized, ignored, 
abandoned)? (3) What is the client’s experience of Self in relationship to others (e.g., 
a sense of being unimportant, burdensome)? (4) What conflicted feelings are typical 
for this client (e.g., anger, anxiety, shame)? (5) What interpersonal coping strategies 
are characteristic for this client (e.g., to comply and go along, to withdraw and con -
vey no need for others, to dominate and take control)? (6) What do these coping 
strategies tend to elicit from the therapist and others (e.g., disinterest, advice giving)? 
Use your responses to these questions to identify two or three primary treatment fo -
cuses that clarify what’s wrong and needs to change for this client.
3. Developmental context. What are the familial and cultural issues that have shaped the 
client’s presenting problems and worldview? How did the family nurture, discipline 
and communicate? In other words, how did the client’s early maladaptive schemas, 
interpersonal coping strategies, and attachment styles develop?
4. Therapeutic process. Describe the quality of the working alliance and how you and 
the client have interacted together. How are you trying to make the client’s relational 
experiences with you repair or disconfirm problematic experiences in other relation -
ships? When the client is distressed, how does he or she tend to misperceive and react 
to you? Have you been able to address potential problems between you and work 
through rupture-repair episodes?
5. Goals and interventions. As you focus on the two to three core treatment issues identi-
fied in item 2, indicate how you plan to address these. Articulate as clearly as possible 
the specific corrective experiences that this client needs from you to meet the treat -
ment goals identified. How are you helping this client to generalize new experiences 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

368  APPENDIX B
with you to relationships outside of therapy? Consider also what referrals might be 
appropriate (e.g., group counseling, medication). In sum, clarify where you want to 
go with this client and how you plan to get there.
6. Impediments to change. Anticipate why treatment could fail. If the client terminates 
prematurely or treatment is not successful, what factors might contribute? What cli -
ent characteristics are most likely to impede sustaining a strong working alliance? Are 
there any significant personal, familial, or cultural factors that may make it difficult 
for this client to acknowledge having problems or to ask for help? Are you able to 
talk with the client about how you work together and what you could do to make 
treatment more helpful? Most importantly, suggest how the client’s maladaptive 
relational patterns with others could subtly be reenacted with you in the therapeutic 
relationship. 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

369
Accurate empathy:  the therapist’s ability to understand 
or discern the primary meaning, or correctly perceive the 
subjective experience the client presents, with clarity and 
speci/f_icity.
Achieved credibility:  the credibility achieved by thera -
pists due to their skillfulness and the effectiveness of their 
responses, rather than merely their status, role or similarity 
to the client.
Active stance:  the balanced therapeutic stance that is 
active, responsive, and engaging—yet neither primarily 
directive nor non-directive.
Adult attachment styles:  the relational styles or patterns 
of attachment in adult attachment relationships; including 
Secure, Preoccupied, Dismissive, and Fearful.
Affect regulation:  children’s increasing capacity to inde -
pendently and successfully manage disruptive feelings of 
distress, fear, vulnerability or need on their own. Children’s 
capacity for self-regulatiom is based largely on internal -
izing their caregiver’s ability to consistently hear their dis-
tress and respond by providing comfort or “psychological 
holding.” 
Affective constellations: a sequence of interrelated feel -
ings that often occur together as a predictable, patterned 
sequence. The /f_irst or initial presenting feeling on the sur-
face is often the least dif/f_icult to express and covers deeper, 
more vulnerable feelings.
Affective containment: a holding or psychologically safe 
environment provided by the therapist that facilitates cli -
ents’ ability to address, explore, more fully experience and 
share their cardinal issues.
Ambivalence: the competing, mixed or even contradictory 
feelings that clients experience with regard to a particu -
lar situation or decision, or toward their therapist and the 
therapy.
Ambivalent feelings: the simultaneous con/f_licting feelings 
experienced by clients during the course of their therapy.
Anxiety: the elevated state of apprehension experienced by 
clients, which is often exacerbated because the client can -
not name the danger or identify the source of their fear.
Ascribed credibility: the credibility that clients ascribe to 
their therapist based on the therapist’s role, professional 
credentials and status, or perceived similarities such as gen-
der, ethnicity and religion.
Attuned: A state of being attentive and aware of the spe -
ci/f_ic feelings or personal experience of the other.
Attuned responsiveness: the ability of therapists to respond 
readily and positively to the client’s emotional needs by 
accurately discerning the client’s needs or distress.
Authoritarian: an approach to discipline that is strict and 
controlling, and also lacks warmth and explanation for 
rules. It can often be punitive and is used by parents to 
enforce obedience and compliance in their children.
Authoritative: an effective child-rearing style with /f_irm 
limits and reliably enforced rules. However, these effective 
parents also are affectionate, clearly communicate their 
expectations, and explain the reasons for their rules and 
decisions.
Between-group differences: the differences in the outcome 
of therapy based on therapists’ use of different theories or 
treatment approaches, such as cognitive-behavioral versus 
interpersonal-dynamic treatments.
Case formulation or case conceptualization: the therapist’s 
formulation of clients’ issues and functioning, including 
how clients’ problem came about developmentally, and 
how this is now contributing to or amplifying symptoms 
and problems in their current life.
Change talk:  clients’ expression of their own desire or 
motivation to make changes in their attitude or behavior.
Characterological affect: the recurrent affective theme or 
predominant feeling that some clients may experience as a 
de/f_ining or primary aspect of their existence.
Client response speci/f_icity: the construct used by therapists 
to /f_lexibly tailor their responses to better /f_it the speci/f_ic 
needs of each individual client.
Client-induced countertransference:  the therapist’s reac -
tion to the client that occurs when the client’s eliciting 
maneuvers or coping styles typically evoke similar reac -
tions in the therapist and in others.
Collaborative: where the therapist and client work togeth-
er as partners rather than the therapist directing or leading 
the client from a position of “expert” and prescribing solu-
tions or providing the client with answers.
Compacted phrase: a phrase that clients tend to repeat that 
encapsulates or condenses the meaning or primary emo -
tional reactions the client has toward the stressful events 
or interaction patterns that have repeatedly occurred.
GLOSSARY
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

370  GLOSSARY
Compliance: Disposed to passively follow the therapist’s 
lead during therapy, believing they need to suppress their 
own interests and goals and seek direction from the thera-
pist. Problematically, these clients have learned that it is 
unacceptable for them to assert their own thoughts and 
preferences, so they follow rather than participate collab -
oratively with the therapist.
Compliance issues: the symptomatic tendency of some cli-
ents to believe they must give up their own self-direction, 
Self or own voice and go along with others in close rela -
tionships, and only do what others want and expect of 
them.
Compliant: See Compliance, Compliance issues.
Conditions of worth:  the behavior or roles that children 
learn they must do to maintain their parents’ approval, 
and to avoid—or cope with, the painful separation anxiet -
ies evoked when parents employ disciplinary techniques 
based on love withdrawal.
Containment: the safety, support and validation that ther-
apists offer clients so they can experience their emotions 
more fully in the moment without fear of judgment or 
criticism.
Contextual remarks: prefatory comments that facilitate the 
bid for more open communication between therapists and 
their clients. These comments help clients understand their 
therapists’ good intentions as they shift from surface con-
versation to a more/uni00A0straightforward approach that invites 
deeper personal engagement.
Contextualize: listening for relational patterns and affec -
tive themes, and trying to understand the client’s problems 
or subjective experience within the broader developmental 
and cultural context of his or her life.
Core conditions:  Carl Rogers proposed three necessary 
ingredients for therapeutic change—empathy, genuine -
ness, and unconditional positive regard. Extensive empiri-
cal support for therapists conveying these basic attitudes 
and behavioral characteristics to clients, and for empathy 
in particular, has been found.
Core con/f_lict: the most basic or central issue that links 
the different problems and concerns that clients present 
which, in turn, provides a focus for treatment.
Core meaning: the most basic feeling, key concern, or cen-
tral meaning in the issues that a client experiences.
Corrective Emotional Experience (CEE): a reparative, real 
life experience with the therapist that resolves rather than 
seemingly repeats a familiar but maladaptive relational pat-
tern. The therapists new and reparative response discon -
/f_irms the clients’ feared but expected responses, which are 
based on unwanted, hurtful past experiences.
Cost/bene/f_it analysis: Therapists help clients do a cost/
bene/f_it analysis by having them evaluate both the costs 
and the bene/f_its of the decisions they are considering, as 
well as the relational patterns or coping styles they have 
adopted.
Countdown: when therapists acknowledge forthrightly that 
therapy is about to terminate, overtly count down to the 
/f_inal session, and repeatedly invite clients to discuss their 
reactions to the termination.
Countertransference: the therapist’s personal reactions to 
the client based on the therapist’s own life history and unre-
solved issues or current personal stressors.
Countertransference reactions: see Countertransference.
Credibility: the extent to which therapists develop Achieved 
Credibility by behaviorally demonstrating that they are 
trustworthy and capable of providing assistance versus 
Ascribed Credibility which is based only on degrees, titles 
and roles.
Deactivating: a coping strategy or form of affect regulation 
observed in dismissive clients in which they minimize their 
needs, suppress feelings of vulnerability, and see them -
selves as strong and competent.
Deactivation: See Deactivating.
Debrief: feedback provided to the client regarding an 
important event or experience that just occurred, often 
used to help the client understand the event more fully or 
clarify their perception of what occurred.
Deconstruct: to consider the developmental, familial and 
cultural in/f_luences that contribute to a client’s feeling or 
experience, that helps both therapist and client understand 
a reaction or response that doesn’t initially make sense 
until viewed or framed within this broader perspective. 
Differentiate: See Differentiation.
Differentiation of a self: to become one’s own person and 
be able to recognize and act on one’s personal likes and 
dislikes rather than automatically complying with familial 
rules, roles, and expectations. The ability to discriminate 
one’s own feelings from others and not over-identify with 
or over-react to others.
Differentiation: to clarify differences in beliefs, values or 
feelings between oneself and others. To be able to discrimi-
nate one’s own perspective from that of others’, the capac-
ity to know or have one’s own mind and function more 
independently.
Disempowered: to feel powerless and incapable of acting 
on one’s behalf; inef/f_icacy.
Disengagement: the tendency to be emotionally removed 
or too personally distant, often lacking in empathy—both 
for oneself and for others.
Disengaged Parenting: a neglective style of parenting in 
which the parents are emotionally uninvolved with the child, 
and fail to provide guidance or show warmth toward the 
child. They are usually passive, self-absorbed and unrespon-
sive, but can be overtly rejecting.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

GLOSSARY 371
Dismissive: See Dismissive client.
Dismissive client: clients who are low in overt or expressed 
attachment anxiety (although they experience high physi -
ological distress or cortisol activation when their needs 
come into play in relationships), and high in avoidance of 
relationships.
Double binding family communications: the discrepant or 
contradictory communication within a family which places 
the child in a confusing lose—lose position. S/he is “damned 
if you do” say something and equally “damned” if you fail 
to do or say the same thing. The key feature in double bind-
ing communications is that the offspring feels bound by not 
being allowed to meta-communicate and make this double 
bind overt—such as by being able to say, “no matter what I 
say, it will be wrong.”
Early maladaptive schemas: the stable and enduring beliefs 
and expectations that develop from ongoing patterns of 
parent–child interaction that are inaccurate, hurtful, and 
dysfunctional, and which extend on into adulthood.
Earned security: the sense of security that clients achieve 
by addressing the problematic life experiences that origi -
nally engendered their insecure attachments, and working 
through them later in life through reparative relation -
ships with others who are more responsive, empathic and 
af/f_irming.
Eliciting: the defensive/coping behavior of evoking or try -
ing to bring about a certain type of response in others—
such as intimidation or caretaking.
Eliciting maneuvers: see Eliciting.
Eliciting pull: the feelings or reactions drawn out in oth -
ers, the way the client makes the therapist tend to want to 
respond in a certain way—such as withdrawing, giving up, 
or feeling bored./uni00A0The force or effect of eliciting maneuvers 
on the other person.
Emancipation Con/f_licts:anxiety or problems that emerge 
as late adolescents/young adults explore and try to devel -
op their own beliefs, interests and values, and struggle to 
negotiate the developmental hurdle of emancipation or 
launching from their families-of-origin and establish a 
more independent adult life.
Embedded message: a message that is not conveyed direct-
ly but is underlying in what is said, such as making a ste -
reotypic, derogatory comment about females in general 
that also serves as a covert communication to this client’s 
female therapist.
Emotional regulation: the capacity to modulate, regulate or 
effectively exert self-control of one’s emotions, impulses or 
behavioral reactions.
Empathic understanding: a genuine feeling of warmth, con-
cern, and acceptance of others. This is accompanied by an 
accurate, speci/f_ic and in-depth understanding of clients’ 
problems within a developmental, familial and cultural 
contextualization—which enables therapists to make sense 
of clients’ seemingly irrational responses.
Empathy: See Empathic understanding.
Encoded reference:  the analogues or metaphors used to 
indirectly describe what is going on between the therapist 
and the client. This occurs when the client is discussing 
another relationship that serves as the overt context for 
the parallel reference to the therapist or what is transpiring 
between the therapist and client.
Enmeshment: emotional over-involvement or binding 
closeness that doesn’t allow for healthy autonomy or dif-
ferentiation, which may be expressed through differing 
opinions, points of view or the ability to express disagree-
ment with certain family members.
Excessive accommodation:  the compliance dynamics of 
clients that leads to the belief that they need permission 
for all they do, and therefore submerge their own goals 
and interests to “go along” with the demands of others. 
Oftentimes, this includes asking the therapist to tell them 
what to do, while simultaneously resisting the control they 
have just elicited.
Experiential relearning:  the process by which a client 
learns new behaviors, attitudes, or beliefs based on in vivo 
re-learning or the reparative relational experiences the 
therapist behaviorally provides.
External validation: the feedback from an external source 
that af/f_irms the legitimacy or appropriateness of some -
thing the client has thought, felt or done.
Family-of-origin work: the psychological work associated 
with exploring and better understanding how family inter-
actions and relationships have shaped clients in becom -
ing who they are and the problematic ways they are still 
responding in the present.
Fearful: See fearful client.
Fearful client: clients with a Fearful attachment style lack a 
consistent strategy for coping and utilize less adaptive, vacil-
lating or unstable coping styles. Confusing to themselves and 
others, these back and forth clients are both high in attach-
ment anxiety and in attachment avoidance. Maddeningly, 
they cannot sustain being close or apart.
Flexibility: therapists’ ability to relinquish control and 
tolerate ambiguity. Rather than dogmatically following 
one theoretical orientation, therapists assess the client’s 
responses to their interventions and modify them to work 
more effectively for this particular client.
Genograms: a three or four generational, graphical repre -
sentation of family roles, rules and relationships that high-
light problematic patterns that repeat across generations 
and continue to shape clients’ current functioning.
Gift: especially at the beginning of treatment, therapists aim 
to provide clients with a “gift,” a practical skill or a cop -
ing strategy that offers some immediate help and engenders 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

372  GLOSSARY
hope, which fosters the working alliance by helping clients 
feel seen and responded to.
Grief work: helping clients better come to terms with unre-
solved feelings of loss and longing for a loved one who 
has died or physically left, and from emotional deprivation 
resulting from unresponsive attachment /f_igures.
Guilt: a feeling of remorse for a transgression.
Hierarchical relationship:  a one-up/one down relation -
ship in which status or authority takes precedence. People 
involved in a hierarchical relationship are perceived as 
holding different levels of authority based on some prede-
termined basis such as power, position or role of “expert.”
Holding environment:  a safe haven of empathic under -
standing and attuned responsiveness that therapists pro -
vide to help modulate or contain the client’s distress or 
disruptive feelings.
Homeostatic mechanisms: the process of the family system 
working against change and responding in predictable and 
patterned ways to get a family member to return to their 
former role. Resisting change and trying to get the trans -
forming individual back to their previous behavior and 
restore the status quo in family relations.
Hyperactivating: See Hyperactivation.
Hyperactivation: a type of affect regulation in which cli -
ents with a preoccupied attachment style typically escalate 
emotions or over-react in order to elicit reassurance and 
responsiveness from others, because they fear abandon -
ment and not being seen or heard.
Idiographic: a highly individualistic approach that empha-
sizes the personal experience or subjective worldview of 
each individual client, focusing on individual differences 
rather than large group characteristics.
Immediacy: See Immediacy interventions.
Immediacy interventions: here-and-now interventions that 
focus on exploring together and trying to understand what 
is transpiring right now between the therapist and client. 
Often used to help negotiatate and resolve problems or 
misunderstanding in the therapeutic relationship, and help 
make it safe to speak forthrightly about feelings, concerns 
and expectations in the moment.
Incongruence: marked discrepancy between what the client 
is saying (content) and the manner or way they are express-
ing it (process).
In/f_lexible coping style: a habitual way of relating to others 
that is pervasively used in relationships even though it is 
no longer necessary or effective. This rigid coping style is 
also re/f_lected in vocational, marital, and other de/f_ining life 
choices.
Intergenerational boundaries: delineating the sub-systems 
of the family system, such as containing marital con -
/f_lict within the parental subsystem without triangulating 
children into taking sides, or having unclear boundaries 
between parental and child sub-systems and having chil -
dren assume caretaking responsibilities for adults.
Internal dissonance: the disempowerment, uncertainty and 
self doubt, and pervasive anxiety that is characteristic of 
clients who grew up feeling repeatedly invalidated in dys -
functional families.
Internal focus: considering one’s own contributions to a 
relational problem and trying to change one’s own internal 
and interpersonal responses, rather than trying to control 
and change the other person’s decisions and behavior.
Internal working models: the mental representations of 
close interpersonal relationships, especially those between 
parents and young children, and how these templates for 
what is usually going to transpire between Self and Others 
shape current functioning.
Internalized contempt: when attachment /f_igures repeated-
ly respond to children with contempt, children adopt this 
rejecting/shaming stance and respond to themselves with 
the same disgust/criticism.
Interpersonal coping strategy:  the habitual coping strate -
gies employed in interpersonal relationships to ward off 
anxiety and maintain self esteem.
Interpersonal process: the manner or way that the client 
and therapist interact with one another, rather than the 
content of what they are talking about.
Interpersonal safety:  the sense of security or well-being 
that one develops in relationships that have proven to be 
trustworthy, validating or protective.
Intrapsychic dynamics:  the conscious and unconscious 
interplay between a rich myriad of feelings, beliefs, wishes, 
fears and expectations that often are in con/f_lict with each 
other.
Invalidation: to dismiss, weaken, or engender uncertainty 
in another’s personal or subjective experience.
In vivo relearning:  experiential re-learning, unlike verbal 
explanations or interpretations, where clients live through 
a behavioral or real-life experience of change in their 
interaction/relationship with the therapist that discon/f_irm 
schemas or faulty beliefs they have learned to expect from 
others.
Love withdrawal: the discipline technique in which par -
ents do not focus speci/f_ically on unacceptable behavior but 
instead globally withdraw feelings of love and approval 
from the child, engendering anxiety as children’s emotion-
al connection to their caregivers is threatened.
Mentalizing perspective: secure attachment relationships 
foster perspective taking abilities in children and greater 
capacity for empathy and seeing their own, and other’s, 
experience more /f_lexibly and accurately.
Metacommunicate: to talk together directly and discuss 
therapist - client communication dynamics as they occur 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

GLOSSARY 373
in the moment—to talk about how we are talking to each 
other.
Misattunement: the inability of a parent to recognize and 
respond to the current emotional needs of the child. Failure 
to provide accurate empathy contributes to children both 
losing self awareness and the validity of their own experi -
ence, and learning to expect unresponsiveness from others, 
fostering insecure attachments.
Moving against: a /f_ixed and pervasive interpersonal strat-
egy for coping with others by asserting dominance or 
aggression as a characteristic way of relating to others.
Moving away: a /f_ixed and pervasive interpersonal strategy 
for coping and adapting via distancing from others through 
physical avoidance, emotional withdrawal, or rigid self-
suf/f_iciency.
Moving toward:  a /f_ixed and pervasive interpersonal 
strategy for coping by repeatedly trying to please oth -
ers, exercising excessive compliance and avoiding con -
/f_lict, which causes clients to lose their own identity and 
autonomy.
Mysti/f_ication: when children have repeatedly been invali -
dated, or told that what they really did see and hear was 
not true or did not occur, children lose the validity of their 
own experience and perceptions—living anxiously uncer -
tain and disempowered.
Naming: highlighting or giving a name to more readily 
identify clients’ maladaptive relational patterns, so that 
clients can begin to recognize and anticipate when these 
patterns are coming into play, and begin to exercise more 
choice in /f_inding new and better ways to respond that 
could change the familiar but unwanted scenario.
Narcissistic wound: the pain experienced by clients when 
their interpersonal coping strategies fail, injuring their feel-
ings of worth, esteem, and their core sense of Self.
Natural ending:  A natural ending in treatment occurs 
when the therapist and client have worked through prob -
lems suf/f_iciently and mutually agreed to terminate. An 
unnatural ending occurs when treatment ends before the 
client’s work is /f_inished because of time limited treatment 
parameters or relocation.
Non-defensive: Therapists’ ability to sustain a curious or 
exploratory stance, and be less prone to personalizing and 
argue, criticize or withdraw in response to clients’ criticism, 
dissatisfaction with some aspect of treatment, or testing 
behavior.
Parenti/f_ied: see Parenti/f_ication.
Parenti/f_ication: the role-reversal that may occur in families 
without clear intergenerational boundries, in which the 
child takes on the role of meeting the caregiver’s emotional 
needs, rather than adults responding to the child’s needs.
Participant/observer: a stance which involves being in a 
relationship experientially, while simultaneously remaining 
an observer and thinking about what might be going on in 
the treatment process at the same time.
Pathogenic beliefs: the faulty and symptom engendering 
beliefs, learned in repetitive, affect-laden interactions with 
attachment /f_igures, that help to create and sustain mal -
adaptive relational patterns.
Performance demands:  the unrealistic or exaggerated 
expectations new therapists can place upon themselves to 
know more or be able to perform more than what is realis-
tically expected—engendering anxiety and self-doubt.
Permissive: an indulgent style of parenting that does not 
enforce limits and rules consistently, and does not place 
age-appropriate expectations for mature and responsible 
behavior onto children.
Personalize: to take personally and over-react to challeng-
ing or provocative behavior from the client, rather than 
remaining non-defensive and sustaining a neutral, explor -
atory or curious stance toward the client that is different 
than the reactivity the client usually elicits from others.
Personalizing: see Personalize. 
Points of entry: therapists’ ability to recognize the oppor-
tunities that clients present where therapists can choose to 
intervene and successfully engage the client in more signi/f_i-
cant issues and concerns.
Predominant affect:  the main feeling state that charac -
terizes the client’s daily functioning. The primary feeling 
which much of a client’s experience revolves around, such 
as being shame-prone or anxiously preoccupied as a way 
of life.
Premature terminations:  attrition or discontinuance of 
treatment. The client drops out of treatment within the 
/f_irst few sessions without making gains and often without 
notifying the therapist.
Preoccupied: an adult attachment style characterized by 
on-going anxiety about not being responded to or left. 
They are prone to escalate emotions with frequent crises, 
and hold a worried state of mind that leaves them fre -
quently entangled in angry, idealizing, or worrisome pre -
occupations about others in current and past relationships.
Preoccupied client: a client who is low on avoidance, but 
high on anxiety. These clients do not avoid emotional 
needs or avoid seeking help from others, although they 
are overtly anxious and worried when approaching others 
with problems or concerns.
Process comments: the present-focused, immediacy inter -
ventions that invite clients to explore or sort through with 
the therapist what is transpiring between them right now. 
Often phrased as talking about you-and-me and what is 
going on between us in the here-and-now.
Process dimension:  the manner or way in which a ther -
apist and a client interact with each other, which may 
either change and help resolve (collaborative, respectful or 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

374  GLOSSARY
non-judgmental interaction that discon/f_irms feared expec-
tations) or reenact (competitive, indifferent, judgmental or 
intrusive interaction that is familiar but unwanted) impor-
tant aspects of a client’s problem.
Protest: an attachment term to describe the young child’s 
expression of anger or cueing that the attachment /f_igure is 
not responding to their distress.
Real relationship:  the personal relationship or authentic 
connection that develops between the therapist and client 
as two individuals, as distinct from the other two domains 
of therapeutic relationships—the working alliance and the 
transference/schema distortion dimensions.
Recurrent themes:  the repeating patterns and themes 
expressed in the narratives that clients relay that help 
therapists make sense of the client’s experience and bet -
ter understand what is most important or central in the 
wide-ranging material that clients present.
Reenactment: re-creating or re-living old relational sce -
narios or maladaptive relational patterns in the way 
the therapist and clients are interacting together, which 
impedes change and con/f_irms the problematic expe -
riences and expectations from past relationships—
leading clients to believe that change is not possible, therapy 
cannot help, and relationships with others cannot be differ-cannot help, and relationships with others cannot be differ-cannot help, and relationships with others cannot be differ
ent and better now.
Re/f_lective: the capacity to see things from a variety of 
perspectives, and be able to dis-embed from one’s own 
strong emotional reactions and more /f_lexibly consider 
them within a broader context and from different van -
tage points.
Reparative interpersonal process:  the way in which the 
therapist and client are interacting together is a different 
and better way of interacting than the client has experi -
enced in the past. This new way of interacting facilitates 
change by experientially discon/f_irming hurtful or prob -
lematic relational patterns the client has experienced with 
signi/f_icant others in the past and come to expect from oth-
ers now in their current lives.
Resistance: the clients’ reluctance to enter treatment or 
explore a problem, usually based on fears that once were 
reality-based, of receiving the same type of unwanted 
responses they have experienced with signi/f_icant others in 
the past when they have asked for help, shared their dis -
tress or vulnerability, or risked trust and genuine involve -
ment in a relationship.
Review-predict-practice sequence:  the intervention 
sequence designed to make the termination phase more 
effective. In this sequence, therapists, therapists review 
progress, accomplishments, successful changes and tran -
sitions, and un/f_inished issues with clients. They also help 
clients predict the challenging events or anxiety-arousing 
situations that are likely to activate problems in the future, 
and rehearse more effective responses to them.
Role induction:  educating a client about the therapy 
process prior to beginning treatment, thus taking a step 
toward establishing a collaborative relationship where the 
client knows what to expect and is invited to speak up 
about questions or concerns the client may have about the 
therapist or any aspect of treatment.
Ruptures: in the context of therapist-client relationships, 
the term refers to misunderstandings, mistakes, or other 
interpersonal con/f_licts that may be occurring and disrupt 
cooperative collaboration between the therapist and client. 
In order to restore a working alliance the “rupture” needs 
to be discussed and “repaired.”
Sabotaging: some clients learned in signi/f_icant relation -
ships that success, achievement, happiness or greater inde-
pendence is envied or disliked by important others, which 
results in some clients sabotaging their own success in 
order to abate anxiety by complying with binding familial 
roles and rules, and undoing the success experiences that 
once threatened their attachment ties.
Safe haven: the empathy and emotional responsiveness that 
an attachment /f_igure reliably offers when a young child is 
frightened, distressed or vulnerable. In parallel, therapists 
intend to provide this experience of empathy, validation 
and acceptance for clients when they are distressed.
Secure: an attachment style for adults who are free from 
excessive anxiety in intimate or close attachment relation-
ships. Secure clients function indepently but can seek help 
when distressed—they discuss relationships clearly and 
openly, exhibit re/f_lective capacity, and show empathy for 
others and themselves.
Secure base:  the active support that caregivers offer to 
facilitate a child’s exploration and increasing indepen -
dence, and that therapists try to provide for clients as they 
explore their concerns and attempt change.
Secure clients: See Secure.
Self-ef/f_icacy: an individual’s sense of his or her own com-
petence or ability to manage challenging situations effec -
tively and successfully cope with stressors.
Self-involving comment:  an immediacy intervention in 
which therapists disclose how the client is affecting them at 
that moment. With this Use-of-Self, therapists judiciously 
provide interpersonal feedback about their own reactions 
to the client that invite more meaningful dialogue about 
what may be transpiring between them right now, and 
explore how how the client may be affecting others as well.
Separation guilt: the symptomatic guilt that often ensues in 
offspring who are not permitted culturally sanctioned ave-
nues for emancipation, individuation and couple formation 
during late adolescence and early adulthood, This common-
ly occurs when there has been a primary cross-generational 
alliance between caregiver and child.
Shame: the toxic feeling that our true Self is deeply and irrepa-
rably defective, inherently /f_lawed or inadequate. This is a 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

GLOSSARY 375
global and pervasive judgment of Self as bad, and not just 
limited to a speci/f_ic mistake or failure as occurs with the far 
less problematic feeling of guilt.
Shame-anxiety: the strong anxiety that is evoked by the 
threat of having one’s inadequate, /f_lawed, or bad self 
exposed to others or even revealed to oneself.
Shame-prone, shame-proneness: the pervasive and readily 
activated shame-based sense of Self that has developed in 
clients who have been frequently shamed in their attach -
ment relationships, stemming from unrelenting criticism 
or from repeated experiences of being responded to with 
contempt by caregivers.
Shame-rage cycle: one of the faulty coping strategies that 
clients develop to cope with their shame-proneness. The 
shame-rage cycle characterizes “road rage” and many 
domestic violence episodes of battering and physical abuse. 
As the shame-prone individual feels “dissed” or shamed 
too readily, and over-reacts to the unintended humiliation 
by trying to dis-prove that they can be hurt or ridiculed 
by igniting with rage, aggression or power assertion. Thus 
they “restore” their sense of worth and truncate their feel-
ings of shame by attempting to prove to themselves and 
others that they are strong and not weak or bad.
Structural family relations: the relatively enduring patterns 
of alliances, coalitions, and loyalties that exist in a fam -
ily, and the boundaries that delineate these different sub-
systems within the family.
Tentative working hypotheses: the general hypotheses for-
mulated about the client’s problems, strengths and cop -
ing strategies by therapists at the beginning of treatment. 
These initial hypotheses will need to be re/f_ined, modi/f_ied, 
or discarded in an on-going manner as further information 
is obtained about each client’s personality and problems.
Testing behavior: a client behaves in a certain way in order 
to gauge or assess whether the therapist is going to respond 
in the familiar but problematic way the client has learned 
to expect, or in different and more helpful ways which s/he 
actually needs and wants. More commonly used by more 
troubled clients with trauma and abuse histories.
The Dream: a vision of the kind of life that one wants to 
lead and the kind of person one wishes to become.
Therapist-induced countertransference:  “Therapist-
induced countertransference” occurs when the therapist’s 
own personal history or problems have been activated by 
something the client has said or done—this is the tradition-
al conceptualization of counter-transference. However, it 
must be distinguished from “client-induced countertrans -
ference” which occurs when clients’ eliciting maneuvers or 
testing behavior evokes the same types of responses from 
the therapist that the client characteristically elicits from 
others in their lives—and this has more to do with the cli -
ent’s interpersonal functioning than the therapist’s own 
personality or dynamics.
Toxic or core shame: toxic or core shame refers to a deeply 
held, pervasive and wounding contempt for oneself that 
contributes to many serious symptoms and problems, 
whereas situational embarrassment or innocuous experi -
ences of self-consciousness are commonplace and largely 
insigni/f_icant for treatment.
Transference: See Transference reactions.
Transference reactions: the systematic misperceptions or 
cognitive distortions towards the therapist (and others) 
that are based on the client’s internal working models or 
schemas. The client transfers or over-generalizes learning 
from earlier relationships onto the therapist (or other per-
son) that is not reality-based.
Treatment focus:  the therapist’s clarity about the core 
problem and understanding of what most needs to change 
for the client. Treatment focus provides direction for where 
the therapist and client are trying to go and the goals they 
are trying to accomplish with each client.
Triangulated: the symptomatic familial process of involv -
ing a third person in a relationship to provide a diver -
sion when too much con/f_lict or closeness arouses anxiety 
between two individuals.
Triggering issues:  identifying the types of situations or 
issues that are challenging for clients and lead them to act 
out and respond in familiar but problematic ways.
Un/f_inished grief work: coming to terms with the painful 
and often threatening or unacceptable feelings of sadness 
caused by emotional deprivation or unwanted/con/f_licted 
endings in the past—such as interpersonal loss through 
death or abandonment, or emotional loss through parental 
rejection or neglect.
Uniformity myth: the myth that all therapists are equally 
effective and that differences in treatment outcome are 
due to theoretical orientation rather than to more and less 
effective therapists within each brand of treatment, as the 
empirical literature repeatedly /f_inds.
Unnatural endings: See Natural endings.
Unspoken family rule: a covert rule that all family mem -
bers members know about but do not talk about overtly 
which often governs important behavior in dysfunctional 
families, such as: what feelings can and can’t be talked 
about; who is allowed to grow up and leave home in late 
adolescence and who isn’t; or who can talk to whom about 
what topics. When these unspoken family rules are vio -
lated, predictable and patterned homeostatic mechanisms 
swing into play to stop the rule-breaking behavior and 
restore the status quo.
Use-of-self: a type of process comment where therapists 
draw on their own current subjective experience—obser -
vations, questions or feelings they may be having as the cli-
ent is speaking, to clarify what is transpiring between the 
therapist and client; such as, what the client is intending or 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

376  GLOSSARY
meaning, or to try and change what they are doing togeth-
er when it does not seem productive.
Validation: an af/f_irming approval or sanction by a second-
ary person. This has an especially signi/f_icant impact when 
an important experience has been denied or minimized by 
signi/f_icant others.
Virtue: when clients adopt a /f_ixed interpersonal coping 
strategy (always being kind, strong or independent), they 
often frame it to/uni00A0themselves as a strength or virtue rather 
than more realistically as a defensive strategy - an attempt 
to cope with chronic stressors and ongoing anxiety.
Within-group differences: the differences in the treatment out-
comes of a group of therapists who share the same theoretical 
orientation, in order to discern therapists who are more and 
less effective at utilizing the same treatment manual or theo-
retical approach. This research paradigm is not widely used, 
even though it consistently accounts for far more variance in 
treatment outcomes than measuring between-group differenc-
es (for instance, contrasting the effectiveness of client-centered 
therapists versus cognitive behavioral therapists).
Working alliance: The therapeutic relationship has been 
conceptualized as being comprised of three distinct compo-
nents: The Working Alliance, the Real Relationship, and the 
Transference–Countertransference dimension. The working 
alliance consists of the bond between therapist and client, 
agreement on treatment goals, and consensus on the tasks or 
interventions that will be used to facilitate change. The bond 
or connection between the therapist and client is the most 
important component of the working alliance.
Working hypotheses: See Tentative working hypotheses.
Working-through: a stage of therapy when the client is try-
ing out new ways of responding to others. In this phase 
clients are experiencing successes and disappointments 
with different people in their lives, and the therapist is 
serving as a coach or ally as the client repetitively tries to 
change old response patterns with new and better ways of 
responding.
Worldviews: an individual’s subjective perception of the 
world and life in general, based on culture, class, gender 
and other shaping in/f_luences.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

377
Ackerman, S., & Hilsenroth, M. (2003). A review of 
therapist characteristics and techniques positively 
impacting the therapeutic alliance. Clinical Psychol -
ogy Review, 23: 1–33.
Adam, K., Sheldon-Keller, & West, M. (1996). Attachment 
organization and history of suicidal behavior in clini -
cal adolescents. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 64: 264–72.
Agrawal, H., Gunderson, J., Holmes, B., & Lyons-Ruth 
(2004). Attachment studies with borderline patients: A 
review. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 12(2): 94–104
Ahmed, E., & Braithwaite, V. (2004). “What, me 
ashamed?” Shame and management of school bully -
ing. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 
41(3): 269–94.
Ainsworth, M., Blehar, M., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). 
Patterns of attachment: A psychological study of the 
strange situation. Oxford: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Akhtar, S. (2007). Diversity without fanfare: Some reflec -
tions on contemporary psychoanalytic technique. Psy-
choanalytic Inquiry, 27: 690–704.
Alexander, F., & French, T. M. (1946). Psychoanalytic 
therapy. New York: Ronald Press.
Allen, J. (2013). Mentalizing in the development and treat-
ment of attachment trauma. London: Karnac Books.
Allen, J., & Fonagy, P. (2006). Handbook of mentaliza -
tion-based treatment. Sussex: Wiley.
Allen, J., Fonagy, P., & Bateman, A. (2008). Mentalizing in 
clinical practice. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric 
Publishing.
Allen, J. G. (2012). Mentalizing in the development and 
treatment of attachment trauma . London: Karnac 
Books.
Allen, J. P., Hauser, S. T., & Borman-Spurrell, E.  (1996). 
Attachment theory as a framework for understanding 
sequelae of several adolescent psychopathology: An 
11-year-follow-up study. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 64: 254–63.
Altenstein, D., Krieger, T., & Holtforth, M. C. (2013). Inter-
personal Microprocesses predict cognitive-emotional 
processing and the therapeutic alliance in psychother-
apy for depression. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 
60(3): 445–52.
Amrhein, P., Miller, W., Yahne, C., & Palmer, M. (2003). 
Client commitment language during motivational 
interviewing predicts drug use outcomes. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71: 862–78.
Anderson, T., Ogles, B. M., Patterson, C. L., & Lambert, 
M. J. (2009). Therapist effects: Facilitative interper -
sonal skills as a predictor of therapist success. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65: 755–68.
Andrusyna, T. P., Luborsky, L., Pham, T., & Tang, T. Z. 
(2006). The mechanisms of sudden gains in support -
ive-expressive psychotherapy for depression. Psycho-
therapy Research, 16: 526–35.
Angus, L., & Kagan, F. (2007). Empathic relational bonds 
and personal agency in psychotherapy: Implications 
for psychotherapy supervision, practice, and research. 
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 
4: 371–77.
Archineiga, G. M., & Anderson, T. C. (2008). Toward a 
fuller conception of machismo: Development of a tra-
ditional machismo and caballerismo scale. Journal of 
Counseling Psychology, 55(1): 19–33.
Arkowitz, H., Miller, W., & Rollnick, S. (Eds.). (2015). 
Motivational interviewing in the treatment of psycho-
logical problems (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford.
Armour, C., Elklit, A., & Sherlin, M. (2011). Attachment 
typologies and post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 
depression, and anxiety: A latent profile analysis 
approach. European Journal of Psychotraumatology, 
2: 608–24.
Arntz, A., Stupar-Ruthenfrans, S., Bloo, J., et al. (2015). 
Prediction of treatment discontinuation and recovery 
from Borderline Personality Disorder: Results from 
a RCT comparing Schema Therapy and Transfer -
ence Focused Psychotherapy. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 74: 60–71.
Aron, L. (1996). A meeting of minds: Mutuality in psy -
choanalysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
REFERENCES
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

378  REFERENCES
Bachelor, A. (1995). Clients’ perception of the therapeutic 
alliance: A qualitative analysis. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 42: 323–27.
Bakermans-Kranenburg, M., & Van IJzendoorh, M. 
(2009). The first 10,000 adult attachment interviews: 
Distribution of adult attachment representations in 
clinical and non-clinical groups. Attachment and 
human development, 11: 223–63.
Balcom, D., Lee, R., & Tager, J. (1995). The systemic treat-
ment of shame in couples. Journal of Marital and 
Family Therapy, 21(1): 55–65.
Baldwin, S., Wampold, B., & Imel, Z. (2007). Untangling 
the alliance-outcome correlation: Exploring the rela -
tive importance of therapist and patient variability in 
the alliance. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy -
chology, 75(6): 842–52.
Baldwin, S. A. & Imel, Z. E. (2013). Therapist effects: 
Findings & methods. In M. J. Camembert. (Ed.), 
Bergin & Garfield’s Handbook of Psychotherapy & 
Behavior Change. New York: Wiley 258–94.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. 
New York: Freeman.
Bandura, A. (2006). Toward a psychology of human 
agency. Perspectives on Human Science, 1: 164–80.
Barber, J. P. (2007). Issues and findings in investigating 
predictors and moderators of psychotherapy out -
come: Introduction to the specialization. Psychother-Psychother-Psychother
apy Research, 17: 131–36.
Barber, J., Connolly, M., Crits-Christoph, P., & Gladis, L. 
(2009). Alliance predicts patients’ outcome beyond in-
treatment change in symptoms. Personality Disorders: 
Research, Theory and Treatment, 1: 80–9.
Barber, J., Foltz, C., DeRubeis, R., & Landis, J. (2002). 
Rigidity of interpersonal themes in narratices about 
relationships. Psychotherapy Research, 12: 139–58.
Barkham, M., & Shapiro, D. (1986). Counselor verbal 
response modes and experienced empathy. Journal of 
Counseling Psychology, 33(1): 3–10.
Bartholomew, K., & Horowitz, L. M. (1991). Attachment 
styles among young adults: A test of a four-category 
model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
61: 226–44.
Bartsch, D., Roberts, R., Davies, M., & Proeve, M. (2015). 
Borderline personality disorder and parenting: Clinician 
Perspectives. Advances in Mental Health DOI: 10.1080/
18387357.2015.1065554.
Bass, A. (2007). When the frame doesn’t fit the picture. 
Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 17: 1–27.
Baumeister, R. F., & Scher, S. J. (1988). Self-defeating 
behavior patterns among national individuals: Review 
and analysis of common self-destructive tendencies. 
Psychological Bulletin, 104: 3–22.
Baumrind, D. (1971). Current patterns of parental 
authority. Developmental Psychology Monograph 4 
(1, pt. 2).
Baumrind, D. (1991). The influences of parenting style on 
adolescent competence and substance use. Journal of 
Early Adolescence, 11: 56–95.
Beatson, J., & Rao, S. (2014). Psychotherapy for border -
line personality disorder. Australasian Psychiatry, 22: 
529–32.
Beavers, W. R., & Hampson, R. B., (1993). Measuring 
family competence: The Beavers Systems Model. In F. 
Walsh (Ed.), Normal family processes (2nd ed.). New 
York: Guilford Press. 
Beck, A. (1967). Depression: Causes and treatment. Phila-
delphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Beck, A. (1995). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond . 
New York: Guilford Press.
Beck, A., Freeman, A., & Davis, D. (2003). Cognitive 
therapy of personality disorders. New York: Guilford 
Press.
Beebe, B., Knoblauch, S., Rustin, J., Sorter, D., Jacobs, T. J., 
& Polly, R. (2005). Forms of intersubjectivity in infant 
research and adult treatment. New York: Other Press.
Beitman B. D., & Soth, A. M. (2006). Activation of self-
observation: A core process among the psycho -
therapies. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 16: 
383–97.
Benbassat, N., & Priel, B. (2012). Parenting and adoles -
cent adjustment: The role of parental reflective func -
tion. Journal of Adolescence, 35: 163–74.
Bender, D. (2005). The therapeutic alliance in the treat -
ment of personality disorders. Journal of Practical 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Health, 11(2): 73–87.
Bender, H. L., Allen, J. P., McElhaney, K. B., Antonishak, 
J. (2007). Use of harsh physical discipline and devel -
opmental outcomes in adolescence. Development and 
Psychopathology, 19: 227–42.
Benjamin, J. (2009). A relational psychoanalysis perspec -
tive on the necessity of acknowledging failures and 
containing features of the intersubjective relationship 
(the shared third). The International Journal of Psy -
choanalysis, 9(3): 441–50.
Benjamin, L. (2006). Interpersonal Reconstructive Ther -
apy. New York: Guilford Press.
Bennett, S. (2008). The interface of attachment, transference, 
and countertransference: Implications for the clinical 
supervisory relationship. Smith College studies in Social 
Work, 78: 301–20.
Bergin, A., & Garfield, S. (Eds.). (1994). Handbook of 
psychotherapy and behavior change (4th ed.). New 
York: Wiley.
Berk, L. E. (2005). Why parenting matters. In S. Olfman 
(Ed.), Childhood lost: How American culture is failing 
our kids. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Bernecker, S., Levy, K., & Ellison, W. (2014). A meta-
analysis of the relation between patient adult attach -
ment style and the working alliance. Psychotherapy 
Research, 24: 12–24.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

REFERENCES 379
Bernier, A. Larose, S., & Soucyn, N. (2005). Academic men-
toring in college: The interactive role of student’s and 
mentor’s interpersonal dispositions. Research in Higher 
Education, 46: 29–51.
Bernier, A. T., & Dozier, M. (2002). The client-counselor 
match and the connective emotional experience: Evi -
dence from interpersonal and attachment research. 
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 
31(1): 32–43.
Bernstein, M., & Benfield, J. (2013). Past perspective is 
related to present relationships: Past-positive and neg-
ative time perspectives differentially predict rejection 
sensitivity. The Psychological Record, 63: 615–28.
Beutler, L. E., Moleiro, C, & Talebi, H. (2002). Resistance 
in psychotherapy: What conclusions are supported by 
research? Journal of Clinical Psychology 58: 207–17.
Binder, J. L. (2004). Key competencies in brief dynamic 
psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press.
Binder, J., & Strupp, H. (1997). “Negative process”: A 
recurrently discovered and underestimated facet of 
therapeutic process and outcome in the individual 
psychotherapy of adults. Clinical Psychology: Science 
and Practice, 4: 121–39
Bjorguinsson, T., & Hart, J. (2006). Cognitive behavioral 
therapy promotes mentalizing. In J. G. Allen & P. Fon-
agy (Eds.), Handbook of mentalization-based treat -
ment. Sussex: Wiley.
Bögels, S., & Brechman-Toussaint, M. (2006). Family 
issues in child anxiety: Attachment, family function -
ing, parental rearing, and beliefs. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 26: 834–56.
Bordin, E. S. (1979). The generalizability of the psychoan-
alytic concept of the working alliance. Psychotherapy 
16: 252–60.
Boszormenyi-Nagy, I., Grunebaum, J., & Ulrich, D. (1991). 
Contextual therapy. In A. S. Gurman & D. P. Knishern 
(Eds.), Handbook of family therapy (vol. 51). New York: 
Bruner/Mazel.
Bowen, M. (1993) Family therapy in clinical practice. New 
York: Jason Aronson.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment loss: Vol 1. Attachment . 
New York: Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1988). A secure base. New York: Basic Books.
Brammer, L. M., & MacDonald, G. (1996). The helping 
relationship: Process and skills (6th ed.). Boston, MA: 
Allyn & Bacon.
Brennan, K., Clark, C., & Shaver, P. (1998). Self-report 
measurements of adult   attachment: An integrative 
overview. In J. A. Sampson & W. F. Rholes (Eds.), 
Attachment theory and close relationships (pp. 
46–76). New York: Guilford Press.
Bretherton, I, & Munholland, K. (2008). Internal work -
ing models in attachment relationships: Elaborating 
central construct in attachment theory. In J. Cassidy 
and P. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment  (pp. 
102–30). New York: Guilford Press.
Breuer, J., & Freud, S. (1955). Studies on hysteria. In Stan-
dard edition (vol. 2, pp. 1–319). London: Hogarth 
Press (Original work published 1893–95).
Bridges, M. (2006). Activating the corrective emotional 
experience. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In Session, 
62: 551–68.
Bridges, M. (2006). Activating the corrective emotional 
experience. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In Session, 
62: 551–68.
Brisch, K. H. (2002). Treating attachment disorders: From 
theory to therapy. New York: Guilford Press.
Bromberg, P. (2006). Awakening the dreamer. Mahwah, 
NJ: Analytic Press.
Callahan, J., & Hynan, M. (2005). Models of psychother-Callahan, J., & Hynan, M. (2005). Models of psychother-Callahan, J., & Hynan, M. (2005). Models of psychother
apy outcome: Are they applicable in training clinics? 
Psychological Services, 2: 65–9.
Callahan, P. E. (2000). Indexing resistance in short-term 
dynamic psychotherapy: Change in breaks in eye 
contact during anxiety. Psychotherapy Research, 10: 
87–99.
Carkhuff,, R. R. (2008). The art of helping in the 21st cen-
tury (9th ed.). Amherst, MA: Possibilities Publishing.
Carlson, E. (1998). A prospective longitudinal study of 
attachment disorganization/disorientation. Child 
Development, 69: 1107–28.
Carter, J., Joyce, P., Mulder, R., & Luty, S. (2001). The 
contribution of temperament, childhood neglect, and 
abuse to the development of personality dysfunction: 
A comparison of three models. Journal of Personality 
Disorders, 15: 123–35.
Cartwright, D. (2004). Anticipatory interpretations: 
Addressing “cautionary tales” and the problematic 
premature termination. Bulletin of the Menninger 
Clinic, 68(2): 95–114.
Cassidy, J., & Shaver, P. R. (2008). Handbook of attach -
ment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (2nd 
ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Castonguay, L., & Hill, C. (Eds.). (2012). Transforma -
tion in psychotherapy: Corrective experiences across 
cognitive behavioral humanistic, and psychodynamic 
approaches. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Catley, D., Harris, K. J., Mayo, M. S., & Hall, S. (2006). 
Adherence to principles of motivational interviewing 
and client within-session behavior. Behavioral and 
Cognitive Psychotherapy, 34: 43–56.
Cervone, D. (2000). Thinking about self-efficacy. Behavior 
modification, 24: 30–56.
Chen, E. & Mallinckrodt, B. (2002). Attachment, group 
attraction, and self-other agreement in interpersonal 
circumplex problems and perceptions of group mem -
bers. Group Dynamics-Theory Research and Practice, 
6: 311–24.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

380  REFERENCES
Coccia, C., Darling, C., Rehm, M., Cui, M., & Sathe, S.K. 
(2012). Adolescent health, stress and life satisfac -
tion: The paradox of indulgent parenting. Stress and 
Health, 28: 211–21.
Comas-Diaz, L. (2006). Cultural variation in the thera -
peutic relationship, In C. D. Goodheart, A. E. Kazdin, 
& R. J. Steinberg (Eds.), Evidence-based psychother -Evidence-based psychother -Evidence-based psychother
apy: Where practice and research meet. Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association.
Connors, M. (2011) Attachment theory. A “secure base” 
for psychotherapy integration. Journal of Psychother-Journal of Psychother-Journal of Psychother
apy Integration, 21: 348–62.
Connolly, H. B., Crits-Christoph, P., Barber, J., & Lobor-
skr, L. (2000). Transference patterns in the therapeutic 
relationship in supportive expressive psychotherapy 
for depression. Psychotherapy Research, 10: 356–72.
Connors, M. (1997). The renunciation of love: Dismissive 
attachment and its treatment. Psychoanalytic Psychol-
ogy, 14: 475–93.
Constantine, M., & Sue, D. W. (2005). Strategies for 
building multicultural competence in mental health 
and education settings. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Coolidge, F., Segal, D., Estey, A., & Neuzil, P. (2010). Pre-
liminary psychometric properties of Karen Horney’s 
tridimensional theory in children and adolescents. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 67: 383–90.
Cooper, G., Hoffman, K., & Powell, B. (2013). The Circle 
of Security Intervention: Enhancing attachment in 
early parent-child relationships . New York: Guilford 
Press.
Cowan, C, & Cowan, P. (2005). Two central roles for cou-
ple relationships: Breaking negative intergenerational 
patterns and enhancing children’s adaptation. Sexual 
and Relationship Therapy, 20(3): 275–88.
Cresswell, C., Murray, L, Stacey, J., & Cooper, P. (2011). 
Parenting and child anxiety. In W. Silverman & A. 
Field (Eds.), Anxiety disorders in children and ado -
lescents (2nd ed.). (pp. 299–322). Cambridge: Cam -
bridge University Press.
Crits-Christoph, P., & Gibbons, B. B. (2002). Relational 
interpretations. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy 
relationships that work: Therapist contributions and 
responsiveness to patients (pp. 285–300). New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Crits-Christoph, P., Siqueland, L., Blain, J., & Frank, A. 
(1999). Psychosocial treatments for cocaine depen -
dence: National Institute on Drug Abuse Collabora -
tive Cocaine Treatment Study. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 56: 493–502.
Csillik, A. (2015). Positive motivational interviewing: 
Activating the clients’ strengths and intrinsic motiva -
tion to change. Journal of Contemporary Psychother-Journal of Contemporary Psychother-Journal of Contemporary Psychother
apy, 45: 119–28.
Curtis, J. T., & Silberschatz, G. (1997). Plan formula -
tion method. In T. D. Eells (Ed.), Handbook of 
psychotherapy case formulation (pp. 116–36). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Curtis, J. T., Silberschatz, G., Sampson, H., Weiss, J., & 
Rosenberg, S. E. (1988). Developing reliable psycho -
dynamic case formulations: An illustration of the plan 
diagnosis method. Psychotherapy, 25: 256–65.
Daly, K. D., & Mallinckrodt, B. (2009). Experienced thera-
pist’ approach to psychotherapy for adults with attach-
ment anxiety or avoidance. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 56: 549–63.
Daniel, S. I. F. (2006). Adult attachment patterns and indi-
vidual psychotherapy: A review. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 26: 968–84. 
D’Aniello, C. (2015). Common factors as a road map 
to MFT model integration: Implications for train -
ing therapists. Contemporary Family Therapy, 37: 
176–82.
Datz, F., Parth, K., Said, U., & Löffler-Staska, H. (2016). 
Countertransference triggered activity in treatment. 
Good, bad, or useful? British Journal of Medicine and 
Medical Research, 11: 1–11.
Dearing, R. & Tangney, J. (Eds.) (2011). Shame in the 
therapy hour. Washington, DC: American Psychologi-
cal Association.
DeFife, J., Hilsenroth, M., & Kuutman, K. (2014). Beyond 
transference fostering grow through therapeutic 
immediacy. In P. Luyten, C. Mayes, P. Fonagy, et al. 
(Eds.). Handbook of contemporary psychodynamic 
approaches to psychopathology . New York: Guilford 
Press.
Denckla, C., & Bornstein, R. (2015). Toward a more 
nuanced conceptualization of interpersonal distanc -
ing: Differential relationships of adaptive and dys -
functional detachment to stress-based anxiety in 
college students. Personality and Individual Differ -Personality and Individual Differ -Personality and Individual Differ
ences, 82: 148–52.
Dew, S. E., & Brown, L. (2005). Client expectancies about 
therapy. Mental Health Services Research, 17: 21–33.
DiCaccavo, A. (2006). Working with parentification: 
Implications for clients and counseling psychologists. 
Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and 
Practice 79: 469–78.
Diener, M., & Hilsenroth, M. (2009). Affect-focused tech-
niques in psychodynamic psychotherapy in R.A. Levy 
& J.S. Ablon (Eds.), Handbook of evidence-based psy-
chodynamic psychotherapy (pp. 227–47). New York: 
Hummana Press.
Diener, M. J., Hilsenroth, M. J., & Weinberger, J. (2007). 
Therapist affect focus and patient outcomes in psy -
chodynamic psychotherapy: A meta-analysis. Ameri-
can Journal of Psychiatry, 164: 936–41.
Diener, M., & Monroe, J. (2011). The relationship 
between adult attachment style and therapeutic alli -
ance in individual psychotherapy: A meta-analytic 
review. Psychotherapy, 48: 237–48.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

REFERENCES 381
Dollard, J., & Miller, N. (1950). Personality and psycho -
therapy: An analysis in terms of learning, thinking, 
and culture. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Domenech-Rodriguez, M., Donovick, M., & Crowley, S. 
(2009). Parenting styles in a cultural context: Obser -
vations of protective parenting in first-generation 
Latinos. Family Process, 48(2): 195–210.
Dozier, M. (1990). Attachment organization and treat -
ment for adults with serious psychopathological dis -
orders. Development and Psychopathology, 2: 47–60.
Dozier, M., & Tyrrell, C. (1998). The role of attachment in 
therapeutic relationships. In J. A. Simpsons and W. S. 
Rholes (Eds.), Attachment theory and close relation -
ships (pp. 221–28). New York: Guilford Press.
Dozier, M., Cue, K. L., & Bernett, L. (1994). Clinicians as 
caregivers: Role of attachment organization in treat -
ment. Journal of Counseling and Clinical Psychology, 
62: 793–800.
Dozier, M., Lomax, L., Tyrrell, C., & Lee, S. (2001). The 
challenge of treatment for clients with dismissing 
states of mind. Attachment and Human Development, 
3: 62–76.
Dozier, M., Stovall-McClough, & Albus, K. (2008). 
Attachment and Psychopathology in Adulthood. In 
Cassidy & P. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment
(pp. 718–44). New York: Guilford Press.
Draguns, J. (2007). Psychotherapeutic and related inter -
ventions for global psychology. In M. J. Stevens (Ed.), 
Toward a global psychology: Theory, research, inter -
vention, and pedagogy (pp. 233–66). Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
DSM-V (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Ameri-
can Psychiatric Publishing. 
Dutton, D. G. (1995). The batterer: A psychological pro -
file. New York: Basic Books.
Eagle, M., & Wolitzky, D. (2009). Adult Psy -
chotherapy from the Perspectives of Attach -
ment Theory and Psychoanalysis. In  
J. Obegi & E. Berant (Eds.), Attachment theory and 
research in clinical work with adults, New York: Guil-
ford Press.
Egan, G. (2014). The skilled helper (10th ed.), Pacific 
Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Elliot, R., Bohart, A., Watson, J., & Greenberg, L. (2011). 
Empathy. Psychotherapy, 48: 43–9.
Elliott, R., Watson, J., Goldman, R., & Greenberg, L. 
(2004). Learning emotion-focused therapy: The pro -
cess experiential approach to change. Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association.
Ellis, A. (1999). How to make yourself happy and remark-
ably less disturbable. San Luis Obispo, CA: Impact 
Publishers.
Enten, R., & Golan, M. (2009). Parenting styles and eat -
ing disorder pathology. Appetite. 52: 784–87.
Erikson, E. (1968). Childhood and society (2nd ed.). New 
York: Norton.
Falender, C, & Shafransky, E. (2004). Clinical supervision: 
A competency-based approach. New York: Guilford 
Press.
Farber, B. A., & Metzger, T. A. (2009). The therapist 
as secure base. In J. H. Obegi & E. Berant (Eds.), 
Attachment theory and research in clinical work . 
New York: Guilford Press.
Farber, B. A., Khurgin-Bott, R., & Feldman, S. (2009). 
The benefits and risks of patient self-disclosure in the 
psychotherapy of women with a history of childhood 
sexual abuse. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Prac-
tice, Training, 46(1): 52–67.
Feeney, B., & VanVieet, M. (2010). Growing through 
attachment and exploration in adulthood. Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 27: 226–34.
Feeney, J., & Noller, P. (1990). Attachment styles as a pre-
dictor of adult romantic relationships. Journal of Per-Journal of Per-Journal of Per
sonality and Social Psychology, 58: 281–91.
Fernando, I., Cohen, M., & Henskens, F. (2012). Pattern-
based formulation: A methodology for psychiatric case 
formulation, Australian Psychiatry, 20(2): 121–26.
Fetterman, A., Robinson, M., Ode, S. (2015). Interper -
sonal arrogance and the incentive salience of power 
versus affiliation cues. European Journal of Personal-
ity, 29: 28–41.
Finkelhor, D. (1990). Early & long-term effects of child 
sexual abuse: An update. Professional Psychology: 
Research and Practice, 21(5): 325–30.
Fiori, K., Consedine, N., & Magai, C. (2009). Late life 
attachment in context: Patterns of relating among 
men and women from seven ethnic groups. Journal of 
Cross Cultural Gerontology, 24(2): 121–41.
Fitzpatrick, M. R., Stalikas, A., & Iwakabe, S. (2001). 
Examining counselor interventions and client prog -
ress in the context of the therapeutic alliance. Psy-
chotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 38: 
160–70.
Florsheim, P., & McArthur, L. (2009). An interpersonal 
approach to attachment and change. In J. H. Obegi & 
E. Berant (Eds.), Attachment Theory and Research in 
Clinical Work with Adults (pp. 379–409). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Flückiger, C., Del Re, A., Wampold, B., Symonds, D., & 
Horvath, A. (2012). How central is the alliance in psy-
chotherapy? A multilevel longitudinal meta-analysis. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 59: 10–17.
Fonagy, O., Leigh, T., Steele, M., et al. (1996). The relation 
of attachment status, psychiatric classification and 
response to psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 64: 22–31.
Fonagy, P. (2000). Attachment and borderline personal -
ity disorder. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic 
Association, 48(4): 1129–47.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

382  REFERENCES
Fonagy, P. (2001). Attachment theory and psychoanalysis. 
New York: Other Press.
Fonagy, P. & Allison, E. (2014). The role of mentalizing 
and epistemic trust in the therapeutic relationship. 
Psychotherapy, 51: 372–80.
Fonagy, P., & Bateman, A. (2006).  Mechanisms of change 
in mentalization-based therapy of borderline per -
sonality disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 62: 
411–30.
Fonagy, P., & Target, M. (1997). Attachment and reflec -
tive function: Their role in self-organization. Develop-
mental Psychopathology, 9: 679–700.
Fonagy, P., Gergeley, G. & Target, M. (2007). The parent-
infant dyad and the construction of the subjective 
self. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,  48: 
288–328.
Fonagy, P., Gergeley, G., Jurist, E. J., & Target, M. (2002). 
Affect regulation, mentalization, and the development 
of the self. New York: Other Press.of the self. New York: Other Press.of the self
Fonagy, P., Leigh, T., Steel, M., & Kennedy, R. (1996). The 
relation of attachment status, psychiatric classifica -
tions, and response to psychotherapy. Journal of Con-
sulting and Clinical Psychology, 64: 22–31.
Fosha, D. (2003). Dyadic regulation and experiential 
work with emotion and relatedness in trauma and 
disorganized attachment. In M. Solomon & D. Siegel 
(Eds.), Healing trauma: Attachment, mind, body, and 
brain (pp. 221–281). New York: Norton.
Fosha, D., & Siegel, D., & Solomon, M. (Eds.). (2009). 
The healing power of emotion. New York: Norton.
Fragoso, J. M., & Kashubeck, S. (2000). Machismo, gen -
der role conflict, and mental health in Mexican Amer-
ican men. Psychology of Men and Masculinity, 1(2): 
87–97.
Fraiberg, S., Adelson, E., & Shapiro, V. (1975). Ghosts in 
the nursery: A psychoanalytical approach to the prob-
lems of impaired mother infant relationships. Journal 
of the American Academy of Child Psychiatry,  14: 
387–421.
Friedlander, M., Sutherland, O., Sanders, S., et al. (2012). 
Exploring corrective experience in a single, successful 
case of short-term dynamic psychotherapy, Psycho-
therapy, 49: 349–63.
Friedlander, M. L., Escuderom V., Hetherington, L., & 
Diamona, G. M. (2011). Alliance in couple & fam -
ily therapy. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy 
relationships that work: Evidence-based on respon -
siveness  (2nd ed., pp. 92–109) New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Fromm-Reichmann, F. (1960). Principles of intensive psy-
chotherapy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gabbard, G. (2007). Flexibility of the frame revised com -
mentary on Tony Bass’s “When the frame doesn’t fit 
the picture.” Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 17: 923–29.
Gabbard, G. O. (2007). Unconscious enactments in psy -
chotherapy. Psychiatric Annals, 37: 268–75.
Galassi, J. P., & Bruch, M. A. (1992). Counseling with 
social interaction problems: Assertion and social anxi-
ety. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), Handbook 
of counseling psychology (pp. 753–91). New York: 
Wiley.
Gans, J. (2011). The role of clinical experience in the mak-
ing of a psychotherapist. In R. Klein, H. Bernard, and 
V. Schermer (Eds.), On becoming a psychotherapist: 
The personal and professionaljJourney . (pp. 94–113). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Garfield, S. L. (1994). Research on client variables in psy-
chotherapy. In A. E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.), 
Handbook of psychotherapy and change (4th ed., pp. 
190–228). New York: Wiley.
Geller, S. M., & Greenberg, L. S. (2012). Therapeutic pres-
ence: A mindful approach to effective therapy . Wash-
ington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Gelso, C. J. (2011). The Real Relationship. Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association.
Gelso, C. J. (2014) A tripartile model of the therapeutic 
relationships: theory, research & practice. Psychother-Psychother-Psychother
apy Research. 24, 117–131.
Gelso, C. J., & Hayes, H. (2007). Countertransference and 
the therapist’s inner experience: Perils and possibili -
ties. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gelso, C., & Hayes, J. (2002). The management of coun -
tertransference. In J. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy 
relationships that work (pp. 267–84). New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Gelso, C. J., & Samstag, L. (2008). A tripartite model of 
the therapeutic relationship in psychotherapy. In S. 
Brown & R. Lent (Eds.), Handbook of counseling 
psychology (4th ed., pp. 267–83). New York: Wiley.
Gelso C., & Woodhouse, S. (2002). The termination of
Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy,  psychother -
apy: What research tells us about the process of end -
ing treatment.  In G. S. Tyrone (Ed.), Applying what 
we know (pp. 344–69). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Gelso, C., & Bhatia, A. (2012). Crossing theoretical lines: 
The role and effect of transference in nonanalytic psy-
chotherapies. Psychotherapy, 49: 384–90.
Gelso, C., Palma, B., & Bhatia, A. (2013). Attachment 
theory as a guide to understanding and working with 
transference and the real relationship in psychother -
apy. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In Session , 69: 
1160–71.
Gendlin, E. T. (1996). Focusing-oriented psychotherapy: A 
manual of the experiential method. New York: Guil-
ford Press.
Gilbert, P. (2009). Developing a compassion based 
approach in cognitive behavioral therapy. In G. 
Gimos (Ed.), Cognitive behavioral therapy: A guide 
for the practicing clinician (pp. 205–20). New York: 
Routledge.
Gilbert, P. (2010). Compassion focused therapy: Distinc -
tive features. London: Routledge.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

REFERENCES 383
Gilbert, P. (2014). Compassion-focused therapy: Preface 
and introduction for special section. British Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 53: 1–5.
Gilbert, P., & Procter, S. (2006). Compassionate mind 
training for people with high shame and self criticism. 
Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 13: 353–76.
Gilbert, P., McEwan, K., Matos, M., & Rivis, A. (2011). Fears 
of compassion: Development of three self-report mea-
sures. Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, 
and Practice, 84: 239–55.
Gill, M., & Muslin, H. (1976). Early interpretations of 
transference. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic 
Association, 24: 779–94.
Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice: Psychological 
theory and women’s development. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Gilligan, J. (2009). Sex, gender, & violence: Estela Wel -
don’s contribution to our understanding of the 
psychopathology of violence, British Journal of Psy -
chotherapy, 25(2): 239–56.
Gold, J. (2011). Attachment theory and psychotherapy 
integration: An introduction and review of the lit -
erature. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 21: 
221–31.
Gold, J. (2006). Patient-initiated integration. In G. Stricker 
& J Gold (Eds.), A casebook of psychotherapy inte -
gration (pp. 3–16). Washington, DC: American Psy -
chological Association.
Gold, J. (2005). Personology, personality disorders, and 
psychotherapy integration. In Strack, S. (Ed.), Hand-
book of personology and psychopathology  (pp. 511–
26). New York: John Wiley.
Gold, S., & Hilsenroth, M. (2009). Effects of graduate 
clinicians personal therapy on therapeutic alliance. 
Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 16: 159–71.
Gold, S., Hilsenroth, M., Kuutman, K., & Owen, J. 
(2015). Therapeutic alliance in the personal therapy 
of graduate clinicians: Relationship to the alliance 
and outcomes of their patients. Clinical Psychology 
and Psychotherapy, 22: 304–16. 
Gold, J., & Stricker, G. (2011). Failures in psychodynamic 
psychotherapy. Journal of Clinical Psychology in Ses -
sion, 67: 1098–05.
Goldenberg, H., & Goldenberg, I. (2013). Family therapy
8th ed. Belmont, CA: Brooks/cole/Cengage.
Goldenberg, I., & Goldenberg, H. (2012). Family therapy: 
An overview (7th ed.). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/
Cole.
Goldfried M. R., (2012). On entering and remaining in 
psychotherapy. Clinical Psychology: Science and Prac-
tice, 19: 125–8.
Goldfried, M. R. (2004). Integrating interactively oriented 
brief psychotherapy. Journal of Psychotherapy Inte -
gration, 14(1): 93–105.
Goldfried, M. R. (2006). Cognitive-affect-relational- 
behavior therapy. In G. Stricker & J. Gold (Eds.), 
A casebook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 153–164). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Goldfried, M., & Davila, J. (2005). The role of relation -
ship and technique in therapeutic change. Psychother-Psychother-Psychother
apy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 42: 421–30.
Goldfried, M. R., Raue, P. J., & Castonguay, L. G. (1998). 
The therapeutic focus in significant sessions of master 
therapists: A comparison of cognitive-behavioral and 
psychodynamic-interpersonal interventions. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66: 803–10.
Goldman, R., Watson, J., & Greenberg, L. (2011). Con -
trasting two clients in emotion-focused therapy for 
Depression 2: The case of “Eloise,” “It’s like opening 
the windows and letting the fresh air come in.” Prag-
matic studies in Psychotherapy, 7: 305–38. 
Göstas, M. W., Wiberg, B, Neander, K, & Kjellin, L. 
(2013). “Hard work” in a new context: Clients’ expe-
riences of Psychotherapy, Qualitative Social Work
12(3): 342–57.
Gottman, J., & DeClair, J. (2001). The Relationship Cure. 
New York: Three Rivers Press.
Greenberg, L., & Iwakabe, S. (2011). Emotion-focused 
therapy and shame. In R. Dearing & J. Tangney (Eds.). 
Shame in the therapy hour (pp. 69–90). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association.
Greenberg, L. (2014). The therapeutic relationship in 
emotion-focused therapy. Psychotherapy, 61: 350–57.
Greenberg, L. (2004). Emotion-focused therapy. Clinical 
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 11: 3–16.
Greenberg, L. S. (2002). Emotion-focused therapy: Coach-
ing clients to work through their feelings. Washing-
ton, DC: American Psychological Association.
Greenberg, L. S., & Goldman, R. N. (2008). Emotion-
focused couples therapy: The dynamics of emotion, 
love, and power. Washington, DC: American Psycho -
logical Association.
Greenberg, L.S. (2010). Emotion-focused therapy: Theory 
and practice. Washington, DC: American Psychologi-
cal Association.
Greenson, R. (1967). The technique and practice of psy -
choanalysis. (vol. 1). New York: International Univer-
sities Press.
Groth, M. (2008). Authenticity in existential analysis. 
Existential Analysis, 19(1): 81–101.
Guame, J., Gmel, G., & Daeppen, J. B. (2008). Brief alcohol 
interventions: Do counselors’ and patients’ communica-
tion characteristics predict change? Alcohol and Alcohol-
ism, 43: 62–9.
Haley, J. (1996). Learning and teaching therapy . New 
York: Guilford Press.
Hamre, B., & Watkins-Lewis, K. (2012). African-American 
parenting characteristics and their association with 
children cognitive and academic school readiness. 
Journal of African American Studies, 16: 390–405.
Hansen, N. B., Lambert, M. J., & Forman, E. M. (2002). 
The psychotherapy dose-response effect and its 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

384  REFERENCES
implications for treatment delivery services. Clinical 
Psychology: Science and Practice, 9: 329–43.
Hatcher, R., & Barends, A. (2006). How a return to the -
ory could help alliance research. Psychotherapy: The-
ory, Research, Practice, Training, 43: 292–99.
Haycraft, E., & Blissett, J. (2010). Eating Disorder Symp-
toms and parenting styles. Appetites, 54: 221–4.
Hayes, J., Gelso, C., & Hummel, A. (2011). Managing 
counter-transference. Psychotherapy, 48: 88–97.
Hayes, J., Gelso, C., & Hummel, A. (2011). Managing 
countertransference. (2011). In J. Norcross (Ed.), Psy-
chotherapy relationships that work  (2nd ed.). New 
York: Oxford.
Hayes, J., Nelson, D., & Fauth, J. (2015). Countertransfer-
ence in successful and unsuccessful cases of psycho -
therapy. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, & Practice, 
52: 127–33.
Henderson, C., Dakof, G., Schwartz, S., & Liddle, H. 
(2006). Family functioning, self-concept, and severity 
of adolescent externalizing problems. Journal of Child 
and Family Studies, 15: 721–31.
Henderson, J. C. (2010). Impact of a role induction to 
counseling on premature termination & readiness for 
change with clients in a rural setting: University of 
Aron: Dissertation.
Hendricks, M. N. (2002). Focusing-oriented/experien -
tial psychotherapy. In D. J. Cain & J. Seeman (Eds.), 
Humanistic psychotherapies: Handbook of research 
and practice (pp. 221–52). Washington, DC: Ameri -
can Psychological Association.
Hendrix, H. (2001). Getting the love you want: A guide 
for couples. New York: Owl Books.
Henry, W., Schacht, T., & Strupp, H. (1990). Patient and 
therapist introject, interpersonal process, and differ -
ential psychotherapy outcome. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 58: 768–74.
Herman, J., Perry, J., & van der Kolk, B. (1989). Child -
hood trauma in borderline personality disorder. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 146: 490–95.
Hersoug, A., Hoglend, P., Gabbard, G., & Lorentzen, 
S. (2013). The combined predictive effect of patient 
characteristic and alliance on long-term dynamic 
and interpersonal functioning after dynamic psycho -
therapy. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy , 20: 
297–307.
Hesse, E., & Main, M. (1999). Second generation effects 
of unresolved trauma in non-maltreating parents: Dis-
sociated, frightened and threatening parental behav -
ior. Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 19: 481–540.
Hesse, E., & Main, M. (2000). Disorganized infant, child 
& adult attachment & collapse in behavioral & 
attentional strategies. Journal of the Psychoanalytic 
Association, 48(4) 1097–148.
Hill, C. (2014). Helping skills (4th ed.). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Hill, C. E., & Knox, S. (2009). Processing the therapeutic 
relationship. Psychotherapy Research.
Hill, C. E., & O’Brien, K. M. (1999). Helping skills: Facili-
tating exploration, insight, and action. Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association.
Hill, C. E., Knox, S., Hess, S., & Crook-Lyon, R. (2007). 
The attainment of insight in the Hill dream model: 
A single case study. In L. Castonguay & C. E. Hill, 
Insight in psychotherapy (pp. 207–30). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association.
Hill, C. E., Sim, W., Spangler, P., Stahl, J., Sullivan, C, & 
Teyber, E. (2008). Therapist immediacy in brief psy -
chotherapy: Case study II. Psychotherapy Theory, 
Research, Practice, Training, 45(3): 298–315.
Hill, C. E., Thompson, B. J., & Corbett, M. M. (1992). The 
impact of therapist ability to perceive displayed and 
hidden client reactions on immediate outcome in first 
sessions of brief therapy. Psychotherapy Research,  2: 
143–55.
Hill, C. E., Thompson, B. J., Cogar, M. M., & Denman, D. 
W. (1993). Beneath the surface of long-term therapy: 
Client and therapist report of their own and each oth-
er’s covert processes. Journal of Counseling Psychol -
ogy, 40: 278–88.
Hill, C., & Knox, S. (2009). Processing the therapeutic 
relationship. Psychotherapy Research, 19: 13–29.
Hinnen, C., Sanderman, R. & Sprangers, M. (2009). Adult 
attachment as a mediator between recollections of 
childhood and satisfaction with life. Clinical Psych & 
Psychotherapy, 16(1): 10–21.
Hoeve, M., Dubas, J., Eichelsheim, V., vander Laan, P., 
Smeenk, W., & Gerris, J. (2009). The relationship 
between parenting and delinquency: A meta-analysis. 
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 37: 749–75.
Holtforth, M.,  Fluckiger, C., et al (2013).  Is the 
relation between early post-session reports 
and treatment outcome an epiphenomenon of 
intake distress and early response? A multi-
predictor analysis in outpatient psychotherapy. Psycho-
therapy Research, 23, 1–13. Doi:10.1080/10503307
Horney, K. (1970). Neurosis and human growth. New 
York: Norton.
Horowitz, M., Marmar, C, Krupnick, J., Wilner, N., Kal -
treider, N., & Wallerstein, R. (1984). Personality styles 
and brief psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books.
Horowitz, M., Rosenberg, S. E., & Bartholomew, K. 
(1993). Interpersonal problems, attachment styles, 
and outcome in brief dynamic psychotherapy. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61: 549–60.
Horvath, A. (2006). The alliance in context: Accomplish -
ments, challenges, and future directions, Psychother-
apy: Theory, Research, and Practice, 43(3), 258–63.
Horvath, A. O., & Bedi, R. P. (2002). The alliance. In J. 
C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that 
work: Therapist contributions and responsiveness to 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

REFERENCES 385
patients (pp. 37–69). New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Horvath, A. O., & Greenberg, L. S. (1994). The working 
alliance: Theory, research, and practice. New York: 
Wiley.
Horvath, A., Del Re, A., Flückiger, C. & Symonds, D. 
(2011). Alliance in individual psychotherapy. Psycho-
therapy, 48: 9–16.
Huntsinger, C, & Jose, P. (2009). Relations among paren-
tal acceptance and control and children’s social adjust-
ment in Chinese American and European American 
families. Journal of Family Psychology, 23(3): 321–30.
Imel, Z., & Wampold, B. (2008). The importance of 
treatment and the science of common factors in psy -
chotherapy. In S. D. Brown, & R. W. Lent (Eds.), 
Handbook of counseling psychology (4th ed.). Hobo-
ken, NJ: Wiley.
Ingram, B. (2012) Clinical case formulation: Matching the 
integrative treatment plan to the client. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley & Sons.
Ivey, A., Ivery, M., & Zalaquett, C. (2014) Intentional 
interviewing & counseling, facilitating client develop-
ment in a multicultural society (8th ed.). Belmont, CA, 
Brooks-Cole/Cengage.
Jacobsen, B. (2007). Authenticity and our basic existential 
dilemmas. Existential Analysis, 18(2): 289–97.
Jacobvitz, D. (2008). Afterword. In H. Steele & M. Steele 
(Eds.). Clinical applications of the Adult Attachment 
Interview (pp. 471–86). New York: Guilford Press.
James, R. K., & Guilliland, B. (2000). Crisis intervention 
strategies (4th ed.). Monterey, CA: Wadsworth.
Janoff-Bulman, R. (1979). Characterological versus 
behavioral self-blame: Inquiries into depression and 
rape. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 
37: 1798–1809.
Janzen, J., Fitzpatrick, M., & Drapeau, M. (2008). Pro -
cesses involved in client-nominated relationship build-
ing incidents: Client attachment, attachment to the 
therapist, and session impact. Psychotherapy: Theory, 
Research, Practice, and Training, 45: 377–90.
Johnson, M.E., Popp, C., Schact, T.E., Mellon, J., & 
Strupp, H. H. (1989). Converging evidence for identi-
fication of recurrent relationship themes: Comparison 
of two methods. Psychiatry, 52: 275–88. 
Johnson, B., Taylor, E., D’elia, J., Tzanetos, T., Rhodes. R., 
& Geller, J. D. (1995). The emotional consequence of 
therapeutic misunderstandings. Psychotherapy Bulle-
tin, 30: 139–49. 
Johnson, S. (2004). Creating connection: The practice of 
emotionally focused couples therapy  (2nd ed.). New 
York: Brunner. Routledge.
Johnson, S. (2008). Couple and family therapy: An attach-
ment perspective. In J. Cassidy & P. Shaver (Eds.), 
Handbook of Attachment  (2nd  ed.). (pp. 811–32). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Joireman, J. (2004). Empathy and the self-absorption par-
adox: self-rumination & self-reflection as mediators 
between shame, guilt, and empathy. Self and Identity, 
3: 255–88.
Jordan, J., Kaplan, A., Miller, J., Striver, P., & Surrey, J. 
(1991). Women’s growth in connection (pp. 126–84). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Kahn, M. (1997). Between therapist and client. New York: 
Freeman.
Karen, R. (1998). Becoming attached. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Kasper, L., Hill, C. E., & Kivlighan, D. (2008). Therapist 
immediacy in brief psychotherapy: Case study I. Psy-
chotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 45: 
281–87.
Kathleen, M., Adelson, J., Callahan, C., et al. (2012). Gifted 
students’ perceptions of parenting styles: Associations 
with cognitive ability, sex, race, and age. Gifted Child 
Quarterly, 54: 15–24.
Katzenelson, H. (2014). Reflective functioning: A review. 
Clinical Psychology Review, 34: 107–17.
Kazantzis, N. & Kellis, E. (2012). A special feature on col-
laboration in psychotherapy. Journal of Clinical Psy -
chology, 68(2): 133–5.
Kegel, A. & Fluckiger, C. (2015). Predicting psychother -
apy dropouts: A multilevel approach. Clinical Psy -
chology and Psychotherapy, 22(5): 377–86. 
Keller, H. (2013). Attachment and culture. Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology, 44: 175–94.
Kelly, A. E. (1998). Clients’ secret keeping in outpatient 
therapy. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 45: 50–57.
Kerig, P., Ludlow, A., & Wenar, C. (2012). Developmental 
Psychopathology (6th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Kerr, M. E., & Bowen, M. (1988). Family evaluation: An 
approach based on Bowen theory. New York: Norton.
Kiesler, D. J. (1966). Some myths of psychotherapy research 
and the search for a paradigm. Psychological Bulletin, 
65: 110–36.
Kiesler, D. J. (1988). Therapeutic metacommunication: 
Therapist impact disclosure as feedback in psycho -
therapy. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Kiesler, D. J. (1996). Contemporary interpersonal theory 
and research: Personality, psychopathology, and psy -
chotherapy. New York: Wiley.
Kiesler, D., & Van Denburg, T. (1993). Therapeutic impact 
disclosure: A last taboo in psychoanalytic theory and 
practice. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy , 1(1): 
3–13.
Kivlighan, D., Gelso, C., Ain, S., Hummel, A., & Markin, 
R. (2015). The therapist, the client and the real rela -
tionship: An Actor-partner interdependence Analysis 
of treatment outcome. Journal of Counseling Psychol-
ogy, 62(2): 314–20.
Knox, S., Adrian, S.  Everson, E., Hess, S., Hill, C., & 
Crook-Lyon, R. (2013). Clients perspectives on 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

386  REFERENCES
therapy termination. Psychotherapy Research, 21(2): 
154–67. 
Kobak, R., Cassidy, J., & Lyons-Ruth, K. (2006). Attach-
ment stress and psychopathology: A developmental 
pathways model. Developmental Psychopathology ,
2(1): 357–88.
Kohut, H. (1977). The restoration of the self. New York: 
International Universities Press.
Kuutmann, K., & Hilsenroth, M. (2012). Exploring 
insession focus on the patient-therapist relation -
ships: Patient characteristics, process and out -
come. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy , 19: 
187–202.
Ladany, N., & Inman, A. (2012). Training and supervi -
sion. In E. Altmaier & J. Hausen (Eds.), The Oxford 
handbook of counseling psychology . New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Ladany, N., Friedlander, M., & Nelson, M. (2005). Critical 
events in psychotherapy supervision: An interpersonal 
approach. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Lafferty, P., Beutler, L. F., & Crago, M. (1991). Differences 
between more and less effective psychotherapists: A 
study of select therapist variables. Journal of Consult-
ing and Clinical Psychology, 57: 76–80.
Laing, R. D., & Esterson, A. (1970). Sanity, madness and 
the family. Middlesex: Penguin.
Lambert, M., & Barley, D. (2002). Research on the thera-
peutic relationship and psychotherapy outcome. In 
J. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that 
work: Therapist contributions and responsiveness to 
patients (pp. 17–22). New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Lambert, M., & Ogles, B. (2004). The efficacy and effec -
tiveness of psychotherapy. In M. J. Lambert (Ed.), Ber-Ber-Ber
gin and Garfield’s handbook of psychotherapy and 
behavior change (5th ed., pp. 139–93). New York: 
Wiley.
Lamborn, S., Mounts, N., Steinberg, L., & Dornbusch, 
S. (1991). Patterns of competence and adjustment 
among adolescents from Authoritative, Authoritarian, 
Indulgent, and Neglectful families, Child Develop -
ment, 62: 1049–65.
Larose, S., & Bernier, A. (2001). Social Support processes: 
Mediators of Attachment state of mind in late ado -
lescence. Attachment and Human Development, 3: 
96–120.
Lasca, F., Mitjavila, M., Ochoa, S., & Balluerta, N. 
(2015). The relationship between attachment styles 
and internalizing or externalizing symptoms in clini -
cal and nonclinical adolescents. Anales de Psicologia, 
31: 422–32.
Lazarus, A. (1993). Tailoring the therapeutic relationship, 
or being an authentic chameleon. Psychotherapy, 30: 
404–7.
Lazarus, A. O. (1989). The practice of multi-modal ther -
apy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lazarus, A., Lazarus, C. & Fey, A. (1993). Don’t believe it 
for a minute!: Forty toxic ideas that are driving you 
crazy. San Luis Obispo, CA: Impact.
Levant, R. F. (2005). Report of the 2005 presidential task 
force on evidence based practice. Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Levenson, H. (1995). Time-limited dynamic therapy. New 
York: Basic Books.
Levenson, H. (1982). Language and healing. In S. Slip 
(Ed.), Curative factors in dynamic psychotherapy. 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Levenson, H. (2003). Time-limited psychotherapy: An 
integrationist perspective. Journal of Psychotherapy 
Integration, 13 (3, pt. 4): 300–33.
Levenson, H. (2004). Time-limited dynamic psychother -
apy: Formulation and intervention.
Levenson, H. (2010). Brief dynamic therapy. Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association.
Levenson, H., Butler, S., Powers, T., & Beitman, B. (2002). 
Concise guide to brief dynamic and interpersonal psy-
chotherapy. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Press.
Levenson, H., & Strupp, H. (2007). Cyclical maladaptive 
patterns: Case formulation in time-limited dynamic 
psychotherapy. In T.D. Eells (Ed.), Handbook of psy -
chotherapy case formulation (2nd ed., pp. 164–97). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Levenson, H., & Strupp. H. (1997). Cyclical maladaptive 
patterns in time-limited dynamic psychotherapy. In T. 
D. Ells (Ed.), Handbook of psychotherapy case formu-
lation (pp. 84–115). New York: Guilford Press.
Levine, A., & Heller, R. (2010). Attached . New York: 
Penguin.
Levinson, D. (1978). The seasons of a man’s life. New 
York: Ballantine.
Levinson, D. (2000). The seasons of a woman’s life. New 
York: Knopf.
Levy, K. N., Clarkin, J. F., Yeomans, F. E., Scott, L. N., 
Wasserman, R. H., & Kernberg, O. F. (2006). The 
mechanisms of change in the treatment of border -
line personality disorder with transference-focused 
psychotherapy. Journal of Clinical Psychology , 62: 
481–501.
Levy, K., & Scalia, J. (2012). Transference, transference 
interpretations, and transference-focused psychother -
apies. Psychotherapy, 49: 391–403.
Levy, K., Ellison, W., Scott, L., & Bernecker, S. (2011). 
Attachment style. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In 
Session, 67: 193–203.
Lewis, H. (1971). Shame and guilt in neurosis. New York: 
International Universities Press.
Lewis, M. (1995). Shame: The exposed self. New York: 
The Free Press.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

REFERENCES 387
Lewis, M., Feiring, C., & Rosenthal, S. (2000). Attach -
ment over time. Child Development, 71: 707 –20.
Lieberman, M., Eisenberger, N., Crockett, M., et al. 
(2007). Putting feelings into words: Affect labeling 
disrupts amygdala activity in response to affective 
stimuli. Psychological Science, 18: 421–28.
Lieberman, A., & Van Horn, P. (2008). Psychotherapy 
with infants and young children. New York: Guilford 
Press.
Linehan, M.M., Dimeff, L.A., Reynolds, S.K., Comtois, 
K.A., Shaw Welch, S., Heagerty, P., & Kivlahan, D. R. 
(2002). Dialectical behavior therapy versus compre -
hensive validation plus 12 step for the treatment of 
opioid dependent women meeting criteria for border -
line personality disorder. Drug and Alcohol Depen -
dence, 67: 13–26.
Linehan, M. (1992). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of 
borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford 
Press.
Linehan, M. (1997). Validation and psychotherapy. In A. 
L. Bohart and L. S. Greenberg (Eds.) Empathy recon-
sidered: New directions (pp. 353–92), Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association.
Liotti, G. (2004). Trauma, dissociation, and disorganized 
attachment: Three strands of a single braid. Psycho-
therapy: theory, Research, Practice, and Training, 41: 
472–86.
Lohr, M., Olatunji, B., Baumeister, R., & Bushman, B. 
(2007). The psychology of anger venting and empiri -
cally supported alternatives that do no harm. The Sci-
entific Review of Mental Health Practice, 5: 53–64.
Love, K., & Thomas, P. (2014). Parenting styles & adjust-
ment outcomes among college students. Journal of 
College Student Development, 55: 139–50.
Luborsky, L., McLellan, A. T., Diguer, L., Woody, G., & 
Seligman, D. A. (1997). The psychotherapist matters: 
Comparison of outcomes across twenty-two thera -
pists and seven patient samples. Clinical Psychology, 
4: 53–65.
Lyons-Ruth, K., Easterbrooks, M., & Cibelli, C. (1997). 
Infant attachment strategies, infant mental lag, and 
maternal depressive symptoms: Predictors of internaliz-
ing and externalizing problems at age 7. Developmental 
Psychology, 33: 681–92.
Main, M. (1995). Recent studies in attachment. In S. 
Goldberg, R. Muir, & J. Kerr (Eds.), Attachment the-
ory: Social, developmental, and clinical perspectives
(pp. 407–74). Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Main, M. & Hesse, E. (1990). Parents’ unresolved trau -
matic experiences are related to infant disorganized 
attachment status: Is frightening and/or frightened 
parental behavior the linking mechanism? In M.T. 
Greenberg, D. Cicchetti, & E.M. Cummings (Eds.), 
Attachment in the preschool years  (pp. 121–60). Chi-
cago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Malik, M., Beutler, L., Alimohamed, S., & Gallagher-
Thompson. (2003). Are all cognitive therapies alike? 
A comparison of cognitive and noncognitive therapy 
process and implications for the application of empir-
ically supported treatments. Journal of Counseling 
and Clinical Psychology, 71: 150–58.
Mallinckrodt, B. (2000). Attachment, social competencies, 
social support, and interpersonal process in psycho -
therapy. Psychotherapy Research, 10: 239–66.
Mallinckrodt, B. (2010). The psychotherapy relationship 
as attachment: Evidence and implications. Journal of 
Personal and Social Relationships, 27: 262–70. 
Mallinckrodt, B. (2015).  Attachment theory and psycho -
therapy relationship-summarizing what we know. [Web 
article]. Retrieved from www.scoietyforpsychother -
apy.org/attachment-theory-and-the-psychotherapy-
relationship-summarizing-what-we-know
Mallinckrodt, B., Gantt, D., & Coble, H. (1995). Attach -
ment patterns in the psychotherapy relationship: 
Development of the client attachment to therapist 
scale. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 42: 307–17.
Mallinckrodt, B., Porter, M. J., & Kivlingham, D. M. 
(2005). Client attachment to therapist, depth of in-
session exploration, and object relations in brief psy -
chotherapy. Psychotherapy: Theory, Practice, Training, 
42: 85–100.
Mallinckrodt, B., Choi, G., & Daly, K. (2015). Pilot test 
of a measure to assess therapeutic distance and its 
association with client attachment and corrective 
experience in therapy. Psychotherapy Research , 25:
505–17
Mallinckrodt, B. & Jeong, J. (2014). Meta-analysis of 
client attachment to therapist: Associations with 
working alliance and client pretherapy attachment. 
Psychotherapy, 52(1): 134–39.
Mallinckrodt, B., Daly, K., & Wang, C. (2009). An attach-
ment approach to adult psychotherapy. In J. Obege 
& E. Berant (Eds.), Attachment theory and research 
in clinical work with adults  (pp. 234–69). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Mann, J. (1973). Time-limited psychotherapy. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Many, M. M. (2009). Termination as a therapeutic inter -
vention when treating children who have experienced 
multiple losses. Infant Mental Health Journal, 30(1): 
23–39.
Markin, R.D. (2014). Toward a common identity for rela-
tionally oriented clinicians: A place to hang one’s hat.  
Psychotherapy, 51(3): 327–33. 
Markowitz, T., & Milrod, B. (2011). The importance of 
responding to negative affect in psychotherapies. The 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 169(2): 124–8.
Marmarosh, C, Gelso, C, Markin, R., & Majors, R. 
(2009). The real relationship in psychotherapy: Rela -
tionships to adult attachments, working alliances, 
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

388  REFERENCES
transferences, and therapy outcomes. Journal of 
Counseling Psychology, 56(3): 37–50.
Marmarosh, C., Kivlighan, D., Bien, K., et al. (2014). The 
insecure psychotherapy base: Using client and thera -
pist attachment styles to understand early alliance. 
Psychotherapy, 51: 404–12.
Marmarosh, C. (2015). Emphasizing the complexity of 
the relationship: The next decade of attachment-based 
psychotherapy research. Psychotherapy, 52: 12–18.
Martin, A., Buchheim, A., Berger, U., & Straus, B. (2007). 
The impact of attachment organization on poten -
tial counter-transference reactions. Psychotherapy 
Research, 17: 46–58.
Marx, S. A., & Gelso, C. J. (1987). Termination of individ-
ual counseling a university counseling center. Journal 
of Counseling Psychology, 34: 3–9.
Matsakis, A. (1998). Managing client anger: What to do 
when a client is angry at you . Oakland, CA: New 
Harlinger Publications.
Mayotte-Blum, J., Slavin-Mulford, J., Lehmann, M., et 
al. (2012). Therapeutic immediately across long-term 
psychodynamic psychotherapy: An evidence-based 
case study. Journal of Counseling Psychology , 59: 
27–40.
McBride, C., Atkinson, L., Quilty, L., & Bagby, R. (2006). 
Attachment as a moderator of treatment outcome in 
major depression: A randomized control trial of inter-
personal psychotherapy versus cognitive behavior. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74: 
1041–54.
McCarthy, K., Cannolly, M., Gibbons, M., & Barber, J. 
(2008). The relation of rigidity across relationships with 
symptoms and functioning: An investigation with the 
revised central relationship questionnaire. Journal of 
Counseling Psychology, 55: 346–58.
McClure, F., & Teyber, E. (2003). Casebook in child and 
adolescent treatment: Cultural and familial contexts . 
Pacific Grove, CA: Wadsworth.
McClure, F., & Teyber, E. (2003). Linda: A depressed 
third- culture kid clarifying spiritual values. In F. 
McClure & E./uni00A0Teyber (Eds.), Casebook in child & 
adolescent treatment (pp. 240–69). Pacific Grove, CA: adolescent treatment (pp. 240–69). Pacific Grove, CA: adolescent treatment
Brooks/Cole.
McCrane, R., & Costa, P. (1988). Recalled parent-child 
relations and adult personality. Journal of Personality, 
56: 417–34.
McGoldrick, M., Gerson, R., & Petry, S. (2008). Geno-
grams: Assessments and interventions (3rd ed.). New 
York: Norton.
McKinney, C., & Renk, K. (2008). Multivariate models of 
parent-late adolescent gender dyads: The importance 
of parenting processes in predicting adjustment. Child 
Psychiatry and Human Development, 39: 147–70.
Meissner, W. W. (2007). Therapeutic alliance: Theme and 
variations. Psychoanalytic Psychology, 24: 231–54.
Messer, S. B. & Wampold, B. E. (2002).  Let’s face facts: 
Common factors are more potent than specific ther -
apy ingredients. Clinical Psychology: Science and 
Practice, 9: 21–5.
Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. R. (2005). Attachment theory 
and emotions in close relationships: Exploring the 
attachment-related dynamics of reactions to relational 
events. Personal Relationships, 12: 149–68.
Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. (2007). Attachment in adult-
hood. New York: Guilford Press.
Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. (2008). Adult attachment 
and affect regulation. In M. Cassidy & P. Shaver 
(Eds.), Handbook of attachment  (pp. 503–31). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. (2008). Adult attachment 
and object relations. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver 
(Eds.), Handbook of attachment  (pp. 503–31). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Mikulincer, M., Shaver, P., & Pereg, D. (2003). Attachment 
theory and affect regulation: The dynamics, develop -
ment, and consequences of attachment-related strate -
gies. Motivation and Emotion, 27: 77–102.
Miller, A. (1984), Prisoners of childhood. New York: Basic 
Books.
Miller, W. R. & Rollnick, S. (2013). Motivational inter -Motivational inter -Motivational inter
viewing (3rd ed.), New York: Guilford Press.viewing (3rd ed.), New York: Guilford Press.viewing
Miller, W. R., Benefield, R. G., & Tonigan, J. S. (1993). 
Enhancing motivation for change in problem with 
drinking: A controlled comparison of two therapist 
styles. Journal of Counseling and Clinical Psychology, 
61: 433–61.
Miller, W., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interview-
ing. New York: Guilford Press.
Miller, W., & Rose, G. (2009). Toward a theory of motiva-
tional interviewing. American Psychological Association,
64(6): 527–37.
Millon, T. (1999). Reflections on psychosynergy: A model 
for integrating science, theory, classification, assess -
ment, and therapy. Journal of Personality Assessment, 
72(3): 437–56.
Millon, T. (2004). Personality disorders in modern life . 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Millon, T., & Grossman, S. (2007). Overcoming resistant 
personality disorders: A personalized psychotherapy 
approach. Hoboken. NJ: Wiley.
Mills, R., Imm, G.,  Walling, B., & Weiler, H. (2008). Cor-
tisol reactivity and regulation associated with shame 
responding in early childhood. Developmental Psy -
chology, 44: 1369–80.
Minuchin, S. (1984). Family kaleidoscope . Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Minuchin, S., & Nichols, M. P. (1998). Structural family 
therapy. In F. M. Datilio (Ed.), Case studies in couple 
and family therapy: Systemic and cognitive perspec -
tives. New York: Guilford Press.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

REFERENCES 389
Minuchin, S., Nichols, M. P., & Lee, W. (2006). Assessing 
couples and families: From symptom to system. Boston, 
MA: Pearson.
Mitchell, S. (1988). Relational concepts in psychoanalysis. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mitchell, S. (1993). Hope and dread in psychoanalysis . 
New York: Basic Books.
Morgan, Z., Brugha, T., Fryers, T., et al. (2012). The 
effects of parent-child relationships on later life men -
tal health status in two national cohorts.  Social Psy -
chiatry and Epidemiology, 47: 1707–15.
Moyers, T. (2014). The relationship in motivational inter-
viewing. Psychotherapy, 51: 358–63.
Moyers, T.B., Houck, J., Rice, S.L. et al (2016). Thera -
pist empathy, combined behavioral intervention, and 
alcohol outcomes in the COMBINE research proj -
ect. Journal of Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 84: 
221–9
Moyers, T. B. & Miller, W. R. (2013). Is low therapist 
empathy toxic. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 
27: 878–84.
Moyers, T. B., Miller, W. R., & Hendrickson, S. M. L. 
(2005). How does motivational interviewing work? 
Therapist interpersonal skill predicts client involve -
ment within motivational interviewing sessions. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73: 
590–98.
Moyers, T., Martin, T., Christopher, P., Houck, J., Tonigan, 
J., & Amrhein, P. (2007). Client language as a mediator 
of motivational interviewing efficacy: Where is the evi-
dence? Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 
31(Suppl. 3): 40–47.
Mueller, W. J., & Aniskiewics, A. S. (1986). Psychothera-
peutic intervention in hysterical disorders . Northvale, 
NJ: Aronson.
Muran, J. C., Safran, J. D., Gorman, B. S., Samstag, L. W., 
Eubanks-Carter, C., & Winston, A. (2009). The rela -
tionship of early alliance ruptures and their resolution 
to process and outcome in three time-limited psycho -
therapies for personality disorders. Psychotherapy: 
Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 46(2): 233–48.
Muran, J. C., Safran, J. D., Samstag, L. W., & Winston, A. 
(2005). A comparative treatment study of personality 
disorders. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, 
Training, 42: 512–31. 
Myers, S., & White, C. (2010) The Abiding Nature of 
empathic connections: A 10-year follow up study. 
Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 50(1): 77–95.
Najavits, L., & Strupp, H. (1994). Differences in the effec-
tiveness of psychodynamic therapists: A process-out -
come study. Psychotherapy Research, 31: 114–23.
Nathanson, D. L. (Ed.). (1987). The many faces of shame 
(pp. 246–70). New York: Guilford Press.
Neff, K. (2011). Self compassion.  New York: 
HarperCollins.
Nienhuis, J.B. (2014). A meta-analytic review of the rela -
tionship between the therapeutic alliance, empathy, 
and genuineness in individual psychotherapy. Elec-
tronic Theses & Dissertations. Paper 1063.
Norcross, J. & Lambert, M. (2014). Relationship science 
& practice in psychotherapy: Closing commentary. 
Psychotherapy, 51(3): 1–13.
Norcross, J., (2011). Psychotherapy relationships that 
work: Evidence based responsiveness  (2nd ed.). New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Norcross, J. & Lambert, M. (2014). Relationship science 
and practice in psychotherapy: Closing commentary. 
Psychotherapy, 51: 398–403.
Norcross, J. & Lambert, M. (2011). Evidence-based ther -
apy relationships. In J. Norcross (Ed.), Psychother -
apy relationships that work (pp. 3–21). New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Norcross, J. (2010). The therapeutic relationship. In B. 
Duncan, S. Miller, B. Wampold, & M. Hubble (Eds.), 
The heart and soul of change: Delivering what works 
in therapy  (2nd ed., pp. 113–41). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. 
Norcross, J. C. (2002). Psychotherapy relationships that 
work: Therapist contributions and responsiveness to 
patients. New York: Oxford University Press.
Norcross, J., & Wampold, B. (2011). Evidence-based ther-
apy relationships: Research conclusions and clinical 
practices. Psychotherapy, 48: 98–102.
O’Brien, A., Fahmy, R., & Singh, S. P. (2009). Disengage-
ment from mental health services: A literature review. 
Social Psychiatry & Psychiatric Epidemiology , 44(7): 
558–68.
Obegi, J., & Berant, E. (Eds.). (2009) Attachment theory and 
research in clinical work with adults. New York: Guil-
ford Press.
Ogawa, J., Sroufe, L., Weinfield, N., et al. (1997). Devel -
opment and the fragmented self: Longitudinal study 
of dissociative symptomatology in a nonclinical sam -
ple. Development and Psychopathology, 9: 855–79.
Ogden, T. H. (2002). New reading of the origins of object 
relations theory. International Journal of Psychoanal-
ysis, 83: 767–82.
Ogrodniczuk, J. S., Joyce, A. S., & Piper, W. T. (2005). 
Strategies for reducing patient-inpatient premature 
termination of psychotherapy. Harvard Review of 
Psychiatry, 13(2): 57–70.
Okiishi, J., Lambert, M., Nelson, S., & Ogles, B. (2003). 
Waiting for supershrink: An empirical analysis of 
therapist effects. Clinical Psychology and Psychother-Clinical Psychology and Psychother-Clinical Psychology and Psychother
apy, 10: 361–73.
Orlinsky, D. E., Ronnestad, M. H., & Willutzki, U. (2004). 
Process and outcome in psychotherapy. In M. J. Lam-
bert (Ed.), Bergin and Garfield’s handbook of psycho-
therapy and behavior change (5th ed., pp. 307–89). 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

390  REFERENCES
Otani, K., Suzuki, A., Matsumoto, V., et al. (2014). Distinctive 
correlations of sociotropy and autonomy with working 
models of self and other. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 55: 
1643–46.
Ozer, E., Flores, E., Tschann, J., & Pasch, L. (2011). Par -
enting style, depressive symptoms and substance use 
in Mexican American adolescents. Youth and Society, 
43: 346–88.
Parish, M., & Eagle, M. N. (2003). Attachment to the 
therapist. Psychoanalytic Psychology, 20: 271–86.
Parker, S., & Thomas, R. (2009). Psychological differences 
in shame vs. guilt: Implications for mental health 
counselors. Journal of Mental Health Counseling, 31: 
213–24.
Pasternak, A., & Schier, K. (2014). Life without child -
hood-parentification of women with AcoA syndrome. 
Psychiatra Polska, 48: 553–62.
Patrick, M., Hobson, R., Castle, D., Howard, R., & 
Maughan, B. (1994). Personality disorder and the 
mental representation of early social experiences. 
Development & Psychopathology, 6: 375–88.
Pedersen, P., Draguns, J., Lonner, W., & Trimble, J. (Eds.). 
(2008). Counseling across cultures (6th ed.). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Pederson, P., Crethar, H., & Carlson, J. (2008). Inclu -
sive cultural empathy: Making relationships central 
in counseling and psychotherapy. Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Perrin, M., Ehrenberg, M., & Hunter, M. (2013). Bound-
ary diffusion, individuation, and adjustment: Com -
parison of young adults in divorced versus intact 
families. Family Relations, 62: 768–82.
Persons, J. B., & Silberschatz, G. (1998). Are results of 
randomized controlled trials useful to psychothera -
pists? Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
66: 126–35.
Persons, J. B., Beckner, V. L., & Tompkins, M. A. (2013). 
Testing case formulation hypotheses in psychother -
apy: Two case examples. Cognitive & Behavioral 
Practise, 20(4): 399–409.
Peterson, B., & Zubriggen, E. (2010). Gender, sexuality, and 
the authoritarian personality. Journal of Personality, 78: 
1801–27.
Pezzarossa, B., Della Rosa, A., & Rubino, A. I. (2002). Self-
defeating personality and memories of parents’ child-
rearing behavior. Psychological Reports, 91: 436–38.
Pietromonacco, P. & Feldman, L. (2000). The internal 
working models concept: What do we really know 
about the self in relation to others? Review of General 
Psychology, 4: 155–75.
Piko, E., Luszczynska, A., & Fitzpatrick, K. (2013). Social 
inequalities in adolescent depression: The role of 
parental social support and optimism. International 
Journal of Social Psychiatry, 59: 474–81.
Pos, A. E., Greenberg, L. S., Goldman, R. N., & Korman, 
L. M. (2003). Emotional processing during experien -
tial treatment of depression. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 71: 1007–16.
Potter-Efron, R. (2007). Rage . Oakland, CA: New 
Harbinger.   
Potter-Efron, R. (2011). Therapy with shame-prone alco -
holic and drug-dependent clients. In R. Dearing & 
J. Tangney (Eds.), Shame in the therapy hour  (pp. 
219–36). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association).
Powell, M., Cooper, G., Hoffman, K., & Marvin, B. 
(2013). The circle of security intervention. New York: 
Guilford Press.
Prochaska, J., & Norcross, J. (2006). Systems of psycho -
therapy: A transtheoretical analysis (6th ed.). Pacific 
Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Prochaska, J., DiClemente, C., & Norcross, J. (1992). In 
search of how people change: Applications to addic -
tive behaviors. American Psychologist, 47: 1102–14.
Prochaska, J., Norcross, J., & DiClemente, C. (2005). 
Stages of change: Perspective guidelines. In G. P. 
Koocher, J. C. Norcross, & S. S. Hill (Eds.), Psycholo-
gists’ desk reference (2nd ed., pp. 226–31). New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Quirk, S., Weir, D., Martin, S., & Christian, A. (2015). The 
influence of parental rejection on the development 
of maladaptive schemas, rumination, and motiva -
tions for self-injury. Journal of Psychopathology and 
Behavioral Assessment, 37: 283–95.
Rapee, R. (1997). Potential role of child rearing practices 
in the development of anxiety and depression. Clinical 
Psychology Review, 17: 47–67.
Rapee, R. (2012). Family factors in the development and 
management of anxiety disorders. Clinical Child and 
Family Psychology Review, 15: 69–80.
Rappleyea, D., Harris, S. M., White, M., & Simon, K. 
(2009). Termination: Legal and ethical considerations 
for marriage and family therapists. American Journal 
of Family Therapy, 37: 12–27.
Raskin, J. (2005). The nondirective attitude. Person-Cen-
tered Journal, 12 (1–2): 5–22.
Ravitz, P., McBride, C., & Maunder, R. (2011). Failures in 
interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT): Factors related to 
treatment resistances. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 
67: 129–39.
Regan, A. M., & Hill, C. E. (1992). Investigation of what 
clients and counselors do not say in brief therapy. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 39: 168–74.
Reis, B. F., & Brown, L. G. (2006). Preventing therapy 
dropout in the real world: The clinical utility of video 
tape preparation and client estimate of treatment 
duration. Professional Psychology: Research and 
Practice, 37: 311–16.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

REFERENCES 391
Reis, S., & Grenyer, B. (2004). Fear of intimacy in women: 
Relationship between attachment styles and depres -
sion symptoms. Psychopathology, 37: 299–303.
Renik, O. (1998). The role of countertransference enact -
ment in a successful clinical psychoanalysis. In S. J. 
Ellman & M. Moskowitz (Eds.), Enactment: Toward 
a new approach to the therapeutic relationship (pp. 
111–28). Northvale, NJ: Aronson.
Renn, P. (2012). The silent past and invisible present: 
Memory, trauma, and representation in psychother -
apy. New York: Routledge.
Rhodes, R. H., Thompson, B. J., & Elliott, R. (1994). Cli-
ent retrospective recall of resolved and unresolved 
misunderstanding events. Journal of Counseling Psy -
chology, 41: 473–83.
Richmond, V., McCroskey, J., & Hickson, M. (2012). 
Nonverbal behavior in interpersonal relations  (7th 
ed.). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Ridley, C. R. & Kelly, S. M. (2007). Multicultural con -
siderations in case formulation. In T. D. Eells (Ed.), 
Handbook of psychotherapy case formulation  (pp. 
33–64). New York: Guilford Press.
Rizq, R. (2009). Teaching and transformation: A psycho -
analytic perspective on psychotherapeutic training. 
British Journal of Psychotherapy, 25(3): 363–80.
Robbins, S. B., & Jolkovski, M. P. (1987). Managing 
countertransference feelings: An international model 
using awareness of feeling and theoretical framework. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 34: 276–82.
Rogers, C. (1951). Client-centered therapy. Boston, MA: 
Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, C. (1957). The necessary and sufficient conditions 
of personality change. Journal of Consulting Psychol-
ogy, 21: 95–103.
Rogers, C. (1975). Empathy: An unappreciated way of 
being. Counseling Psychologist, 21: 95–103.
Rogers, C. (1980). A way of being. Boston, MA: Hough -
ton Mifflin.
Roisman, G., & Fraley, R. (2008). A behavior-genetic 
study of parenting quality, infant attachment security, 
and their covariation in a nationally representative 
sample. Developmental Psychology, 44, 831–839.
Romano, V., Fitzpatrick, M., & Janzen, J. (2008). The 
secure-base hypothesis: Global attachment, attach -
ment to counselor, and session exploration in psy -
chotherapy. Journal Counseling Psychology,  55: 
495–504.
Roth, A., & Fonagy, P. (2005). What works for whom? 
A critical review of psychotherapy research (2nd ed.). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Rothrauff, T., Cooney, T., & An, J. (2009). Remembered 
parenting styles and adjustment in middle and late 
adulthood. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 
64: 137–46.
Rubino, A. I., Pezzarossa, B., Della Rosa, A., & Siracu -
sano, A. (2004). Self-defeating personality and memo-
ries of parent’s child-rearing behavior: A replication. 
Psychological Reports, 94: 733–35.
Rubino, G., Barker, C., Roth, T., & Fearon, P. (2000). 
Therapist empathy and depth of interpretation in 
response to potential alliance ruptures: The role of 
therapist and patient attachment styles. Psychother-
apy Research, 10: 408–20.
Rubinstein, T. (2015). Relational theory: A refuge 
and/uni00A0compass. Clinical Social Work Journal , 43: 
398–406.
Russell, E., & Fosha, D. (2008). Transformational affects 
and core state in AEDP: The emergence and consoli -
dation of joy, hope, gratitude, and confidence in (the 
solid goodness of) the self. Journal of Psychotherapy 
Integration, 18(2): 167–90.
Safran, J., & Kraus, J. (2014). Alliance ruptures, impasses, 
and enactments: A relational perspective. Psychotherapy, 
51: 381–87.
Safran, J. D., Muran, J. C, Samstag, L. W., & Winston, A. 
(2005). A comparative treatment study of potential treat-
ment failures. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, 
Training, 42: 532–45. 
Safran, J. D., Muran J. C., & Eubanks-Carter, C. (2011). 
Repairing alliance ruptures: A task analytic investiga -
tion. Psychotherapy, 48: 80–7.
Safran, J., & Muran, J. (2003). Negotiating the therapeutic 
alliance: A relational treatment guide. New York: 
Guilford Press.
Safran, J., Muran, J. C, Samstag, L., & Stevens, C. (2002). 
Repairing alliance ruptures. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), 
Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapist 
contributions and responsiveness to patients (pp. 
235–54). London: Oxford University Press.
Safran, J., Muran, J., & Proskurov, B. (2009). Alliance, 
negotiation, and rupture resolution. In R. A. Levy & 
J. S. Ablon (Eds.), Handbook of evidence-based psy -
chodynamic psychotherapy (pp. 201–26). New York: 
Humana Press.
Sakado, K., Kuwabara, H., Sato, T., et al. (2000). The rela-
tionship between personality, dysfunctional parenting 
in childhood, and lifetime depression in a sample of 
employed Japanese adults. Journal of Affective Disor-
ders, 60: 47–51.
Sampson, H. (2005). Treatment by attitudes. In G. Silber-
schatz (Ed.), Transformative relationships: The con -
trol-mastery theory of psychotherapy (pp. 111–20). 
New York: Routledge. 
Sanfer, J. & Tantillo, M. (2011). Body image and eating 
disorders: A compelling source of shame for women. 
In R. Dearing, & J. Tangney (Eds.), Shame in the ther-Shame in the ther-Shame in the ther
apy hour (pp. 277–304). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

392  REFERENCES
Satir, V., & Bitter, J. R. (2000). The therapist and family 
therapy: Satir’s human validation model. In A. Horne 
& J. L. Passmore (Eds.), Family counseling and ther -
apy (3rd ed.). Pacific Grove, CA: Wadsworth-Brooks/
Cole.
Sauer, E. M., Lopez, F. G., & Gormley, B. (2003). Respec-
tive contributions of therapist and client adult attach-
ment orientations to the development of the early 
working alliance: A preliminary growth modeling 
study. Psychotherapy Research, 13: 371–82.
Schatzman, M. (1973). Soul murder: Persecution in the 
family. New York: Random House.
Scheff, T. J. (2000). Bloody revenge: Emotions, national -
ism, and war. Lincoln, NE: iUniverse.com, Inc. 
Schill, T., & Williams, D. (1993). Attachment histories for 
people with characteristics of self-defeating personal -
ity. Psychological Reports 73: 1232–34.
Schore, A. (2014). The right brain is dominant in psycho -
therapy. Psychotherapy, 51: 388–97.
Schore, A. N. (2003). Affect dysregulation & disorders of 
the self. New York: Norton.the self. New York: Norton.the self
Schore, A. N. (2012). The science of the art of psycho -
therapy. New York: Norton.
Schroeder, R., & Mowen, T. (2014). Parenting style-transi-
tions and delinquency. Youth and Society, 46: 228–54.
Seligman, M. (1995). The effectiveness of psychotherapy: 
The consumer reports study. American Psychologist, 
50: 965–74.
Shah, R., & Waller, G. (2000). Parental style & vulnerabil-
ity to depression: The role of core beliefs. Journal of 
Nervous and Mental Disease, 188: 9–25.
Shaver, J., & Cassidy, P. R. (Eds.). (2008). Handbook of 
attachment: Theory, research, & clinical applications 
(2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Shaver, P., & Mikulincer, M. (2010). New directions in 
attachment research. Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships, 27: 163–72.
Shaw, B. A., Krauge, N., Chatters, L. M., Connell, G. M., 
& Ingersoll-Dayton, B. (2004). Emotional support 
from parents early in life, aging, and health. Psychol-
ogy and Aging, 19: 4–12.
Sheehan, A. H., & Friedlander, M. L. (2015). Therapeutic 
alliance and retention in brief strategic family therapy: 
A mixed-methods study. Journal of Marital and Family 
Therapy, 41: 415–27.
Sherlin, M., Boyda, D., Elklit, A., & Murphy, S. (2014). 
Attachment styles and psychological response to 
infant bereavement. European Journal of Psychotrau-
matology, 5: 1–8.
Shirk, S. R., & Karver, M. S. (2011). The Alliance in child 
& adolescent psychotherapy. In J. Norcross (Ed.), Psy-
chotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-based 
on responsiveness , 48, 17–24. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Schore, J., & Schore, A. (2008). Modern attachment the -
ory: The central role of affect regulation in develop -
ment and treatment. Clinical Social Work Journal, 36: 
9–20. 
Siegel, D., & Hartzell, M. (2014). Parenting from the 
inside out. New York: Penguin.
Silberschatz, G. (Ed.). (2005) Transformative relation -
ships. New York: Taylor & Francis Group.
Silberschatz, G. (Ed.). (2005). The control-mastery theory: 
An integrated cognitive-psychodynamic relational the-
ory. New York: Routledge. 
Silberschatz, G., & Curtis, J. T. (1993). Measuring the 
therapist’s impact on the patient’s therapeutic prog -
ress. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
61: 403–11.
Simon, J. L. (2002). Analysis of the relationship between 
shame, guilt, and empathy in intimate relationship 
violence (abstract). Dissertation Abstracts Interna -
tional, 63(6): 3026.
Simpson, J., & Rholes, W. (2010). Attachment and rela -
tionships: Milestones and future directions. Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 27: 173–80.
Skovholt, T., & Rennestad, M. (2003). Struggles of the 
novice counselor and therapist. Journal of Career 
Development, 30(1): 45–59.
Slade, A. (1999). Attachment theory and research: Impli -
cations for the theory and practice of individual psy -
chotherapy with adults. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver 
(Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, 
and clinical applications (pp. 575 –94). New York: 
Guilford Press. 
Slade, A. (2004). The move from categories to process: 
Attachment phenomena and clinical evaluation. 
Infant Mental Health Journal, 25(4): 269–83.
Slavin-Mulford, J. (2013). The dance of psychotherapy. 
Psychotherapy, 50: 419–23.
Slicker, E. K., & Thornberry, I. (2002). Older adolescent 
well-being and authoritative parenting. Adolescent 
and Family Health, 3: 9–19.
Smith, A. E., Msetfi, R. M., & Golding, L. (2010). Client self 
rated adult attachment patterns and the therapeutic alli-
ance: A systematic review. Clinical Psychology Review, 
30: 326–37.
Smith, J. (2006). Form and forming a focus in brief 
dynamic therapy. Psychodynamic Practice, 12(3): 
261–79.
Smith, W. (2007). Karen Horney and psychotherapy in the 
21st century. Clinical Social Work Journal, 35: 57–66.
Snyder, C. R., (1994). The psychology of hope: You can 
get there from here. New York: Free Press.
Solomon, J., & George, C. (1999). The development of 
attachment in separated and divorced families: effects 
of overnight visitation, parent and couple variables. 
Attachment and Human Development, 1: 2–33.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

REFERENCES 393
Spangler, P., Hill, C., Dunn, M., et al. (2014). Training 
undergraduate students to use immediacy. The Coun-
seling Psychologist, 42: 729–57.
Speight, S., Myers, L., Cox, C., & Highlen, P. (1991). A 
redefinition of multicultural counseling. Journal of 
Counseling Development, 70(1): 29–36.
Spiegel, D., & Alpert, J. L. (2000). The relationship between 
shame and rage: Conceptualizing the violence at Colum-
bine High School. Journal for the Psychoanalysis of Cul-
ture, 5(2): 237–46.
Spieker, S., Nelson, E., & Condun, M.-C. (2011). Validity 
of the TAS-45 as a measure of toddler-parent attach -
ment: Preliminary evidence from Early Head Start 
families. Attachment and Human Development, 13: 
69–90 (pp. 45–68). Washington, DC: American Psy -
chological Association.
Springmann, R. (1986). Countertransference: Clarifica -
tions in supervision. Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 
22: 252–77.
Sroufe, L. (2005). Attachment and development: A pro -
spective, longitudinal study from birth to adulthood. 
Attachment & Human Development, 7(4): 349–67.
Steinberg, L. (2001) We know some things: Parent adoles-
cent relationships in retrospect and prospect. Journal 
of Research on Adolescence, 11: 1–19.
Steinberg, L., Lamborn, S., Darling, N., Mounts, N., & 
Dornbusch, S. (1994). Over-time changes in adjustment 
and competence among adolescents from authoritative, 
authoritarian, indulgent, and neglectful families. Child 
Development, 65: 754–70.
Steinberg, L., Blatt-Eisengart, I., & Cauffman, E. (2006). 
Patterns of competence and adjustment among ado -
lescents from authoritative, authoritarian, indulgent, 
and neglectful homes: A replication in a sample of 
serious juvenile offenders. Journal of Research on 
Adolescence, 16: 47–58.
Stierlin, H. (1972). Separating parents and adolescents . 
New York: Quadrangle.
Stolorow, R. D., Atwood, G. E., & Brandchaft, B. (1994). 
The intersubjective perspective . New York: Jason 
Aronson.
Stovall-McClough, K., & Cloitre, M. (2006). Unresolved 
attachments, PTSD, and dissociation in women with 
childhood abuse histories. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 74: 219–28.
Strupp, H., & Binder, J. (1984). Psychotherapy in a new 
key: A guide to time-limited dynamic psychotherapy. 
New York: Basic Books.
Strupp, H., & Hadley, S. (1979). Specific versus nonspe -
cific factors in psychotherapy: A controlled study 
of outcome. Archives of General Psychiatry, 36: 
1125–36.
Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2016). Counseling the culturally 
diverse (7th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
Sue, S., & Zane, N. (2009). The role of culture and cultural 
techniques in psychotherapy: A critique and reformu -
lation. Asian American Journal of Psychology, 1: 3–14.
Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psychi-
atry. New York: Norton.
Sullivan, H. S. (1968). The interpersonal theory of psychi-
atry. New York: Norton.
Sullivan, H. S. (1970). The psychiatric interview. New 
York: Norton.
Swift, J. K. (2013). Increasing hope by addressing clients’ 
outcome expectations. Psychotherapy, 50(3), 284–87.
Swift, J., & Callahan, J. (2008). A delay discounting mea-
sure of great experiences and the effectiveness of psy -
chotherapy. Professional Psychology: Research and 
Practice, 39(6): 581–88.
Tangney, J. P. (1998). Are shame and guilt related to dis -
tinct self discrepancies? A test of the 1999 Higgins 
hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 75(1): 256–68.
Tangney, J., & Dearing, R. (2002). Shame and guilt. New 
York: Guilford Press.
Tasca, G., Ritchie, K., Zachariades, F., et al. (2013). 
Attachment insecurity mediates the relationship 
between childhood trauma and eating disorder psy -
chopathology in clinical sample: A structural equation 
model. Child Abuse & Neglect, 37: 926–33.
Tasca, G. A., & Balfour, L. (2014). Attachment and eating 
disorders: A review of current research. International 
Journal of Eating Disorders, 47: 710–17.
Teyber, E. (1983). Effects of the parental coalition on ado-
lescent emancipation from the family. Journal of Mar-Journal of Mar-Journal of Mar
ital and Family Therapy, 9: 89–99.
Teyber, E. (2001). Helping children cope with divorce. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass.
Teyber, E., & Teyber, F. (2014). Working with the process 
dimension in relational therapies: Guidelines for clini-
cal training. Psychotherapy, 51: 334–41.
Teyber, E., & McClure, F. (2000). Therapist variables. In 
C. Snyder & R. Ingram (Eds.), Handbook of psycho -
logical change; psychotherapy processes and practices 
for the 21st century (pp. 62–87). New York: Wiley.
Teyber, E., McClure, F., & Weathers, R. (2011). Shame in 
families: Transmission across generations. In R. Dear-
ing & J. Tangney (Eds.), Shame in the therapy hour
(pp. 167–94). Washington, DC: American Psychologi-
cal Association.
Thomaes, S., Stegge, H., & Olthof, T. (2007). External -
izing shame responses in children: The role of fragile 
positive self-esteem. British Journal of Developmental 
Psychology, 25: 559–77.
Thomas, K., Hopwood, C., Woody, E., Ethier, N., & 
Sadler, P. (2014). Momentary assessment of interper -
sonal process in psychotherapy. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 61(1): 1–14.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

394  REFERENCES
Tomkins, S. (1967). Shame. In D. Nathanson (Ed.). The 
many faces of Shame  (pp. 133–61), New York: Guil-
ford Press.
Townsend, K., & McWhirter, B. (2005). Connectedness: A 
review of the literature with implications for counsel -
ing, assessment, and research. Journal of Counseling 
& Development, 83: 191–201.
Tracey, J., Robins, R., & Tangney, J. (Eds.). (2007). The self-
conscious emotions: Theory and research . New York: 
Guilford Press.
Truax, C. B., & Carkhuff, R. R. (1967). Toward effective 
counseling and psychotherapy. Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Tsai, M., Yard, S., & Kohlenberg, R. (2014). Functional 
analytic psychotherapy: A behavioral relational 
approach to treatment. Psychotherapy, 51: 364–71.
Tufekcioglu, S., & Muran, J. C. (2015). Case formulation 
and the therapeutic relationship: The role of therapist 
self-reflection and self-revelation. Journal Clinical 
Psychology: In Session, 71: 469–77.
Tyrone, G. S., & Winograd, G. (2002). Goal consensus 
and collaboration. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psycho-
therapy relationships that work  (pp. 109–128). New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Tyrrell, C., Dozier, M., Teague, G., & Fallof, R. (1999). 
Effective treatment relationships for persons with 
serious psychiatric disorders: The importance of 
attachment states of mind. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology,  67: 725–33.
Uji, M., Sakamoto, A., Adachi, K., & Kitamura, T. 
(2014). The impact of authoritative, authoritarian, 
and permissive parenting styles on children’s later 
mental health in Japan: Focusing on parent and child 
gender. Journal of Child and Family Studies , 23: 
293–302.
Van Dijke, A., & Ford, J. (2015). Adult attachment and 
emotion dysregulation in borderline personality and 
somatoform disorders.  Borderline Personality Disor - Borderline Personality Disor - Borderline Personality Disor
der and Emotion Dysregulation, 2: 6–9.
Van Zeijl, J., Messman, J., Van IJendoorn, et  al. (2006). 
Attachment based intervention for enhancing sensi -
tive discipline in mothers of 1-to-3 year old children 
at risk for externalizing behavior problems: A ran -
domized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting Clini-
cal Psychology, 74: 994–1005.
Varghese, A., & Jenkins, S. (2009). Parental overprotec -
tion, cultural value conflict, and psychological adap -
tation among Asian Indian women in America. Sex 
Roles, 61(3): 235–51.
Vasquez, M. (2007). Cultural difference and the thera -
peutic alliance: An evidence-based analysis. American 
Psychologist, 62(8): 878–85.
Wachtel, P. (2014). Cyclical psychodynamics and the 
contextual self: The inner world, the intimate world, 
and the world of culture and society . New York: 
Routledge.
Wachtel, P. (1982). Psychoanalysis and behavior therapy: 
Toward an integration. New York: Basic Books.
Wachtel, P. (1997). Psychoanalysis, behavior therapy, and 
the relational world. Washington, DC: American Psy-
chological Association.
Wachtel, P. (2011). Therapeutic communication: Know -
ing what to say when, (2nd  ed.). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Wachtel, P. (2008). Relational theory and the practice of 
psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press.
Wachtel, P. L., Kruk, J., & McKinney, M. (2005). Cyclical 
psychodynamics and integrative relative psychother -
apy. In J. Norcross & M. Gohdfried (Eds.), Handbook 
of psychotherapy integration  (2nd ed., pp. 172–95). 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Wallin, D. (2007). Attachment in psychotherapy. New 
York: Guilford Press.
Wampold, B. (2010). The research evidence for the com -
mon factors. Models: A historically situated perspec -
tive. In B. L. Duncan, S. D. Miller, B. E. Wampold, & 
M. A. Hubble (Eds), The heart and soul of change: 
Delivering what works in therapy . (2nd ed., pp. 
49–81). American Psychological Association Wash -
ington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Wampold, B. (2015). How important are common fac -
tors in psychotherapy: An update. World Psychiatry, 
14(3): 270–77.
Wampold, B. E. (2001). The great psychotherapy debate: 
Models, methods, and findings. Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Wampold, B. E. (2013). The great psychotherapy debate: 
Models, methods and findings. New York: Routledge.
Wampold, B., & Budge, S. (2012). The relationship – and 
its relationship to the common and specific factors 
of psychotherapy. The Counseling Psychologist,  40: 
601–23.
Wang, C., & Mallinckrodt, B. (2006). Differences between 
Taiwanese and US cultural beliefs about ideal adult 
attachment. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 53: 
192–204.
Watson, J., Goldman, R., & Greenberg, L. (2011). Con -
trasting two clients in emotion-focused therapy for 
depression 1: The case of “Tom”, “Trapped in the tun-
nel”. Pragmatic Studies in Psychotherapy, 7: 268–304.
Wei, M., & Ku, T. (2007). Testing a conceptual model of 
working through self-defeating patterns. Journal of 
Counseling Psychology, 53(3): 295–305.
Weiss, J. (1993). How psychotherapy works . New York: 
Guilford Press.
Weiss, J. (2005). Safety. In G. Silberschatz (Ed.), Transfor-Transfor-Transfor
mative relationships: The control-mastery theory of 
psychotherapy (pp. 31–43). New York: Routledge. 
Wells, M., & Jones, R. (2000). Childhood parentifica -
tion and shame-proneness: A preliminary study. The 
American Journal of Family Therapy, 28: 19–27.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

REFERENCES 395
Westin, D., Morrison, K., & Thompson-Brenner, H. 
(2004). The empirical status of empirically sup -
ported psychotherapies. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 69: 875–99.
Westen, D., Nakash, O., Thomas, C., & Bradley, R. (2006). 
Clinical assessment of attachment patterns and per -
sonality disorder in adolescents and adults. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74: 1065–85.
Whelton, W. J. (2004). Emotional process  in psychother-
apy: Evidence across therapeutic modalities. Clinical 
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 111: 89–106.
White, B. (2007). Working with adult survivors of sexual 
and physical abuse. In T. Ronen & A. Freeman (Eds.), 
Cognitive behavioral therapy in clinical social work 
practice (pp. 467–490). New York: Springer.
White, W. L., & Miller, W. R. (2007). The use of confron-
tation in addiction treatment: History, science, and 
time for change. Counselor, 8(4): 12–30.
Wierzbicki, M., & Pekarik, G. (1993). A meta-analysis 
of psychotherapy dropout. Professional Psychology: 
Research and Practice, 24: 190–95.
Williams, E. N., Judge, A., Hill, C. E., & Hoffman, M. A. 
(1997). Experience of novice therapists in prepracti -
cum: Trainees’, clients’, and supervisees’ perceptions 
of therapists’ personal reactions and management 
strategies. Journal of Counseling Psychology,  44: 
390–99.
Winnicott, D. W. (1965). Ego distortion in terms of true 
and false self. In D. W. Winnicott (Ed.). The matura-
tional process and the facilitating environment  (pp. 
140–52). New York: International Universities Press.
Wolfe, B. E. (2005). Understanding and treating anxiety 
disorders. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Woodhouse, S. S., Schlosser, L. Z., Crook, R. E., & 
Ligiero, D. P. (2003). Client attachment to therapist: 
Relations to transference and client recollections of 
parental caregiving. Journal of Counseling Psychol -
ogy, 50: 395–408.
Yalom, I. (1981). Existential psychotherapy. New York: 
Basic Books.
Yalom, I. (2003). The gift of therapy: An open letter to a 
new generation of therapists and their patients. New 
York: Perennial Currents.
Yalom, I., & Leszcz, M. (2005). The theory and practice 
of group psychotherapy (5th ed.). New York: Basic 
Books. 
Yap, M., & Jorm, A. (2015). Parental factors associated 
with childhood anxiety, depression, and internaliz -
ing problems: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Journal of Affective Disorders, 175: 424–40.
Yeomans, F., Levy, K., & Caligor, E. (2013). Transference-
focused psychotherapy. Psychotherapy, 50: 449–53.
Young, J. E. (1999). Cognitive therapy for personality dis-
orders: A schema-focused approach (3rd ed.). Sara -
sota, FL: Professional Resource Press.
Young, J. E., Klosko, H. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). 
Schema therapy: A practitioner’s guide. New York: 
Guilford Press.
Young, J., Rygh, J., Weinberger, A., & Beck, A. (2014). 
Cognitive therapy for depression. In D. H. Barlow 
(Ed.), Clinical handbook of psychological disorders 
(5th ed.) (pp. 275–332). New York: Guilford Press.
Zilcha-Mand, S., McCarthur, K., Pinger, V., & Barber, J. 
(2014). To what extent is alliance affected by trans -
ference? An emperical exploration. Psychotherapy , 
51(3): 424–33.
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

396
NAME INDEX
A
Ackerman, S., 44, 82, 90, 299, 310
Adachi, K., 202
Adams, K., 196
Adelson, E., 66
Adelson, J., 202
Adrian, S., 80
Agrawal, H., 187, 195
Ahmed, E., 103
Ain, S., 14
Ainsworth, M., 189, 194
Akhtar, S., 345
Albus, K., 193, 197, 198
Alexander, F., 10
Alimohamed, S., 38
Allen, J., 7, 155, 296, 357
Allen, J. G., 187, 191
Allen, J. P., 191, 200
Allen, J. W., 53, 119, 206
Allison, E., 114
Alpert, J. L., 103
Altenstein, D., 8
Amrhein, P., 40, 269
An, J., 206, 207
Anderson, T. C., 161, 305
Andrusyna, T. P., 273
Angus, L., 49, 213, 286, 302, 305
Aniskiewics, A. S., 256
Antonishak, J., 200
Archineiga, G. M., 161
Arkowitz, H., 69, 98, 133
Armour, C., 168
Arntz, A., 354
Aron, L., 39, 261
Atkinson, L., 195
Atwood, G. E., 232
B
Bachelor, A., 16
Bagby, R., 195
Bakermans-Kranenburg, M., 168
Balcom, D., 165
Baldwin, S., 14, 22, 31, 37
Balfour, L., 196
Balluerta, N., 196
Bandura, A., 12, 111, 158, 296, 308
Barber, J., 224, 225, 242, 262, 275, 296, 297, 327
Barends, A., 14
Barker, C., 351
Barkham, M., 53, 152
Barley, D., 37, 256
Bartholomew, K., 11, 185, 186, 190, 195, 199
Bartsch, D., 255
Bass, A., 259
Bateman, A., 53, 119, 195, 206, 357
Bateson, G., 288
Baumeister, R., 147, 154, 225
Baumrind, D., 204
Beatson, J., 254, 283
Beavers, W. R., 217
Beck, A., 27, 62, 254, 263
Beckner, V. L., 7, 83
Bedi, R. P., 14, 22, 38, 82, 307
Beebe, B., 296
Beitman B. D., 111, 137
Benbassat, N., 206
Bender, D., 80
Bender, H. L., 200
Benefield, R. G., 314
Benfield, J., 240
Benjamin, J., 135
Benjamin, L. S., 26, 196, 251, 254, 289, 364
Bennett, S., 283, 320
Berant, E., 184
Berger, U., 275, 283
Bergin, A., 354
Berk, L. E., 200
Berman, M., 320
Bernecker, S., 195
Bernett, L., 197, 273, 283
Bernier, A., 196
Bernier, A. T., 10, 197, 335
Bernstein, M., 240
Beutler, L., 38
Beutler, L. E., 72
Beutler, L. F., 49, 327
Bhatia, A., 272, 278
Bien, K., 185, 327
Binder, J. L., 11, 12, 83, 90, 176, 231, 256, 262, 284, 310, 357, 362
Bitter, J. R., 30, 215
Bjorguinsson, T., 62
Blain, J., 295
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

NAME INDEX 397
Blehar, M., 189, 194
Blissett, J., 202, 204
Bloo, J., 354
Bögels, S., 227
Bordin, E. S., 38
Borman-Spurrell, E., 191
Bornstein, R., 225
Boszormenyi-Nagy, I., 219
Bowen, M., 30, 45
Bowlby, J., 49, 71, 142, 187, 275, 295, 335, 353, 364
Boyda, D., 185, 197
Braithwaite, V., 103
Brammer, L. M., 338
Brandchaft, B., 232
Brechman-Toussaint, M., 227
Brennan, K., 193
Bretherton, I., 187
Breuer, J., 69
Bridges, M., 10, 228, 304, 319
Brisch, K. H., 169
Bromberg, P., 61, 165, 179
Brown, L. G., 42, 43, 198, 354
Bruch, M. A., 125
Brugha, T., 207
Buchheim, A., 275, 283
Budge, S., 6, 7
Bushman, B., 147, 154
Butler, S., 137
C
Caligor, E., 278
Callahan, C., 202
Callahan, J., 354
Callahan, P. E., 81
Cannolly, M., 224
Carkhuff, R. R., 53, 132, 154
Carlson, E., 198
Carlson, J., 15, 31, 54, 61, 94, 219
Carter, J., 206
Cartwright, D., 80
Cassidy, J., 24, 71, 169, 170, 184, 227
Cassidy, P. R., 8
Castle, D., 191, 196
Castonguay, L. G., 11, 254, 304
Catley, D., 49
Cervone, D., 125
Chatters, L.M., 204
Chen, E., 190, 194, 195
Choi, G., 197
Christian, A., 225, 227, 297
Cibelli, C., 198
Clark, C., 193
Clarkin, J. F., 273
Cloitre, M., 198
Coble, H., 275
Coccia, C., 204
Cogar, M. M., 80, 151, 319
Comas-Diaz, L., 94
Comtois, K. A., 144
Condun, M-C., 207
Connell, G.M., 204
Connolly, H. B., 275, 297
Connolly, M., 296, 297, 327
Connors, M., 184, 190, 191
Consedine, N., 200
Constantine, M., 94
Coolidge, F., 224
Cooney, T., 206, 207
Cooper, G., 169, 192
Cooper, P., 225
Corbett, M. M., 80, 88, 284
Costa, P., 204
Cowan, C., 217
Cowan, P., 217
Cox, C., 95
Crago, M., 49
Cresswell, C., 225
Crethar, H., 15, 31, 54, 61, 94, 219
Crits-Christoph, P., 9, 275, 295, 296,  
297, 327
Crockett, M., 145
Crook, R. E., 275
Crook-Lyon, R., 80, 299
Crowley, S., 208
Csillik, A., 126, 138
Cue, K. L., 197, 273, 283
Cui, M., 204
Curtis, J. T., 64, 262, 310
D
Daeppen, J. B., 138
Dakof, G., 207
Daly, K. D., 60, 188, 193, 197, 223, 268, 275, 283
Daniel, S. I. F., 184, 195
D’Aniello, C., 7
Darling, C., 204
Darling, N., 202, 204, 206
Datz, F., 257
Davies, M., 255
Davila, J., 339
Davis, D., 254
Dearing, R., 102, 109, 165, 167, 234
DeClair, J., 230
DeFife, J., 242
Della Rosa, A., 225, 230
Del Re, A., 38, 39, 305
Denckla, C., 225
Denman, D. W., 80, 151, 319
DeRubeis, R., 242
Dew, S. E., 354
Diamona, G. M., 38
DiCaccavo, A., 220
DiClemente, C., 72
Diener, M. J., 63, 144
Diguer, L., 295, 305
Dimeff, L. A., 144
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

398  NAME INDEX
Dollard, J., 288
Domenech-Rodriguez, M., 208
Donovick, M., 208
Dornbusch, S., 202, 204, 206
Dozier, M., 10, 190, 191, 193, 195, 197, 198, 273, 275, 283, 335
Draguns, J., 31
Drapeau, M., 185
Dubas, J., 207, 208
Dunn, M., 277, 302, 325
E
Eagle, M. N., 25, 169
Easterbrooks, M., 198
Egan, G., 67, 70, 73
Ehrenberg, M., 217, 219
Eichelsheim, V., 207, 208
Eisenberger, N., 145
Elklit, A., 168, 185, 197
Elliott, R., 80, 144, 148, 165, 171, 174, 339
Ellis, A., 62
Ellison, W., 195
Enten, R., 202
Erikson, E., 37
Escuderom V., 38
Esterson, A., 51, 211
Estey, A., 224
Ethier, N., 8
Eubanks-Carter, C., 89, 90, 196,  
273, 313
Everson, E., 80
F
Fahmy, R., 354
Falender, C., 177, 261, 283
Fallof, R., 191
Farber, B. A., 338
Farber, B. A., 119 
Fauth, J., 175, 179
Fearon, P., 351
Feeney, B., 184, 188
Feeney, J., 194
Feiring, C., 187
Feldman, L., 138
Fetterman, A., 231
Feldman, S., 119
Fey, A., 62
Finkelhor, D., 103
Fiori, K., 200
Fitzpatrick, K., 207
Fitzpatrick, M. R., 152, 185, 338
Flores, E., 206
Florsheim, P., 14
Fluckiger, C., 80, 185, 215
Flückiger, C., 38, 39, 305
Foltz, C., 242
Fonagy, O., 191, 196, 198
Fonagy, P., 7, 26, 53, 114, 119, 155, 168, 174, 187, 194, 195, 
196, 198, 206, 273, 282, 317, 357
Ford, J., 198
Forman, E. M., 354
Fosha, D., 170, 345, 351
Fragoso, J. M., 161
Fraiberg, S., 66
Fraley, R., 207
Frank, A., 295
Freeman, A., 254
French, T., 10
Freud, S., 69
Friedlander, M. L., 38, 95, 142, 145, 177
Fromm-Reichmann, F., 12
Fryers, T., 202, 207
G
Gabbard, G. O., 38, 72, 259
Galassi, J. P., 125
Gans, J., 258
Gantt, D., 275
Garfield, S. L., 43, 354
Geller, J. D., 319
Geller, S. M., 39, 146, 148, 171, 172
Gelso, C. J., 14, 38, 272, 278, 283, 284, 292, 303, 326, 327, 354, 
357, 362
Gendlin, P. E. T., 111, 154
George, C., 198
Gergeley, G., 155, 168, 174, 196, 273, 317
Gerlsma, P., Gold, S. H., Hilsenroth, M. J., Kuutmann K., &  
Owen, J. J., 202
Gerris, J., 207, 208
Gerson, R., 30
Gibbons, B. B., 9
Gibbons, M., 224
Gilbert, P., 106, 107, 158, 296
Gill, M., 287
Gilligan, C., 67
Gilligan, J., 104
Gladis, L., 296, 297, 327
Gmel, G., 138
Golan, M., 202
Gold, J., 71, 145, 176, 184, 296, 339
Gold, S., 360
Goldenberg, H., 29, 217
Goldenberg, I., 29, 217
Gold, S. H., 360
Goldfried, M. R., 142, 145, 296, 304, 339
Golding, L., 275
Goldman, R. N., 63, 111, 144, 148, 165, 171,  
339, 341
Gorman, B. S., 90, 273, 313
Gormley, B., 281
Göstas, M. W., 43
Gottman, J., 230
Greenberg, L. S., 39, 63, 98, 104, 111, 127, 137, 138, 144, 146, 
148, 162, 165, 171, 172, 319, 339, 341
Greenson, R., 38
Grossman, S., 224, 256
Groth, M., 119
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

NAME INDEX 399
Grunebaum, J., 219
Guame, J., 138
Guilliland, B., 42
Gunderson, J., 187, 195
H
Hadley, S., 286
Haley, J., 45
Hall, S., 49
Hampson, R. B., 217
Hamre, B., 202
Hansen, N. B., 354
Harris, K. J., 49
Harris, S. M., 357
Hart, J., 62
Hartzell, M., 229
Hatcher, R., 14
Hauser, S. T., 191
Haycraft, E., 202, 204
Hayes, H., 278, 326
Hayes, J.A., 175, 179, 278, 284, 292, 326–327
Heagerty, P., 144
Heller, R., 191
Henderson, C., 207
Henderson, J. C., 43
Hendricks, M. N., 155
Hendrickson, S. M. L., 331
Hendrix, H., 230
Henry, W., 256
Herman, J., 198
Hersoug, A., 38
Hess, S., 80, 299
Hesse, E., 25, 197, 198, 199, 288
Hetherington, L., 38
Hickson, M., 148, 171
Highlen, P., 95
Hill, C. E., 9, 10, 11, 15, 63, 80, 88, 142, 150, 151, 231, 254, 
261, 273, 277, 284, 299, 302, 311, 313, 319, 320, 325,  
331, 364
Hilsenroth, M. J., 44, 63, 82, 90, 144, 242, 299, 302, 310, 311, 
313, 360
Hinnen, C., 26
Hobson, R., 191, 196
Hoeve, M., 207, 208
Hoffman, K., 169, 192
Hoffman, M. A., 63, 230
Hoglend, P., 38
Holmes, B., 187, 195
Holtforth, M., 185
Holtforth, M., 215
Holtforth, M. C., 8
Hopwood, C., 8
Horney, K., 225, 230
Horowitz, L. M., 185, 186, 190, 195, 199
Horowitz, M., 11
Horvath, A. O., 14, 22, 38, 39, 82, 127,  
305, 307
Houck, J., 40, 174
Howard, R., 191, 196
Hummel, A. M., 14, 284, 292, 327
Hunter, M., 217, 219
Hynan, M., 354
I
Imel, Z., 7, 14, 22, 31
Imm, G., 104
Ingersoll-Dayton, B., 204
Ingram, B., 7, 22
Inman, A., 175
Ivery, M., 18
Ivey, A., 18
Iwakabe, S., 104, 152
J
Jacobs, T. J., 296
Jacobsen, B., 113
Jacobvitz, D., 187
Jackson, J., 320
James, R. K., 42
Janoff-Bulman, R., 210, 229
Janzen, J., 185, 338
Jenkins, S., 218
Jeong, J., 184, 338
Johnson, B., 319
Johnson, M. E., 137
Johnson, S., 170, 211
Joireman, J., 103
Jolkovski, M. P., 179, 258
Jones, R., 103
Jordan, J., 281
Jorm, A., 225
Joyce, A. S., 80
Joyce, P., 206
Judge, A., 63
Jung, 1998, 219
Jurist, E. J., 155, 174, 196, 273, 317
K
Kagan, F., 49, 213, 286, 302, 305
Kahn, M., 271, 364
Kaltreider, N., 11
Kaplan, A., 281
Karen, R., 295
Karver, M. S., 38
Kashubeck, S., 161
Kasper, L., 9
Kathleen, M., 202
Katznelson, H., 206
Kazantzis, N., 135
Kegel, A., 80
Keller, H., 200
Kellis, E., 135
Kelly, A. E., 151
Kelly, S. M., 137
Kerig, P., 32, 202
Kernberg, O. F., 273
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

400  NAME INDEX
Kerr, M. E., 30, 45
Khurgin-Bott, R., 119
Kiesler, D. J., 8, 9, 73, 135, 251, 305, 315
Kitamura, T., 202
Kivlahan, D. R., 9, 14, 144, 185, 327
Kivlingham, D. M., 338
Kjellin, L., 43
Klosko, H. S., 27
Knoblauch, S., 296
Knox, S., 80, 261, 273, 299, 313
Kobak, R., 227
Kohlenberg, R., 77, 146
Kohut, H., 232, 235, 353
Korman, L. M., 341
Krauge, N., 204
Kraus, J., 90, 135
Krieger, T., 8
Kruk, J., 111, 257, 296
Krupnick, J., 11
Ku, T., 77, 225, 230
Kuutmann, K., 242, 302, 311, 313
Kuwabara, H., 202
L
Ladany, N., 175, 177
Lafferty, P., 49
Laing, R. D., 51, 211
Lambert, M., 6, 7, 22, 37, 256,  
296, 305
Lambert, M. J., 305, 354
Lamborn, S., 202, 204, 206
Landis, J., 242
Larose, S., 196
Lasca, F., 196
Lazarus, A. O., 16, 62, 162
Lazarus, C., 62
Lee, R., 165
Lee, S., 190, 191, 195
Lee, W., 30, 45
Lehmann, M., 311, 313, 318
Leigh, T., 191, 196, 198
Levant, R. F., 269
Levenson, H., 11, 16, 48–49, 60, 83, 137, 142, 170, 183, 217, 
225, 242, 273, 287, 296, 336, 347, 364
Levine, A., 191
Levinson, D., 351
Levy, K. N., 195, 272, 278
Lewis, H. B., 165
Lewis, M., 103, 187
Liddle, H., 207
Lieberman, M., 145
Ligiero, D. P., 275
Linehan, M. 171
Linehan, M., 51, 52
Linehan, M. M., 51, 52, 144
Liotti, G., 198
Liu, J., 320
Loborskr, L., 275, 297
Löffler-Staska, H., 257, 260
Lohr, M., 147, 154
Lomax, L., 190, 191, 195
Lopez, F. G., 281
Lorentzen, S., 38
Love, K., 202, 204
Luborsky, L., 273, 295, 305
Ludlow, A., 202
Luty, S., 206
Lyons-Ruth, K., 195, 198, 227
M
MacDonald, G., 338
Magai, C., 200
Main, M., 25, 189, 194, 197, 198,  
199, 288
Majors, R., 283
Malik, M., 38
Mallinckrodt, B., 60, 184, 185, 187, 188, 189, 190, 194, 195, 
197, 200, 223, 268, 275, 283, 295, 338
Mann, J., 362
Many, M. M., 357, 359
Markin, R., 14, 283
Markowitz, T., 63
Marmar, C., 11
Marmarosh, C., 185, 283, 327
Martin, A., 275, 283
Martin, S., 225, 227, 297
Martin, T., 40
Marx, S. A., 362
Matos, M., 106
Matsakis, A., 231
Matsumoto, V., 227, 228, 232
Maughan, B., 191, 196
Maunder, R., 354
Mayo, M. S., 49
Mayotte-Blum, J., 311, 313, 318
McArthur, L., 14
McBride, C., 195, 354
McCarthur, K., 262
McCarthy, K., 224
McClure, F., 48, 94, 103, 158, 165,  
305, 310
McCrae, R., 204
McCroskey, J., 148, 171
McElhaney, K. B., 200
McEwan, K., 106
McGoldrick, M., 30
McKinney, C., 207
McKinney, M., 111, 257, 296
McLellan, A. T., 295, 305
McWhirter, B., 119, 338
Meissner, W. W., 81
Mellon, J., 137
Messman, J., 209
Metzger, T. A., 119, 338
Mikulincer, M., 184, 185, 189, 190, 191, 193, 194, 347
Miller, A., 31, 103
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

NAME INDEX 401
Miller, J., 281
Miller, N., 288
Miller, W. R., 14, 37, 39, 40, 49, 69, 70, 98, 111, 133, 146, 269, 
288, 296, 314, 331
Millon, T., 224, 232, 254, 256
Mills, R., 104
Milrod, B., 63
Minuchin, S., 30, 45, 217
Mitchell, S., 327
Mitjavila, M., 196
Moleiro, C., 72
Morgan, Z., 207
Morrison, K., 296, 303
Mounts, N., 202, 204, 206
Mowen, T., 207
Moyers, T., 40, 98, 174
Moyers, T. B., 40, 98, 146, 174, 331
Msetfi, R. M., 275
Mueller, W. J., 256
Mulder, R., 206
Munholland, K., 187
Muran, J. C., 9, 38, 89, 90, 112, 196, 251, 273, 286, 287, 313, 
317, 319, 329, 354
Murphy, S., 185, 197
Murray, L, 225
Muslin, H., 287
Myers, L., 52, 95
Myers, S., 67
N
Najavits, L., 18, 90, 310, 327
Najavits, L. (Najavitts in text), 217
Nathanson, D. L., 164
Neander, K., 43
Neff, K., 76, 312, 334
Nelson, D., 175, 179
Nelson, E., 207
Nelson, M., 177
Nelson, S., 305
Neuzil, P., 224
Nichols, M. P., 30, 45, 217
Nienhuis, J. B., 38, 241
Noller, P., 194
Norcross, J. C., 6, 7, 16, 22, 37, 72, 268, 296, 305, 327,  
333, 354
O
Obegi, J., 184
O’Brien, A., 354
O’Brien, K. M., 150
Ochoa, S., 196
Ode, S., 231
Ogawa, J., 198
Ogden, T. H., 24
Ogles, B. M., 305
Ogrodniczuk, J. S., 80
Okiishi, J., 305
Olatunji, B., 147, 154
Olthof, T., 232
Orlinsky, D. E., 72
Otani, K., 227, 228, 232
Ozer, E., 206
P
Palma, B., 272, 278
Palmer, M., 269
Parish, M., 169
Parker, S., 167
Parth, K., 257, 260
Pasch, L., 206
Pasternak, A., 219
Patrick, M., 191, 196
Patterson, C. L., 305
Pederson, P., 15, 31, 54, 61, 94, 149, 219
Pekarik, G., 354
Pereg, D., 189, 194
Perrin, M., 217, 219
Perry, J., 198
Persons, J. B., 7, 83, 258, 268
Peterson, B., 202
Petry, S., 30
Pezzarossa, B., 225, 230
Pham, T., 273
Pietromonacco, P. (Pietromonaco), 138
Pinger, V., 262
Piper, W. T., 80
Polly, R., 296
Popp, C., 137
Porter, M. J., 338
Pos, A. E., 341
Potter-Efron, R., 103, 104
Powell, B., 169, 192
Powers, T., 137
Priel, B., 206
Prochaska, J., 16, 72, 333
Procter, S., 106
Proeve, M., 255
Proskurov, B., 38, 317, 319
Q
Quilty, L., 195
Quirk, S., 225, 227, 297
R
Rao, S., 254, 283
Rapee, R., 225
Rappleyea, D., 357
Raskin, J., 49
Raue, P. J., 304
Ravitz, P., 354
Regan, A. M., 150
Rehm, M., 204
Reis, B. F., 42, 43, 198, 354
Renik, O., 261
Renk, K., 207
Renn, P., 145
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

402  NAME INDEX
Rennestad, M., 65
Reynolds, S. K., 144
Rhodes, R. H., 80
Rhodes. R., 319
Rholes, W., 189
Rice, S., 174
Richmond, V., 148, 171
Ridley, C. R., 137
Ritchie, K., 168
Rivis, A., 106
Robbins, S. B., 179, 258
Roberts, R., 255
Robins, R., 165
Robinson, M., 231
Rogers, C., 14, 39, 54, 208, 216, 299
Roisman, G., 207
Rollnick, S., 14, 39, 40, 49, 69, 70, 98, 133, 288, 296, 307, 331
Romano, V., 338
Ronnestad, M. H., 72
Rose, G., 37, 40, 69, 111, 269, 331
Rosenberg, S. E., 11, 64
Rosenthal, S., 187
Roth, A., 7
Roth, T., 351
Rothrauff, T., 206, 207
Rubino, A. I., 225, 230
Rubino, G., 351
Rubinstein, T., 254, 262
Russell, E., 345, 351
Rustin, J., 296
S
Sadler, P., 8
Safran, J., 9, 38, 89, 90, 135, 251, 286, 317, 319
Safran, J. D., 90, 196, 273, 313, 354
Said, U., 257, 260
Sakado, K., 202
Sakamoto, A., 202
Sampson, H., 16, 64, 213, 262, 296
Sampson, H. W., 18
Samstag, L., 9, 89, 303, 326
Samstag, L. W., 90, 273, 313, 354
Sanderman, R., 26
Sanders, S., 142, 145
Sanfer, J., 103
Sathe, S. K., 204
Satir, V., 30, 215
Sato, T., 202
Sauer, E. M., 281
Scalia, J., 272
Schacht, T., 256
Schact, T. E., 137
Schatzman, M., 51
Scheff, T. J., 164
Scher, S. J., 225
Schier, K., 219
Schill, T., 230
Schlosser, L. Z., 275
Schore, A. N., 148, 171, 187
Schore, J., 120
Schroeder, R., 207
Schwartz, S., 207
Scott, L. N., 195, 273
Segal, D., 224
Seligman, D. A., 295, 305
Seligman, M., 6
Shafransky, E., 177, 261, 283
Shah, R., 207
Shapiro, D., 53, 152
Shapiro, V., 66
Shaver, J., 8
Shaver, P. R., 24, 71, 169, 170, 184,  
185, 189, 190, 191, 193, 194, 347
Shaw, B.A., 204
Shaw Welch, S., 144
Sheehan, A. H., 95
Sheldon-Keller, 196
Sherlin, M., 168, 185, 197
Shirk, S. R., 38
Siegel, D., 170, 229
Silberschatz, G., 16, 19, 62, 64, 135, 258,  
262, 268, 310
Silberschatz, G. I., 95
Sim, W., 10, 231, 311, 313, 320
Simon, J. L., 104
Simon, K., 357
Simpson, J., 189
Singh, S. P., 354
Siqueland, L., 295
Siracusano, A., 230
Skovholt, T., 65
Slade, A., 185, 283
Slavin-Mulford, J., 311, 313, 318
Slicker, E. K., 200
Smeenk, W., 207, 208
Smith, A. E., 275
Smith, J., 64
Smith, W. F., 231, 232
Snyder, C. R., 351
Solomon, J., 198
Solomon, M., 170
Sorter, D., 296
Soth, A. M., 111
Soucyn, N., 196
Spangler, P., 10, 231, 277, 302, 311, 313, 320, 325
Speight, S., 95
Spiegel, D., 103
Spieker, S., 207
Sprangers, M., 26
Springmann, R., 260
Sroufe, L., 168, 198, 207, 227
Stacey, J., 225
Stahl, J., 10, 231, 311, 313
Stalikas, A., 152
Steele, M., 191, 196, 198
Stegge, H., 232
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

NAME INDEX 403
Steinberg, L., 202, 204, 206, 207
Stevens, C., 9, 89
Stolorow, R. D., 232
Stovall-McClough, K., 193, 197, 198
Straus, B., 275, 283
Stricker, G., 176
Striver, P., 281
Strupp, H., 12, 16, 18, 90, 137, 176, 217, 225, 231, 256, 262, 
284, 286, 310, 327
Strupp, H. H., 137
Strupp, H. P., 60
Stupar-Ruthenfrans, S., 354
Sue, D. W., 47, 61, 94, 149, 161
Sue, S., 13, 31, 63, 123, 355
Sullivan, C., 10, 231, 311, 313
Sullivan, H. S., 23, 136, 254, 261, 281
Surrey, J., 281
Sutherland, O., 142, 145
Suzuki, A., 227, 228, 232
Swift, J., 354
Swift, J. K., 43
Symonds, D., 38, 39, 305
T
Tager, J., 165
Tagney, J., 109
Talebi, H., 72
Tang, T. Z., 273
Tangney, J., 102, 165, 234
Tangney, J. P., 103
Tantillo, M., 103
Target, M., 155, 168, 174, 187, 194, 196, 198, 273, 317
Tasca, G.A., 168, 196
Taylor, E., 319
Teague, G., 191
Teyber, E., 10, 48, 94, 103, 152, 158, 165, 205, 208, 213, 217, 
218, 219, 231, 257, 305, 310, 311, 313
Teyber, F., 152, 213, 257
Thomaes, S., 232
Thomas, K., 8
Thomas, P., 202, 204
Thomas, R., 167
Thompson, B. J., 80, 88, 151, 284, 319
Thompson-Brenner, H., 296, 303
Thornberry, I., 200
Tomkins, S., 103
Tompkins, M. A., 7, 83
Tonigan, J., 40
Tonigan, J. S., 314
Townsend, K., 338
Tracey, J., 165, 167
Truax, C. B., 53
Tsai, M., 77, 146
Tschann, J., 206
Tufekcioglu, S. (Tufekciogly), 112, 287, 329
Tyrone, G. S., 86
Tyrrell, C., (this name seems to be et al in ref, but in text only 
one name available), 190, 191, 197, 273, 275, 335
Tzanetos, T., 319
U
Uji, M., 202
Ulrich, D., 219
V
Van Denburg, T., 315
van der Kolk, B., 198
vander Laan, P., 207, 208
Van Dijke, A., 198
Van IJzendoorh, M., 168, 209
VanVieet, M., 184, 188
Van Zeijl, J., 209
Varghese, A., 218
Vasquez, M., 47
W
Wachtel, P., 73, 95, 224, 227, 310, 313, 347
Wachtel, P. L., 111, 257, 296
Wall, S., 189, 194
Waller, G., 207
Wallerstein, R., 11
Wallin, D., 193–194
Walling, B., 104
Wampold, B. E., 6, 7, 14, 22, 31, 38, 39, 43, 268, 296, 305, 354
Wang, C., 200, 275
Wasserman, R. H., 273
Waters, E., 189, 194
Watkins-Lewis, K., 202
Watson, J., 111, 144, 148, 165, 171, 339
Weathers, R., 103, 165
Wei, M., 77, 225, 230
Weiler, H., 104
Weinberger, J., 144
Weinfield, N., 198
Weir, D., 225, 227, 297
Weishaar, M. E., 27
Weiss, J., 62, 64, 135, 218, 229, 254, 262, 289,  
303, 310, 347
Wells, M., 103
Wenar, C., 32, 202
West, M., 196
Westin, D., 296, 303
Whelton, W. J., 148
White, M., 215
White, B., 177
White, C., 67
White, M., 357
White, W. L., 98
Wiberg, B., 43
Wierzbicki, M., 354
Williams, D., 230
Williams, E. N., 63
Willutzki, U., 72
Wilner, N., 11
Winnicott, D. W., 52, 172
Winograd, G., 86
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

404  NAME INDEX
Winston, A., 90, 273, 313, 354
Wolfe, B. E., 137
Wolitzky, D., 25
Woodhouse, S., 354, 357, 362
Woodhouse, S. S., 275
Woody, E., 8
Woody, G., 295, 305
Y
Yahne, C., 269
Yalom, I., 85, 113, 271, 318
Yap, M., 225
Yard, S., 77, 146
Yeomans, F., 273, 278
Young, J. E., 27, 70, 254
Z
Zachariades, F., 168
Zalaquett, C., 18
Zane, N., 13, 31, 63, 123, 355
Zilcha-Mano, S., 262
Zubriggen, E., 202
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

405
SUBJECT INDEXSUBJECT INDEX
A
Abuse. See Sexual abuse
Accurate empathy, 53
Achieved credibility, 13, 31, 250
Adult Attachment Interview (AAI), 186–187
Affect
affective constellations, 161–167
characterological, 63, 159–161, 167
containment, 98, 169, 170–173
expanding and elaborating, 152–154
experiencing rather than talking about,  
154–157
identifying predominant, 157–161
recurrent affect themes, 63–65
regulation, 169
Ambivalence
in attachment style, 25
exploring ambivalent feelings, 70
responding to clients’ conflict, 288–291
working with client’s, 144–145
Anger
anger-sadness-shame constellation, 162–165
sadness-anger-guilt constellation, 166–167
Anxiety
in basic attachment ties, 25
shame-anxiety, 105–107
Ascribed credibility, 250
Assessing client reactions, 269–272
Attachment styles
clinical guidelines, 212–217
in adults: dismissive, 185, 188–193
fearful, 186, 197–200
   preoccupied, 186, 193–197
secure, 185–188
in children: ambivalent, 25
     avoidant, 24–25
disorganized, 25
secure, 24
Attachment theory, 24–25
internalizing attachment relationship, 25–27
secure vs. insecure, 24
B
Between-group differences, 305
C
Case formulation/conceptualization 6–7
interpersonal model for conceptualizing clients, 225–226
using transference reactions, 275–280
Change process, interpersonal model, 226
Client response specificity, 15–19
assessing client reactions, 269–272
testing behavior, 268–269
Client’s salient feeling, 148–152
Cognitive behavioral therapy, 27–28. See also Early maladaptive 
schemas (EMSs)
Cognitive domain, 24
Collaborative alliance. See Working alliance
Collaborative relationship, 14
Compacted phrase, 159
Compliance, 156
Compromise solution, 26
Conditions of worth in parenting, 208–212
Conflicts
emancipation, 217–219
over initiating, 47–48
responding to, in therapeutic relationship, 296–297
Confrontations, concern about, 328–329
Contemporary short-term relational approach, 11
Contempt, 103. See also Shame
Corrective emotional experience, 10–15, 267–280 See also  
Experiential Relearning
using process dimension to provide, 13–14
Corrective interpersonal process, 22
Countertransference, 14–15, 175–177, 260–261 
254–261, 281–283, 286–288
client- vs. therapist-induced countertransference,  
260–261
in family-of-origin work 350–351
issues/therapists fears, 325–328
Cultural competence, 31
Cultural norms and values, 28–29
D
De-activating in Attachment, 168, 188
Debriefing, 276
Dichotomous thinking, 31–32
Differentiation, 178
Directive/nondirective styles, 39–43
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

406  SUBJECT INDEX
Disengagement, 282–283
Dream, the, 351–353
E
Early maladaptive schemas (EMSs), 27–28
Early parent–child relationships, 24
Earned security, 184–185
Eliciting maneuvers, 254–261
Emancipation conflicts, 217–219
Embedded messages, 58
Empathic understanding, 48–50
Enmeshment, 281–282
Experiential relearning, 10–15, 27, 267–280
F
Facilitate change, in process dimension, 299
Family-of-origin work, 345–351
conflict with primary caregivers, 347–348
developmental familial experience, 32–33
grieving for caretaking, 349–350
Family systems
cultural context, 30–32
familial rules and roles, 175–177
invalidation of client’s experience, 50–54
lifelong impact of family experience, 32–33
strengths, 31–32
Flexibility, 61
G
Grief work, 361
Guilt, 70 vs. shame, 103
Sadness-anger-guilt constellation, 166–167
H
Hierarchical model or relationship, 20, 37, 73,  
133, 307
Homeostatic mechanism, 348
Hyper-activating in Attachment, 168, 188
I
Idiographic approach, 16–17
Immediacy interventions, 313–320, See also  
Process Comments
uncertainty about when to intervene, 324–325
Inclusive cultural empathy, 31
Incongruence, 155
Initial interview, 43–48
Initiating, conflicts over, 47–48
Insecure attachment, 24
Intergenerational boundaries, 217
Internal focus for change, 110–142
client’s reluctance to adopt, 122–125
effective interventions, 130–132
enlisting clients to solve their problems, 132–136
focusing client’s inward, 112–118, 140–141
fostering client’s initiative, 125–132
ineffective interventions, 129–130
resolving client’s conflict, 133–136
therapist–client relationship, 127–129
therapist’s reluctance to adopt, 118–122
tracking client’s anxiety, 136–141
Internal working models (IWMs), 24, 228–230
maladaptive relational patterns, 240–241
resolving core conflict, 235–238
shoulds for self, entitlement for others, 234–235
unmet developmental needs, 227–235
Interpersonal balance
disengagement, 282–283
effective middle ground, 284–286
enmeshment, 281–282
over-involvement, 286–288
under-involvement, 286–288
Interpersonal conflict, 88–89
Interpersonal consequences, unwanted, 145–148
Interpersonal coping strategies, 209, 224–251
moving toward, moving against, or moving away,  
231–232
moving against, 244–247
moving away, 247–251
moving toward, 238–244
Interpersonal domain, 23–24
Interpersonal feedback, 155
Interpersonal patterns, 61–62
Interpersonal process approach, 8–19
theoretical and historical context, 22–33
Invalidation, 51
In vivo relearning, also Experiential Relearning, 27
Involvement
disengagement, 282–283
effective middle ground, 284–286
enmeshment, 281–282
L
Love withdrawal, in parenting, 208–212
Loyalties, family, 85, 217
M
Metacommunication, 9
Middle ground of effective involvement, 284–286
Mis-attunement, 51
Multiple stressors, 158–159
Mystification, 210–212
N
Natural endings, 357
Non-defensive therapist, 9
O
Object relations theory, 24–25
Participant/ Observer, 6
Open-ended invitations, 152–153
P
Parentification of children, 29, 176, 219–222
Parenting styles
authoritarian, 201–203
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

SUBJECT INDEX 407
authoritative, 207–208
disengaged, 205–207
permissive, 203–205
Pathogenic beliefs, 62–63 
Performance anxieties
causes and management of, 4–6
concerns about personal power, 330–331
countertransference issues and, 325–328
fear of offending client, 325–326
fear of revealing inadequacies, 329–330
Personalizing, 132
Pervasive coping style, 210
Points of entry, 120–122
Power and control, 330–331
Pre-contemplators, 72
Premature termination, 354–357
Process comments, 9
facilitating interventions, 318–320
guidelines for utilizing, 313–315
preventing reenactment with therapist, 302–304
providing interpersonal solution, 313–320
types of, 315–318
Process dimension, 8–10, 295–331
bridging theoretical orientations, 304–309
facilitating change, 299
recognizing interpersonal process, 299–302
reenacting problem in interpersonal process, 299–313
therapists reluctance to work with, 323–331
Psychologically based resistance, 81
R
Real relationship, 38
Recurrent themes
affective, 63–65
identifying, 60–65
Reenactments of client’s conflict
eliciting maneuvers, 254–261
testing behavior, 261–272
transference reactions, 272–280
Rejection/Shame schema, 28
Relational patterns, 23–24, 29. See also Interpersonal  
coping strategies
maladaptive, 11, 14–15, 19
repetitive themes, 61–65
Resistance, 69–108
clients’ concerns about therapy, 93–94
client’s reluctance to work with, 75–80
common themes in, 70
cultural differences, 94–95
exploring danger/identifying threat, 99–101
exploring in first session, 88–95
formulating case conceptions, 81–83
fueled by shame, 102–108
identifying, 80–81
in initial telephone contact, 84–87
interpersonal conflict, 88–89
interventions, 99, 101–102
responding to, 83–84
testing therapist’s adequacy, 92–93
therapist’s reluctance to work with, 72–75
Ruptures, 9
ruptures, reenactments, and resistance, 95–102
S
Sadness
anger-sadness-shame constellation, 162–165
sadness-anger-guilt constellation, 166–167
Safe haven, 49, 71, 174, 184
Schemas, 27–28
Secure base, 71, 184
Self-blaming distortion, 27
Self-defeating behavior, 107
Self-efficacy, 37
Separateness/relatedness, 30
Separation guilt, 156, 218
Sexual abuse, 309–313
Shame, 102–108 vs. guilt, 103
anger-sadness-shame constellation, 162–165
defending against, framing as virtue, 232–234
shame-anxiety, 105–107
shame-prone sense of self, 104
shame-rage cycle, 104–105
shame-worthiness, 104
Shoulds, tyranny of, 234–235
Splitting defenses, 26
Strain trauma, 32
Structural family relations, 217
T
Termination, 354–363
client and therapist discuss ending, 357–362
ending the relationship, 363
premature, 354–357
Testing behavior, 261–272
assessing clients’ reactions, 269–272
client response specificity., 268–269
therapist passing client’s test, 267
Theoretical orientations, bridging, 304–309
Therapeutic alliance. See Working alliance
Therapeutic relationship
affirmative responses to clients, 321–322
evoking & responding to clients’ conflicts, 296–299
shared control, 127–129
Transference reactions, 38, 272–280 
contemporary approach, 273
definition, 272
in everyday life, 274–275
therapeutic goals for, 273
using to conceptualize clients, 275–280
Triangulation, 45–46 
U
Understanding
client’s subjective meaning, 50–54
communicating overtly, 54–60
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

408  SUBJECT INDEX
Understanding (Continued)
empathic, 48–50
pre-conditions of change, 66–67
Unfinished grief work, 361
Unnatural endings, 358
Unspoken family rule, 211
Unwanted interpersonal consequences,  
145–148
V
Validation of client’s experience, 50–54
W
Working alliance, 37–67
collaboration, in initial interview, 43–48
collaboration vs. directive/nondirective styles, 39–43
communicating understanding, 54–60
demonstrating understanding, 50–54
empathic understanding as basis, 48–50
identifying recurrent themes, 60–65
performance anxieties, 65
Working-through, 333–353
Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

Copyright 2017 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203

