“Russ	Harris	is	an	open,	centered,	and	engaged	teacher	of
acceptance	and	commitment	therapy	(ACT),	and,	in	
ACT	 Made
Simple
,	he	succeeds	in	delivering	a	transparent	account	of	a
complex	and	powerful	treatment.	I	recommend	this	book	to	mental
health	and	medical	providers	and	to	their	teachers.”
—Patricia	J.	Robinson,	Ph.D.,	coauthor	of
Behavioral	 Consultation	 and	 Primary
Care
	and	
The	Mindfulness	and	Acceptance
Workbook	for	Depression
“
ACT	Made	Simple
	is	simply	the	most	accessible	book	written	to
date	for	therapists	interested	in	learning	ACT.	Russ	Harris	explains
ACT	concepts	in	a	style	that	is	both	engaging	and	straightforward.
His	advice	on	overcoming	therapy	roadblocks	is	invaluable	and	will
be	useful	to	both	novice	and	experienced	ACT	practitioners.”
—Jason	B.	Luoma,	Ph.D.,	psychologist	at
Portland	Psychotherapy	Clinic,	Research,
and	Training	Center
“Perhaps	the	most	elegant,	easily	digestible	book	on	using	the
principles	of	mindfulness	and	acceptance	to	improve	your	own	life
and	the	lives	of	others.	Inside	are	a	litany	of	creative	exercises	and
strategies	that	are	ready	for	immediate	use.	But	none	of	the	benefits
would	be	possible	without	the	supportive,	entertaining	voice	of
Russ	Harris.	There	is	something	new	to	be	learned	with	each
reading.”
—Todd	B.	Kashdan,	Ph.D.,	professor	of
psychology	at	George	Mason	University
and	 author	 of	
Curious?	 Discover	 the
Missing	Ingredient	to	a	Fulfilling	Life
“ACT	aims	to	increase	psychological	flexibility.	Learn	from	this
book	and	you’ll	be	
doing
	ACT	rather	than	just	talking	about	doing
ACT.	And	you’ll	be	doing	it	with	greater	flexibility.”
—Hank	Robb,	Ph.D.,	ABPP
“Let’s	face	it:	psychological	concerns	are	complex.	If	modern
behavior	therapy	is	to	rise	to	the	occasion	of	reducing	human
suffering,	it	will	require	a	similarly	intricate	and	comprehensive
approach.	ACT	attempts	to	provide	a	multifaceted	treatment	model
to	address	these	complexities,	and	
ACT	Made	Simple
	has	risen	to
the	occasion	by	reducing	the	difficulties	in	understanding	the
unique	ACT	approach.	Harris’s	expressive	style	is	matchless.
Comprehensive	scientific	and	clinical	literature	rarely	reads	this
well.	This	is	a	clear,	understandable	introduction	to	a	powerful
intervention	approach.	Many	practitioners	who	are	new	to	ACT	will
want	to	start	with	
ACT	Made	Simple
.”
—Daniel	J.	Moran,	Ph.D.,	BCBA,	coauthor
of	
ACT	in	Practice
“This	much-needed	book	is	a	must	for	mental	health	clinicians
interested	in	learning	ACT.	True	to	his	physician	roots,	Harris	has
taken	a	very	practical	approach	to	understanding	ACT.	He	does	a
wonderful	job	of	taking	complicated	ACT	concepts	and	making
them	easy	to	understand.	His	writing	is	full	of	wit,	self-disclosure,
and	down-to-earth	communication.	Readers	of	this	book	will	finish
it	with	a	much	better	understanding	of	core	ACT	principles	and
interventions.”
—Kirk	D.	Strosahl,	Ph.D.,	coauthor	of	The
Mindfulness	and	Acceptance	Workbook
for	Depression
“For	newcomers	to	ACT,	there	is	no	better	place	to	start	than	with
this	book.	Russ	Harris	masterfully	makes	ACT	come	alive	with	an
accessible	writing	style	and	illustrative	examples	of	its	application
in	alleviating	a	wide	range	of	types	of	human	suffering.	Practical
tips	and	homework	assignments	throughout	will	actively	engage
you	to	go	beyond	merely	reading	about	ACT	and	begin	to	apply	it
to	your	own	life	and	in	your	work	with	clients.	For	those	who	may
have	been	holding	out	for	
ACT	for	Dummies
,	the	wait	is	over.	This
book	is	for	you!”
—Robert	 Zettle,	 Ph.D.,	 professor	 of
psychology	at	Wichita	State	University
and	author	of	
ACT	for	Depression
“For	those	of	you	who	train	or	supervise	nurses,	physicians,	social
workers,	or	other	professionals	unfamiliar	with	psychological	lingo,
ACT	Made	Simple
	is	a	must.	Russ	Harris	has	succeeded	in	the
challenge	of	translating	difficult	psychological	concepts	embedded
in	ACT	into	plain,	colorful,	diverse	language	that	anyone	working
clinically	will	understand.	Each	section	is	simply	organized,	easy	to
follow,	and	user-friendly.	Harris	has	included	highly	useful	sections
of	practical	tips	and	common	pitfalls	that	even	the	trained	ACT
therapist	will	find	useful.	I	highly	recommend	
ACT	Made	Simple
	as
a	primer	for	ACT	training.”
—JoAnne	Dahl,	Ph.D.,	author	of	
The	Art	and
Science	of	Valuing	in	Psychotherapy
“
ACT	Made	Simple
	is	just	that.	Dr.	Harris	has,	once	again,	written	a
very	accessible	book	that	should	be	read	by	all	clinicians	wanting	to
learn,	engage	or	otherwise	implement	ACT	in	their	practice.	This
book	is	a	must	for	ACT	readers.	My	thanks	to	Dr.	Harris	for	making
ACT	so	user-friendly	and	understandable.”
—Robyn	D.	Walser,	Ph.D.,	author	of	
The
Mindful	Couple
Publisher’s	Note
This	publication	is	designed	to	provide	accurate	and	authoritative	information	in	regard	to	the	subject	matter	covered.	It	is	sold
with	the	understanding	that	the	publisher	is	not	engaged	in	rendering	psychological,	financial,	legal,	or	other	professional
services.	If	expert	assistance	or	counseling	is	needed,	the	services	of	a	competent	professional	should	be	sought.
Distributed	in	Canada	by	Raincoast	Books
Copyright	©	2009	by	Russ	Harris
New	Harbinger	Publications,	Inc.
5674	Shattuck	Avenue
Oakland,	CA	94609
www.newharbinger.com
All	Rights	Reserved
epub	ISBN	9781608821747
The	Library	of	Congress	has	cataloged	the	print	edition	as:
Acquired	by	Catharine	Sutker;	Cover	design	by	Amy	Shoup;
Edited	by	Carole	Honeychurch;	Text	design	by	Tracy	Carlson
Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data
Harris,	Russ,	1938-
ACT	made	simple	:	an	easy-to-read	primer	on	acceptance	and	commitment	therapy	/	Russ	Harris	;	foreword	by
Steven	C.	Hayes.
p.	cm.
Includes	bibliographical	references	and	index.
ISBN-13:	978-1-57224-705-5	(pbk.	:	alk.	paper)
ISBN-10:	1-57224-705-3	(pbk.	:	alk.	paper)	1.	Acceptance	and	commitment	therapy.	I.	Title.
RC489.A32H37	2009
616.89’1425--dc22
2009023487
Dedication
To	my	brother	Genghis:	for	all	your	love,	support,	inspiration,	and	encouragement	over	the
years;	for	pushing	me	when	I	needed	pushing;	for	anchoring	me	when	I	needed	stability;	for
showing	me	the	way	when	I	got	lost;	and	for	bringing	so	much	light,	love,	and	laughter	into	my
life.
Contents
Foreword
Acknowledgments
Introduction
What’s	It	All	About?
1.	ACT	in	a	Nutshell
2.	Stuck,	Not	Broken
3.	The	House	of	ACT
4.	Getting	Experiential
5.	Opening	ACT
6.	Creative	What??!!
7.	Watch	Your	Thinking
8.	Open	Up
9.	Be	Here	Now
10.	Pure	Awareness
11.	Know	What	Matters
12.	Do	What	It	Takes
13.	Getting	Unstuck
14.	I	and	Thou
15.	The	Therapist’s	Journey
Appendix	1.	Case	Conceptualization	Made	Simple
Appendix	2.	Resources
References
Foreword
Acceptance	and	commitment	therapy	(ACT)	is	oddly	counterintuitive.	The
mind	fights	it.	Even	experienced	ACT	therapists	and	successful	ACT	clients
can	connect	with	something	in	the	work,	move	forward,	and	then	weeks	later
suddenly	find	that	the	vitality	is	gone	from	that	connection	because	they	have
subtly	reformulated	it	mentally	into	something	more	“normal”	but	also	much
less	useful.
ACT	is	not	about	training	the	normal	mode	of	the	mind.	It	is	about	getting
out	of	your	mind	and	into	your	life.	Minds	don’t	like	that	agenda.
This	very	phenomenon	partially	explains	why	ACT	is	a	new	therapy	for
most	clinicians,	even	though	it	was	developed	almost	thirty	years	ago.
We	deliberately	spent	a	long	time	working	out	the	underlying	processes	and
theory	in	hopes	that	these	would	serve	as	a	guide	when	we	lost	our	way.	We
could	say,	in	precise	behavioral	language,	what	was	meant	by	“mind.”	We
could	research,	in	precise	behavioral	experiments,	how	defusion	altered	the
impact	of	cognition	or	how	acceptance	changed	the	role	of	emotion.
This	strategy	did	indeed	help	keep	the	work	focused,	but	it	greatly	delayed
thorough	presentations	of	the	work.	(The	first	book	on	ACT	was	completed
only	ten	years	ago,	nearly	twenty	years	after	ACT	began.)	It	also	made	early
ACT	writings	very	complex.	Clients	have	a	hard	time	shifting	from	a
problem-solving	mode	into	a	mindful	appreciation	mode.	The	underlying
theory	explains	why	and	what	to	do	about	it—and	we	were	ready	with	these
detailed	geek-science	explanations	even	if	at	times	they	were	virtually
unreadable	to	those	not	versed	in	behavior	analysis.
Fortunately,	the	heart	of	the	work	shone	through	for	some	at	least.	Creative
clinicians	and	authors,	including	the	author	of	this	beautiful	new	book,	began
to	find	simpler	and	clearer	ways	to	help	others	connect	with	the	work.	The
advent	of	ACT	self-help	books	accelerated	that	process	even	further	as
authors	learned	how	to	write	in	ways	that	people	can	understand.
Now	the	ACT	literature	is	vast,	with	scores	of	books	and	hundreds	of
articles.	Clinicians	need	a	place	to	begin	to	explore	that	territory.	My
prediction	is	that	they	have	just	found	it.
Russ	Harris	is	brilliant	in	his	ability	to	sniff	out	needless	complexity	and
present	complex	clinical	ideas	in	an	accessible	way.	
ACT	Made	Simple
	is
ACT.	Unquestionably.	This	book	rings	with	a	clear	note	on	every	page.	Russ
has	put	in	the	years	to	understand	the	work	deeply	(even	the	geek	science
underlying	relational	frame	theory)	and	learn	to	apply	and	extend	it	with
integrity.	In	this	book,	he	has	brought	his	considerable	talents	to	bear	on	the
clear	presentation	and	formulation	of	the	ACT	model,	and	he	has	brought	his
clinical	creativity	to	new	methods	and	new	ways	of	getting	to	the	heart	of
these	issues	with	clients.
That	is	a	great	combination	and	a	significant	contribution.	Particularly	if
you	are	new	to	the	work,	this	book	will	do	a	masterful	job	of	opening	up	the
ACT	model	for	you	to	explore.	It	is	just	as	the	title	says:	
ACT	Made	Simple
.
—Steven	C.	Hayes,	Ph.D.University	of	Nevada
Acknowledgments
First,	a	humongous	thank	you	to	my	wife,	Carmel,	for	all	her	love	and
support;	for	putting	up	with	my	obsessive-compulsive	writing	disorder;	for
encouraging	me	to	keep	writing	during	all	those	dark	patches	where	I	thought
I	was	writing	nothing	but	crap;	and	for	being	my	“sounding	board”	and
actively	helping	me	to	develop	my	ideas.
Thanks	also	to	all	those	friends	and	colleagues	who	read	early	drafts	and
gave	me	invaluable	feedback:	Julian	McNally,	Georg	Eifert,	Hank	Robb,	and
Ros	Lethbridge.
As	usual,	I’d	like	to	dump	a	zillion	truckloads	of	gratitude	on	Steve	Hayes,
the	originator	of	ACT—and	that	gratitude	also	extends	to	Kelly	Wilson,	Kirk
Strosahl,	Robyn	Walser,	and	Hank	Robb,	all	huge	sources	of	inspiration	for
me.	I	also	am	very	thankful	to	the	entire	ACT	community,	which	is	very
supportive	and	inspirational;	many	ideas	within	these	pages	have	arisen	from
discussions	on	the	worldwide	ACT	Listserv.
Next	I’d	like	to	thank	my	agent,	Sammie	Justesen,	for	all	her	good	work;
and	a	heap	of	thanks	to	the	entire	team	at	New	Harbinger—including	Jess
Beebe,	Catherine	Sutker,	and	Matt	McKay—for	all	the	hard	work,	care,	and
attention	they	have	invested	in	this	book.
Editors	are	the	unsung	heroes	of	successful	books,	and	so	I’d	like	to	sing
my	thanks	to	the	heroic	efforts	of	my	editor,	Jean	Blomquist,	who	truly	had
her	work	cut	out	for	her	in	knocking	this	book	into	shape.
And	finally	I	want	to	thank	my	son,	Max.	While	he	is	far	too	young	to	help
me	with	the	book	directly,	he	has	helped	enormously	in	a	more	indirect
manner,	simply	by	being	in	my	life	and	filling	it	with	so	much	love.
Introduction.	What’s	It	All	About?
Life	is	spelt	H.A.S.S.L.E.
—Albert	Ellis
Life	is	difficult.
—M.	Scott	Peck
Life	is	suffering.
—Buddha
Shit	happens!
—Anonymous
Why,	Why,	Why?
Why	is	it	so	hard	to	be	happy?	Why	is	life	so	difficult?	Why	do	humans	suffer
so	much?	And	what	can	we	realistically	do	about	it?	Acceptance	and
commitment	therapy	(ACT)	has	some	profound	and	life-changing	answers	to
these	questions.	This	book	aims	to	take	the	complex	theory	and	practice	of
ACT	and	make	it	accessible	and	enjoyable.	If,	like	me,	you’ve	got	a	bookcase
full	of	mostly	unfinished	academic	textbooks,	you’ll	appreciate	the	fact	that
ACT	is	engaging	and	playful.	I’ve	deliberately	kept	technical	jargon	to	an
absolute	minimum	and	opted	for	everyday	language	wherever	possible.	I	hope
to	make	ACT	accessible	to	the	broadest	possible	range	of	professionals—
from	coaches,	counselors,	and	mental	health	nurses,	to	social	workers,
psychologists,	psychiatrists,	and	all	health	professionals.
So	What	Is	ACT?
We	officially	say	ACT	as	the	word	“act”	and	not	as	the	initials	A-C-T.	There’s
a	good	reason	for	this.	At	its	core,	ACT	is	a	behavioral	therapy:	it’s	about
taking	action.	But	it’s	not	about	just	any	old	action.	First,	it’s	about	values-
guided	action.	There’s	a	big	existential	component	to	this	model:	What	do	you
want	to	stand	for	in	life?	What	really	matters,	deep	in	your	heart?	What	do
you	want	to	be	remembered	for	at	your	funeral?	ACT	gets	you	in	touch	with
what	really	matters	in	the	big	picture:	your	heart’s	deepest	desires	for	whom
you	want	to	be	and	what	you	want	to	do	during	your	brief	time	on	this	planet.
You	then	use	these	core	values	to	guide,	motivate,	and	inspire	behavioral
change.	Second,	it’s	about	“mindful”	action:	action	that	you	take	consciously,
with	full	awareness—open	to	your	experience	and	fully	engaged	in	whatever
you’re	doing.
ACT	gets	its	name	from	one	of	its	core	messages:	accept	what	is	out	of
your	personal	control,	and	commit	to	taking	action	that	enriches	your	life.	The
aim	of	ACT	is	to	help	us	create	a	rich,	full,	and	meaningful	life,	while
accepting	the	pain	that	life	inevitably	brings.	ACT	does	this	by
teaching	us	psychological	skills	to	handle	painful	thoughts
and	feelings	effectively,	in	such	a	way	that	they	have	much
less	impact	and	influence—these	are	known	as	
mindfulness
skills
;	and
helping	us	to	clarify	what’s	truly	important	and	meaningful
to	us—that	is,	clarify	our	values—and	use	that	knowledge	to
guide,	inspire,	and	motivate	us	to	set	goals	and	take	action
that	enriches	our	life.
ACT	rests	on	an	underlying	theory	of	human	language	and	cognition	called
relational	frame	theory	(RFT),	a	theory	that	now	has	over	one	hundred	and
fifty	published	peer-reviewed	articles	supporting	its	principles.	We	won’t
cover	RFT	in	this	book	because	it’s	quite	technical	and	takes	a	fair	bit	of	work
to	understand,	whereas	the	aim	of	this	book	is	to	welcome	you	into	ACT,
simplify	the	main	concepts,	and	get	you	off	to	a	quick	start.
The	good	news	is	you	can	be	an	effective	ACT	therapist	without	knowing
anything	about	RFT.	If	ACT	is	like	driving	your	car,	RFT	is	like	knowing
how	the	engine	works:	you	can	be	an	excellent	driver	while	knowing
absolutely	nothing	about	the	mechanics.	(Having	said	that,	many	ACT
therapists	say	that	when	they	understand	RFT,	it	improves	their	clinical
effectiveness.	Therefore,	if	you’re	interested,	appendix	2	will	tell	you	where
to	go	for	more	information.)
Who	Is	This	Book	For?
I’ve	aimed	this	book	primarily	at	newcomers	to	ACT	who	want	a	quick	and
simple	introduction	to	the	model.	It	will	also	be	useful	for	more	experienced
practitioners	who	want	a	quick	refresher	course:	an	ACT	primer,	if	you	like.
I’ve	designed	it	to	complement	other	ACT	textbooks	that	offer	more	theory	or
more	 in-depth	 discussions	 of	 the	 ACT	 processes	 and	 their	 clinical
applications.	I’ll	mention	some	of	these	textbooks	as	we	go	along	and	others
in	the	resources	section	(appendix	2)	at	the	end.
How	to	Use	This	Book
If	you’re	brand-new	to	ACT,	I	strongly	recommend	you	read	this	entire	book
from	cover	to	cover	
before
	you	start	using	any	of	it.	This	is	because	the	six
core	processes	of	ACT	are	all	interdependent,	so	unless	you	have	a	good
sense	of	the	entire	model	and	the	way	these	different	strands	interweave,	you
may	well	get	confused	and	head	off	in	the	wrong	direction.
And,	of	course,	reading	it	is	not	enough;	you’ll	also	need	to	actively
practice	the	exercises	as	you	go.	After	all,	you	can’t	learn	to	drive	merely	by
reading	about	it;	you	have	to	actually	get	in	a	car,	put	your	hands	on	the
wheel,	and	take	it	for	a	spin.	When	you’re	ready	to	start	using	ACT	with	your
clients,	you	can	either	use	this	book	to	loosely	guide	you,	or	you	might	prefer
to	use	a	protocol-based	ACT	textbook	that	will	coach	you	along	in	detail,
session-by-session.
First	off,	in	chapters	1	through	3,	we’re	going	to	zip	through	an	overview
of	the	model	and	the	theory	underlying	it.	Then	in	chapters	4	and	5,	we’ll
cover	the	basics	of	getting	started,	including	how	to	do	experiential	therapy,
obtain	informed	consent,	and	structure	your	ongoing	sessions.	In	chapters	6
through	12,	we’ll	go	step-by-step	through	the	six	core	processes	of	ACT	and
how	to	apply	them	to	a	wide	range	of	clinical	issues.	The	emphasis	in	each
chapter	will	be	on	simplicity	and	practicality	so	you	can	start	using	this
approach	straight	away.	(But	please	keep	in	mind:	newcomers	should	first
read	the	whole	book,	cover	to	cover,	before	applying	it.)
In	the	last	section	of	the	book,	chapters	13	through	15,	we’ll	cover	a	wide
range	of	important	topics	including	common	therapist	pitfalls,	overcoming
barriers	to	change,	enhancing	the	client-therapist	relationship,	dancing	around
the	six	core	processes,	embodying	ACT	in	everyday	life,	mixing	and
matching	ACT	with	other	models,	and	where	to	go	next	on	your	journey	as	an
ACT	therapist.
From	chapter	5	onward,	you’ll	find	these	“practical	tip”	text	boxes	popping
up:
Practical	Tip
	In	these	sections,	you’ll	find	practical	tips	to	help	your
clinical	practice	and	common	pitfalls	to	watch	out	for.
Your	Role	in	All	This
I	heard	a	great	saying	recently:	“Be	yourself:	everyone	else	is	already	taken.”
Your	role	in	learning	and	practicing	ACT	is	to	be	yourself.	I	wasted	a	lot	of
time	and	effort	in	my	early	ACT	work	trying	to	do	ACT	word-for-word	as
written	in	the	textbooks.	And	then,	after	I	saw	Steve	Hayes	and	Kelly	Wilson
—two	of	the	founders	of	ACT—in	action,	I	tried	very	hard	to	copy	their
unique	styles	of	doing	therapy.	This	didn’t	work	very	well	for	me.	It	all	went
much	better	when	I	allowed	myself	to	be	me	and	developed	my	own	style	and
my	own	way	of	speaking,	a	manner	that	felt	natural	and	also	suited	the	clients
I	work	with.	I’m	sure	you’ll	find	the	same.
So	as	you	go	through	this	book,	use	your	creativity.	Feel	free	to	adapt,
modify,	and	reinvent	the	tools	and	techniques	within	these	pages	(provided
you’re	remaining	true	to	the	ACT	model)	to	suit	your	own	personal	style.
Wherever	I	present	metaphors,	scripts,	worksheets,	or	exercises,	change	the
words	to	fit	your	way	of	speaking.	And	if	you	have	better	or	different
metaphors	that	accomplish	the	same	ends,	then	please	use	yours	rather	than
the	ones	in	this	book.	There’s	enormous	room	for	creativity	and	innovation
within	the	ACT	model,	so	please	do	take	every	advantage	of	it.
Getting	Started
Few	people	come	to	ACT	and	dive	in	head	first.	You,	like	most,	may	start	off
by	dipping	a	toe	in	the	water.	Next,	you	put	a	whole	foot	in.	Then	a	knee.
Then	an	entire	leg.	Now	you	find	yourself	in	this	odd	position,	with	one	leg	in
the	water	and	one	leg	out.	And	generally	you	stay	there	for	quite	a	while,	half
in,	half	out,	not	quite	sure	if	ACT	is	for	you.	Finally,	one	day,	you	take	the
plunge.	And	when	you	do	so,	you	discover	the	water	is	warm,	welcoming,
and	invigorating;	you	feel	liberated,	buoyant,	and	resourceful;	and	you	want
to	spend	a	lot	more	time	in	it.	Once	this	happens,	there’s	generally	no	going
back	to	your	old	way	of	working.	(So	if	this	hasn’t	already	happened	to	you,	I
hope	it	will	by	the	end	of	this	book.)
One	reason	for	this	initial	uncertainty	about	ACT	is	that	it	challenges
conventional	wisdom	and	overturns	the	ground	rules	of	most	Western
psychology.	For	example,	most	models	of	therapy	are	extremely	focused	on
symptom	reduction.	Their	assumption	is	that	clients	need	to	reduce	their
symptoms	before	they	can	lead	a	better	life.	ACT	takes	a	radically	different
stance.	ACT	assumes	that	(a)	quality	of	life	is	primarily	dependent	upon
mindful,	values-guided	action,	and	(b)	this	is	possible	regardless	of	how	many
symptoms	you	have—provided	that	you	respond	to	your	symptoms	with
mindfulness.
To	put	it	another	way,	mindful,	values-congruent	living	is	the	desired
outcome	in	ACT,	not	symptom	reduction.	So	although	ACT	typically	reduces
symptoms,	this	is	never	the	goal.	(By	the	way,	as	“values-congruent	living”	is
a	bit	of	a	mouthful,	for	the	most	of	the	book	I’ll	shorten	it	to	“valued	living.”
Sorry,	I	know	it’s	not	great	English.)
Thus	in	ACT,	when	we	teach	a	client	mindfulness	skills,	the	aim	is	
not
	to
reduce	his	symptoms	but	to	fundamentally	
change	his	relationship	with	his
symptoms
	so	that	they	no	longer	hold	him	back	from	valued	living.	The	fact
that	his	symptoms	reduce	is	considered	a	“bonus”	rather	than	the	main	point
of	therapy.
Of	course,	we	don’t	say	to	our	clients,	“We’re	not	going	to	try	to	reduce
your	symptoms!”	Why	not?	Because	(a)	this	would	set	up	all	sorts	of
unnecessary	therapeutic	barriers,	and	(b)	we	know	that	symptom	reduction	is
extremely	likely.	(Even	though	we	never	aim	for	it,	in	almost	every	trial	and
study	ever	done	on	ACT,	there	is	significant	symptom	reduction—although
sometimes	it	occurs	more	slowly	than	in	other	models.)
So	what	this	means	is,	if	you	come	to	ACT	from	models	that	are	very
focused	on	trying	to	reduce	symptoms,	it’s	truly	a	massive	paradigm	shift.
Fortunately	most	people—therapists	and	clients	alike—find	it	a	liberating
one.	However,	because	ACT	is	so	different	from	most	other	psychological
approaches,	many	practitioners	initially	feel	awkward,	anxious,	vulnerable,
confused,	or	inadequate.	I	certainly	did.	(And	I	still	do	at	times!)	The	good
news	is	ACT	gives	you	the	means	to	effectively	handle	those	perfectly	natural
feelings.	And	the	more	you	practice	ACT	on	yourself	to	enrich	and	enhance
your	own	life	and	to	resolve	your	own	painful	issues,	the	more	effective
you’ll	be	in	applying	it	with	your	clients.	(How’s	that	for	a	bonus?)	So,
enough	of	the	preamble:	let’s	get	started!
Chapter	1.	ACT	in	a	Nutshell
What	Is	a	“Mind”?
This	is	too	hard.	I	can’t	do	this.	Why	isn’t	this	working?	It	all	seemed	so	easy
when	I	read	it	in	the	textbook.	I	wish	there	was	a	real	therapist	here	to	tell	me
what	to	do.	Maybe	I’m	not	cut	out	for	this	sort	of	work.	I’m	so	dumb.	Maybe	I
should	refer	this	client	to	someone	else	who	knows	what	they’re	doing.
Does	your	mind	ever	say	things	like	this	to	you?	Mine	certainly	does.	And
so	does	the	mind	of	every	therapist	I’ve	ever	known.	Now	take	a	moment	to
reflect	on	what	else	your	mind	does	that’s	unhelpful.	For	example,	does	it
ever	compare	you	harshly	to	others,	or	criticize	your	efforts,	or	tell	you	that
you	can’t	do	the	things	you	want	to	do?	Does	it	ever	dredge	up	unpleasant
memories	from	the	past?	Does	it	find	fault	with	your	life	as	it	is	today	and
conjure	up	alternative	lives	where	you’d	be	ever	so	much	happier?	Does	it
ever	drag	you	into	scary	scenarios	about	the	future	and	warn	you	about	all	the
possible	things	that	might	go	wrong?	If	so,	it	sounds	as	if	you	have	a	normal
human	mind.	You	see,	in	ACT,	we	start	from	the	assumption	that	the	normal
psychological	processes	of	a	normal	human	mind	readily	become	destructive,
and	sooner	or	later,	they	create	psychological	suffering	for	all	of	us.	And	ACT
speculates	that	the	root	of	this	suffering	is	human	language	itself.
Language	and	the	Mind
Human	language	is	a	highly	complex	system	of	symbols	that	includes
words,	images,	sounds,	facial	expressions,	and	physical	gestures.	Humans	use
language	in	two	domains:	public	and	private.	The	public	use	of	language
includes	speaking,	talking,	miming,	gesturing,	writing,	painting,	sculpting,
singing,	dancing,	acting,	and	so	on.	The	private	use	of	language	includes
thinking,	imagining,	daydreaming,	planning,	visualizing,	analyzing,	worrying,
fantasizing,	and	so	on.	(A	commonly	used	term	for	the	private	use	of	language
is	
cognition.
)
Now	clearly	the	mind	is	not	a	“thing”	or	an	“object.”	We	use	the	word
“mind”	to	describe	an	incredibly	complex	set	of	interactive	cognitive
processes,	such	as	analyzing,	comparing,	evaluating,	planning,	remembering,
visualizing,	and	so	on.	And	all	of	these	complex	processes	rely	on	the
sophisticated	system	of	symbols	we	call	human	language.	Thus	in	ACT,	when
we	use	the	word	“mind,”	we’re	using	it	as	a	metaphor	for	“human	language.”
Your	Mind	Is	Not	Your	Friend—or	Your	Enemy
ACT	regards	the	mind	as	a	double-edged	sword.	It’s	very	useful	for	all
sorts	of	purposes,	but	if	we	don’t	learn	how	to	handle	it	effectively,	it	will	hurt
us.	On	the	bright	side,	language	helps	us	make	maps	and	models	of	the	world;
predict	and	plan	for	the	future;	share	knowledge;	learn	from	the	past;	imagine
things	that	have	never	existed	and	go	on	to	create	them;	develop	rules	that
guide	our	behavior	effectively	and	help	us	to	thrive	as	a	community;
communicate	with	people	who	are	far	away;	and	learn	from	people	who	are
no	longer	alive.
The	dark	side	of	language	is	that	we	use	it	to	lie,	manipulate,	and	deceive;
to	spread	libel,	slander,	and	ignorance;	to	incite	hatred,	prejudice,	and
violence;	to	make	weapons	of	mass	destruction	and	industries	of	mass
pollution;	to	dwell	on	and	“relive”	painful	events	from	the	past;	to	scare
ourselves	by	imagining	unpleasant	futures;	to	compare,	judge,	criticize,	and
condemn	both	ourselves	and	others;	and	to	create	rules	for	ourselves	that	can
often	be	life	constricting	or	destructive.	Because	language	is	both	a	blessing
and	a	curse,	we	often	say	in	ACT,	“Your	mind	is	not	your	friend—and	it’s	not
your	enemy	either.”	So	now	that	we	know	what	a	“mind”	is,	let’s	turn	to	a
very	important	question.
What	Is	the	Aim	of	ACT?
The	aim	of	ACT,	in	lay	terms,	is	to	create	a	rich,	full,	and	meaningful	life
while	accepting	the	pain	that	inevitably	goes	with	it.	Later	this	chapter,	we’ll
look	at	a	more	technical	definition	of	ACT,	but	first	take	a	moment	to
consider	this	question:	why	does	life	inevitably	involve	pain?
Clearly	there	are	many,	many	reasons.	We’ll	all	experience	frustration,
disappointment,	rejection,	loss,	and	failure.	We’ll	all	experience	illness,
injury,	and	aging.	We’ll	all	face	our	own	death	and	the	death	of	our	loved
ones.	On	top	of	that,	many	basic	human	emotions—normal	feelings	that	each
and	every	one	of	us	will	repeatedly	experience	throughout	our	lives—are
inherently	painful:	fear,	sadness,	guilt,	anger,	shock,	and	disgust,	to	name	but
a	few.
And	as	if	all	that	were	not	enough,	we	each	have	a	mind	that	can	conjure	up
pain	at	any	moment.	Thanks	to	human	language,	wherever	we	go,	whatever
we	do,	we	can	experience	pain	instantly.	In	any	moment,	we	can	relive	a
painful	memory	or	get	lost	in	a	fearful	prediction	of	the	future.	Or	we	can	get
caught	up	in	unfavorable	comparisons	(“Her	job	is	better	than	mine”)	or
negative	self-judgments	(“I’m	too	fat,”	“I’m	not	smart	enough,”	and	so	on).
Thanks	to	human	language,	we	can	even	experience	pain	on	the	happiest
days	of	our	lives.	For	example,	suppose	it’s	Susan’s	wedding	day,	and	all	of
her	friends	and	family	are	gathered	together	to	honor	her	joyful	new	union.
She	is	blissfully	happy.	But	then	she	has	the	thought	
I	wish	my	father	were
here
—and	she	remembers	how	he	committed	suicide	when	she	was	only
sixteen	years	old.	Now,	on	one	of	the	happiest	days	of	her	life,	she’s	in	pain.
And	we’re	all	in	the	same	boat	as	Susan.	No	matter	how	good	our	quality
of	life,	no	matter	how	privileged	our	situation,	all	we	need	do	is	remember	a
time	when	something	bad	happened,	or	imagine	a	future	where	something	bad
happens,	or	judge	ourselves	harshly,	or	compare	our	life	to	someone	else’s
that	seems	better,	and	instantly	we’re	hurting.
Thus,	thanks	to	the	sophistication	of	the	mind,	even	the	most	privileged	of
human	lives	inevitably	involves	significant	pain.	Unfortunately,	typical
human	beings	commonly	handle	their	pain	ineffectively.	All	too	often	when
we	experience	painful	thoughts,	feelings,	and	sensations,	we	respond	in	ways
that	are	self-defeating	or	self-destructive	in	the	long	run.	Because	of	this,	one
major	element	of	ACT	is	teaching	people	how	to	handle	pain	more	effectively
through	the	use	of	mindfulness	skills.
What	Is	Mindfulness?
“Mindfulness”	is	an	ancient	concept,	found	in	a	wide	range	of	ancient
spiritual	and	religious	traditions,	including	Buddhism,	Taoism,	Hinduism,
Judaism,	Islam,	and	Christianity.	Western	psychology	has	only	recently
started	to	recognize	the	many	benefits	of	developing	mindfulness	skills.	If
you	read	a	few	books	on	the	subject,	you’ll	find	“mindfulness”	defined	in	a
variety	of	different	ways,	but	they	all	basically	boil	down	to	this:
Mindfulness	means	paying	attention	with	flexibility,	openness,	and	curiosity.
This	simple	definition	tells	us	three	important	things.	First,	mindfulness	is
an	
awareness
	process,	not	a	
thinking
	process.	It	involves	bringing	awareness
or	paying	attention	to	your	experience	in	this	moment	as	opposed	to	being
“caught	up”	in	your	thoughts.	Second,	mindfulness	involves	a	particular
attitude:	one	of	openness	and	curiosity.	Even	if	your	experience	in	this
moment	is	difficult,	painful,	or	unpleasant,	you	can	be	open	to	it	and	curious
about	it	instead	of	running	from	it	or	fighting	with	it.	Third,	mindfulness
involves	flexibility	of	attention:	the	ability	to	consciously	direct,	broaden,	or
focus	your	attention	on	different	aspects	of	your	experience.
We	can	use	mindfulness	to	“wake	up,”	connect	with	ourselves,	and
appreciate	the	fullness	of	each	moment	of	life.	We	can	use	it	to	improve	our
self-knowledge—to	learn	more	about	how	we	feel	and	think	and	react.	We
can	use	it	to	connect	deeply	and	intimately	with	the	people	we	care	about,
including	ourselves.	And	we	can	use	it	to	consciously	influence	our	own
behavior	and	increase	our	range	of	responses	to	the	world	we	live	in.	It	is	the
art	 of	 living	 consciously—a	 profound	 way	 to	 enhance	 psychological
resilience	and	increase	life	satisfaction.
Of	course	there’s	a	lot	more	to	ACT	than	just	mindfulness.	It’s	also	about
valued	living:	taking	action,	on	an	ongoing	basis,	that	is	guided	by	and
aligned	with	core	values.	Indeed,	we	teach	mindfulness	skills	in	ACT	with	the
express	purpose	of	facilitating	valued	action:	to	help	people	live	by	their
values.	In	other	words,	the	outcome	we	aim	for	in	ACT	is	mindful,	valued
living.	This	will	become	clearer	in	the	next	section,	where	we	look	at	the	six
core	processes	of	ACT.
The	Six	Core	Therapeutic	Processes	of	ACT
The	six	core	therapeutic	processes	in	ACT	are	contacting	the	present	moment,
defusion,	acceptance,	self-as-context,	values,	and	committed	action.	Before
we	go	through	them	one	by	one,	take	a	look	at	the	diagram	in	figure	1.1,
which	is	light-heartedly	known	as	the	ACT	“hexaflex.”	(This	diagram	differs
from	the	standard	version	you’ll	find	in	most	ACT	textbooks	in	that
underneath	each	technical	term	I’ve	written	a	short	catchphrase	to	help	you
remember	what	it	means.)
Let’s	take	a	look	now	at	each	of	the	six	core	processes	of	ACT.
Contacting	the	Present	Moment	(
Be	Here	Now
)
Contacting	 the	 present	 moment
	means	being	psychologically	present:
consciously	connecting	with	and	engaging	in	whatever	is	happening	in	this
moment.	Humans	find	it	very	hard	to	stay	present.	Like	other	humans,	we
know	how	easy	it	is	to	get	caught	up	in	our	thoughts	and	lose	touch	with	the
world	around	us.	We	may	spend	a	lot	of	time	absorbed	in	thoughts	about	the
past	or	the	future.	Or	instead	of	being	fully	conscious	of	our	experience,	we
may	operate	on	automatic	pilot,	merely	“going	through	the	motions.”
Contacting	the	present	moment	means	flexibly	bringing	our	awareness	to
either	the	physical	world	around	us	or	the	psychological	world	within	us,	or	to
both	simultaneously.	It	also	means	consciously	paying	attention	to	our	here-
and-now	experience	instead	of	drifting	off	into	our	thoughts	or	operating	on
“automatic	pilot.”
Defusion	(
Watch	Your	Thinking
)
Defusion
	means	learning	to	“step	back”	and	separate	or	detach	from	our
thoughts,	images,	and	memories.	(The	full	term	is	“cognitive	defusion,”	but
usually	we	just	call	it	“defusion.”)	Instead	of	getting	caught	up	in	our
thoughts	or	being	pushed	around	by	them,	we	let	them	come	and	go	as	if	they
were	just	cars	driving	past	outside	our	house.	We	step	back	and	watch	our
thinking	instead	of	getting	tangled	up	in	it.	We	see	our	thoughts	for	what	they
are—nothing	more	or	less	than	words	or	pictures.	We	hold	them	lightly
instead	of	clutching	them	tightly.
Acceptance	(
Open	Up
)
Acceptance
	means	opening	up	and	making	room	for	painful	feelings,
sensations,	urges,	and	emotions.	We	drop	the	struggle	with	them,	give	them
some	breathing	space,	and	allow	them	to	be	as	they	are.	Instead	of	fighting
them,	resisting	them,	running	from	them,	or	getting	overwhelmed	by	them,
we	open	up	to	them	and	let	them	be.	(Note:	This	doesn’t	mean	liking	them	or
wanting	them.	It	simply	means	making	room	for	them!)
Self-as-Context	(
Pure	Awareness
)
In	everyday	language,	we	talk	about	the	“mind”	without	recognizing	that
there	are	two	distinct	elements	to	it:	the	thinking	self	and	the	observing	self.
We’re	all	very	familiar	with	the	thinking	self:	that	part	of	us	which	is	always
thinking—generating	 thoughts,	 beliefs,	 memories,	 judgments,	 fantasies,
plans,	and	so	on.	But	most	people	are	unfamiliar	with	the	observing	self:	the
aspect	of	us	that	is	aware	of	whatever	we’re	thinking,	feeling,	sensing,	or
doing	in	any	moment.	Another	term	for	it	is	“pure	awareness.”	In	ACT,	the
technical	term	is	
self-as-context.
	For	example,	as	you	go	through	life,	your
body	changes,	your	thoughts	change,	your	feelings	change,	your	roles	change,
but	the	“you”	that’s	able	to	notice	or	observe	all	those	things	never	changes.
It’s	the	same	“you”	that’s	been	there	your	whole	life.	With	clients,	we
generally	refer	to	it	as	“the	observing	self”	rather	than	use	the	technical	term
“self-as-context.”
Values	(
Know	What	Matters
)
Deep	in	your	heart,	what	do	you	want	your	life	to	be	about?	What	do	you
want	to	stand	for?	What	you	want	to	do	with	your	brief	time	on	this	planet?
What	truly	matters	to	you	in	the	big	picture?	
Values
	are	desired	qualities	of
ongoing	action.	In	other	words,	they	describe	how	we	want	to	behave	on	an
ongoing	basis.	Clarifying	values	is	an	essential	step	in	creating	a	meaningful
life.	In	ACT,	we	often	refer	to	values	as	“chosen	life	directions.”	We
commonly	compare	values	to	a	compass	because	they	give	us	direction	and
guide	our	ongoing	journey.
Committed	Action	(
Do	What	It	Takes
)
Committed	action
	means	taking	effective	action,	guided	by	our	values.	It’s
all	well	and	good	to	know	our	values,	but	it’s	only	via	ongoing	values-
congruent	action	that	life	becomes	rich,	full,	and	meaningful.	In	other	words,
we	won’t	have	much	of	a	journey	if	we	simply	stare	at	the	compass;	our
journey	only	happens	when	we	move	our	arms	and	legs	in	our	chosen
direction.	Values-guided	action	gives	rise	to	a	wide	range	of	thoughts	and
feelings,	both	pleasant	and	unpleasant,	both	pleasurable	and	painful.	So
committed	action	means	“doing	what	it	takes”	to	live	by	our	values	even	if
that	brings	up	pain	and	discomfort.	Any	and	all	traditional	behavioral
interventions—such	as	goal	setting,	exposure,	behavioral	activation,	and	skills
training—can	be	used	in	this	part	of	the	model.	And	any	skill	that	enhances
and	enriches	life—from	negotiation	to	time	management,	from	assertiveness
to	problem	solving,	from	self-soothing	to	crisis	coping—can	be	taught	under
this	section	of	the	hexaflex	(provided	that	it’s	in	the	service	of	valued	living
and	
not
	in	the	service	of	experiential	avoidance,	which	we’ll	talk	about	in
chapter	2).
Psychological	Flexibility:	A	Six-Faceted	Diamond
Keep	in	mind	that	the	six	core	processes	of	ACT	aren’t	separate	processes.
Although	we	talk	about	them	that	way	for	pragmatic	purposes—to	help
therapists	and	clients	learn	and	apply	the	ACT	model—it’s	more	useful	to
think	of	them	as	six	facets	of	one	diamond.	And	the	diamond	itself	is
psychological	flexibility.
Psychological	flexibility
	is	the	ability	to	be	in	the	present	moment	with	full
awareness	and	openness	to	our	experience,	and	to	take	action	guided	by	our
values.	Put	more	simply,	it’s	the	ability	to	“be	present,	open	up,	and	do	what
matters.”	Technically	speaking,	the	primary	aim	of	ACT	is	to	increase
psychological	flexibility.	The	greater	our	ability	to	be	fully	conscious,	to	be
open	to	our	experience,	and	to	act	on	our	values,	the	greater	our	quality	of	life
because	we	can	respond	far	more	effectively	to	the	problems	and	challenges
life	inevitably	brings.	Furthermore,	through	engaging	fully	in	our	life	and
allowing	our	values	to	guide	us,	we	develop	a	sense	of	meaning	and	purpose,
and	we	experience	a	sense	of	vitality.	We	use	the	word	“vitality”	a	lot	in	ACT,
and	it’s	important	to	recognize	that	
vitality
	is	not	a	feeling;	it	is	a	sense	of
being	fully	alive	and	embracing	the	here	and	now,	regardless	of	how	we	may
be	feeling	in	this	moment.	We	can	even	experience	vitality	on	our	deathbed	or
during	extreme	grief	because	“There	is	as	much	living	in	a	moment	of	pain	as
in	a	moment	of	joy”	(Strosahl,	2004,	p.	43).
THE	ACT	TRIFLEX
The	six	core	processes	can	be	“lumped	together”	into	three	functional	units,
as	in	figure	1.2	below.	Both	defusion	and	acceptance	are	about	separating
from	thoughts	and	feelings,	seeing	them	for	what	they	truly	are,	making	room
for	them,	and	allowing	them	to	come	and	go	of	their	own	accord.	In	other
words:	“Opening	up.”
Self-as-context	(aka	the	observing	self)	and	contacting	the	present	moment
both	involve	making	contact	with	verbal	and	nonverbal	aspects	of	your	here-
and-now	experience.	In	other	words:	“Being	present.”
Values	and	committed	action	involve	the	effective	use	of	language	to
facilitate	life-enhancing	action.	In	other	words:	“Doing	what	matters.”
Thus	psychological	flexibility	is	the	ability	to	“be	present,	open	up,	and	do
what	matters.”
THE	ACT	ACRONYM
There’s	a	simple	acronym	that	encapsulates	the	entire	model,	and	it’s	often
useful	to	share	this	with	clients.	The	acronym	is—surprise,	surprise!—ACT:
A	=	Accept	your	thoughts	and	feelings,	and	be	present.
C	=	Choose	a	valued	direction.
T	=	Take	action.
(And	on	that	note,	I	should	mention	that	throughout	this	book,	I	use	the
phrase	“thoughts	and	feelings”	as	a	form	of	shorthand.	By	“thoughts,”	I	mean
all	manner	of	cognitions,	including	memories	and	images,	and	the	term
“feelings”	includes	emotions,	sensations,	and	urges.)
The	ACT	in	a	Nutshell	Metaphor
The	following	transcript	describes	a	physical	metaphor	that	I	originally	put
together	to	quickly	summarize	the	ACT	model	to	clients.	(Many	ACT
textbooks	caution	against	didactically	explaining	the	model	to	clients:	the
danger	is	we	can	get	bogged	down	in	long-winded	explanations,	or	the	client
will	intellectualize	the	model.	However,	there	are	situations	in	which	it’s
useful	to	metaphorically—as	opposed	to	didactically—explain	the	model,	and
we	can	adapt	the	ACT	in	a	Nutshell	Metaphor	in	many	ways.	Indeed,	as	you
read	through	the	book,	you’ll	notice	how	we	can	use	and	modify	pieces	of	it
for	multiple	purposes,	especially	work	with	defusion	and	acceptance.	The
transcript	that	follows	takes	place	toward	the	end	of	a	first	session,	as	part	of
informed	consent.	(To	get	a	better	sense	of	how	this	exercise	is	done,	you	can
watch	 a	 free	 You	 Tube	 video	 of	 the	 exercise	 on
www.actmadesimple.com/free_resources
).	There	are	five	sections	to	it,	which
I’ve	numbered	for	future	reference.
SECTION	1
Therapist:
	It’s	hard	to	explain	what	ACT	is	about	simply	by	describing	it,	and
it	probably	wouldn’t	make	much	sense	even	if	I	tried.	So	would	it
be	okay	if	I	showed	you	what	it’s	about	by	using	a	metaphor?
Client:
	Sure.
Therapist:
	Great.	(
The	therapist	picks	up	a	clipboard	or	a	large	hardback
book	and	shows	it	to	the	client.
)	I	want	you	to	imagine	that	this
clipboard	represents	all	the	difficult	thoughts	and	feelings	and
memories	that	you	have	been	struggling	with	for	so	long.	And	I’d
like	you	to	take	hold	of	it	and	grip	it	as	tightly	as	you	can	so	that	I
can’t	pull	it	away	from	you.	(
Client	grips	it	tightly.
)	Now	I’d	like
you	to	hold	it	up	in	front	of	your	face	so	you	can’t	see	me	anymore
—and	bring	it	up	so	close	to	your	face	that	it’s	almost	touching	your
nose.	(
The	client	holds	the	clipboard	directly	in	front	of	her	face,
blocking	her	view	of	both	the	therapist	and	the	surrounding	room.
)
Therapist:
	Now	what’s	it	like	trying	to	have	a	conversation	with	me	while
you’re	all	caught	up	in	your	thoughts	and	feelings?
Client:
	Very	difficult.
Therapist:
	Do	you	feel	connected	with	me,	engaged	with	me?	Are	you	able	to
read	the	expressions	on	my	face?	If	I	were	doing	a	song-and-dance
routine	now,	would	you	be	able	to	see	it?
Client:
	(
chuckling
)	No.
Therapist:
	And	what’s	your	view	of	the	room	like,	while	you’re	all	caught	up
in	this	stuff?
Client:
	I	can’t	see	anything	except	the	clipboard.
Therapist:
	So	while	you’re	completely	absorbed	in	all	this	stuff,	you’re
missing	out	on	a	lot.	You’re	disconnected	from	the	world	around
you,	and	you’re	disconnected	from	me.	Notice,	too,	that	while
you’re	holding	on	tightly	to	this	stuff,	you	can’t	do	the	things	that
make	your	life	work.	Check	it	out—grip	the	clipboard	as	tightly	as
you	possibly	can.	(
The	client	tightens	her	grip.
)	Now	if	I	asked	you
to	cuddle	a	baby,	or	hug	the	person	you	love,	or	drive	a	car,	or	cook
dinner,	or	type	on	a	computer	while	you’re	holding	on	tightly	to
this,	could	you	do	it?
Client:
	No.
Therapist:
	So	while	you’re	all	caught	up	in	this	stuff,	not	only	do	you	lose
contact	with	the	world	around	you	and	disconnect	from	your
relationships,	but	also	you	become	incapable	of	doing	the	things
that	make	your	life	work.
Client:
	(
nodding
)	Okay.
SECTION	2
Therapist:
	Is	it	alright	if	I	just	drag	my	chair	across	so	I’m	sitting	beside	you?
There’s	something	else	I	want	to	demonstrate	here.
Client:
	Sure.
Therapist:
	(
pulls	his	chair	alongside	that	of	the	client
)	Could	I	have	the
clipboard	back	for	a	moment?	(
Therapist	takes	the	clipboard	back.
)
Can	I	just	check—you	don’t	have	any	neck	or	shoulder	problems	do
you?
Client:
	No.
Therapist:
	Okay.	I’m	just	checking	because	this	involves	a	bit	of	physical
exertion.	What	I’d	like	you	to	do	is	place	both	your	hands	flat	on
one	side	of	the	clipboard	here,	and	I’m	going	to	put	my	hands	on
the	other	side,	and	I’d	like	you	to	push	the	clipboard	away	from
you.	Push	firmly,	but	don’t	push	so	hard	you	knock	me	over.	(
As	the
client	tries	to	push	the	clipboard	away,	the	therapist	pushes	back.
The	harder	the	client	pushes,	the	more	the	therapist	leans	into	it.
)
And	just	keep	pushing.	You	hate	this	stuff,	right?	You	hate	these
thoughts	and	feelings.	So	push	as	hard	as	you	can—try	to	make
them	go	away.	(
The	therapist	maintains	the	struggle	so	that	the
client	keeps	pushing	while	the	therapist	pushes	back.
)	So	here	you
are,	trying	very	hard	to	push	away	all	these	painful	thoughts	and
feelings.	You’ve	been	doing	this	for	years,	and	are	they	going
anywhere?	Sure,	you’re	keeping	them	at	arm’s	length,	but	what’s
the	cost	to	you?	How	does	it	feel	in	your	shoulders?
Client:
	(
chuckling
)	Not	too	bad	actually.	It’s	a	good	workout.
Therapist:
	(
pushing	harder
)	Okay,	this	is	fine	for	now,	we’ve	only	been	going
a	few	seconds,	but	how	will	you	be	feeling	after	a	whole	day	of
this?
Client:
	I’d	be	pretty	tired.
Therapist:
	(
still	pushing	the	clipboard	back	and	forth	with	the	client
)	And	if	I
asked	you	now	to	type	on	a	computer,	or	drive	a	car,	or	cuddle	a
baby,	or	hug	somebody	you	love	while	you’re	doing	this,	could	you
do	it?
Client:
	No.
Therapist:
	And	what’s	it	like	trying	to	have	a	conversation	with	me	while
you’re	doing	this?
Client:
	Very	distracting.
Therapist:
	Do	you	feel	a	bit	closed	in	or	cut	off?
Client:
	Yes.
SECTION	3
The	therapist	now	stops	resisting.	He	eases	off	the	pressure,	and	takes	the
clipboard	back.
Therapist:
	Okay,	now	let’s	try	something	else.	Is	it	okay	if	I	just	place	the
clipboard	on	your	lap,	and	we	just	let	it	sit	there?	(
Client	nods.	The
therapist	places	the	clipboard	on	the	client’s	lap.
)	Now	isn’t	that	a
lot	less	effort?	How	are	your	shoulders	now?
Client:
	A	lot	better.
Therapist	drags	his	chair	back	across	the	room.
Therapist:
Notice	that	you	are	now	free	to	invest	your	energy	in	doing
something	constructive.	If	I	asked	you	now	to	cook	a	meal,	or	play
the	piano,	or	cuddle	a	baby,	or	hug	somebody	you	love—now	you
could	do	it,	right?
Client:
	(
chuckling
)	Yes.
Therapist:
	And	what’s	it	like	to	have	a	conversation	with	me	now	as	opposed
to	doing	this	(
mimes	pushing	the	clipboard	away
)	or	this	(
mimes
holding	the	clipboard	up	in	front	of	his	face
)?
Client:
	Easier.
Therapist:
	Do	you	feel	more	engaged	with	me?	Can	you	read	my	face	now?
Client:
	Yes.
Therapist:
	Notice,	too,	you	now	have	a	clear	view	of	the	room	around	you.
You	can	take	it	all	in.	If	I	started	doing	a	song-and-dance	routine,
you’d	be	able	to	see	it.
Client:
	(
smiles
)	Yes.	(
She	gestures	down	at	the	clipboard.
)	But	it’s	still	here.	I
don’t	want	it.
SECTION	4
Therapist:
	Absolutely.	It’s	still	there.	And	of	course	you	don’t	want	it;	who
would	all	these	painful	thoughts	and	feelings?	But	notice,	now	this
stuff	is	having	much	less	impact	on	you.	Now	I’m	sure	in	the	ideal
world	you’d	like	to	do	this.	(
Therapist	 mimes	 throwing	 the
clipboard	on	the	floor.
)	But	here’s	the	thing:	you’ve	been	trying	to
do	that	for	years.	Let’s	do	a	brief	recap.	You’ve	tried	drugs,	alcohol,
self-help	books,	therapy,	withdrawing	from	the	world,	lying	in	bed,
avoiding	challenging	situations,	beating	yourself	up,	blaming	your
parents,	distracting	yourself,	rehashing	the	past,	trying	to	figure	out
why	you’re	like	this,	being	busy,	doing	self-development	courses,
and	lots	of	other	things	too,	I’m	willing	to	bet.	So	no	one	can	call
you	lazy!	You’ve	clearly	put	a	lot	of	time,	effort,	and	money	into
trying	to	get	rid	of	these	thoughts	and	feelings.	And	yet,	despite	all
that	effort,	they’re	still	showing	up.	They’re	still	here	today.	(
The
therapist	points	to	the	clipboard	in	the	client’s	lap.
)	Some	of	these
things	you	do	make	this	stuff	go	away	for	a	short	while,	but	it	soon
comes	back	again,	doesn’t	it?	And	isn’t	it	the	case	that	this	is	now
bigger	and	heavier	than	it	was	all	those	years	ago	when	you	first
started	struggling	with	this	stuff?	There	are	more	painful	feelings,
thoughts,	and	memories	here	than	there	were	five	years	ago,	right?
Client:
	Yes.
Therapist:
	So	even	though	this	is	what	every	instinct	in	your	body	tells	you	to
do	(
mimes	 throwing	 the	 clipboard	 onto	 the	 floor
),	that	strategy
clearly	isn’t	having	the	effects	you	want.	It’s	really	just	making
things	worse.	So	we	don’t	want	to	do	more	of	what	doesn’t	work,
right?
Client:
	I	guess	not.
SECTION	5
Therapist:
	So	here’s	what	ACT	is	all	about.	We’re	going	to	learn	some	skills
called	mindfulness	skills	that	will	enable	you	to	handle	painful
thoughts	and	feelings	far	more	effectively—in	such	a	way	that	they
have	much	less	impact	and	influence	over	you.	So	instead	of	doing
this	(
picks	up	clipboard	and	holds	it	in	front	of	his	face
)	or	this
(
mimes	 pushing	 clipboard	 away
),	you	can	do	this	(
drops	 the
clipboard	into	his	lap	and	lets	go	of	it.
)	And	notice,	this	not	only
allows	you	to	be	connected	with	the	world	around	you	and	to
engage	in	what	you’re	doing,	but	it	also	frees	you	up	to	take
effective	action.	When	you’re	no	longer	struggling	with	this	stuff,
or	absorbed	in	it,	or	holding	on	to	it,	you	are	free.	(
The	therapist
holds	his	arms	up	in	a	gesture	of	freedom.
)	So	now	you	can	put
your	energy	into	doing	the	things	that	improve	your	quality	of	life
—like	hugging	people	you	love	or	riding	your	bike	or	playing	the
guitar.	(
The	therapist	mimes	these	activities.
)	How	does	that	sound
to	you?
Client:
	(
smiling
)	Okay.
Obviously	it	doesn’t	always	go	that	smoothly—when	does	therapy	
ever
	go	as
smoothly	as	in	the	textbooks?—but	hopefully	this	metaphor	gives	you	a	sense
of	what	ACT	is	all	about:	creating	a	rich	and	meaningful	life	while	accepting
the	pain	that	goes	with	it.	It	also	demonstrates	that	we	teach	mindfulness
skills	not	as	some	spiritual	pathway	to	enlightenment	but	in	order	to	facilitate
effective	action.	(Unfortunately,	we	don’t	have	the	space	here	to	describe
some	of	the	ways	clients	may	occasionally	object	to	this	metaphor,	and	how
we	can	respond	effectively	to	those	objections.	However	you	can	download	a
description	 of	 these	 objections	 and	 responses	 at:
www.actmadesimple.com/nutshell_metaphor_objections_and_responses
	)
Dissecting	the	Metaphor
ACT	 speculates	 that	 there	 are	 two	 core	 psychological	 processes
—“cognitive	fusion”	and	“experiential	avoidance”—that	are	responsible	for
most	psychological	suffering.	Section	1	of	the	transcript	is	a	metaphor	for
cognitive	fusion
:	getting	caught	up	or	entangled	in	our	thoughts,	or	holding	on
to	them	tightly.	Section	2	is	a	metaphor	for	
experiential	 avoidance
:	the
ongoing	struggle	to	avoid,	suppress,	or	get	rid	of	unwanted	thoughts,	feelings,
memories,	and	other	“private	experiences.”	(A	
private	experience
	means	any
experience	you	have	that	no	one	else	can	know	about	unless	you	tell	them:
emotions,	sensations,	memories,	thoughts,	and	so	on.)	N.B.	You	don’t	want	to
turn	this	exercise	into	a	strength	test	or	a	pushing	competition.	If	you	suspect
your	client	may	push	aggressively	against	the	clipboard,	then	preempt	him.
Say,	“When	I	ask	you	to	push,	please	don’t	push	too	hard.	Don’t	try	to	push
me	over,	just	push	gently!”	Also,	modify	your	own	counterpressure;	after	a
few	seconds	you	could	ease	off	and	just	leave	the	clipboard	resting	gently	in
midair,	gently	sandwiched	in	between	your	hands	and	the	client’s	hands.
Section	3	is	a	metaphor	for	acceptance,	defusion,	and	contacting	the	present
moment.	Instead	of	the	term	“acceptance,”	we	often	talk	about	“dropping	the
struggle,”	“sitting	with	the	feeling,”	“letting	it	be,”	“making	room	for	it,”	or
“willingness	to	have	it.”	You	can	see	how	these	terms	nicely	fit	the	physical
metaphor	of	letting	the	clipboard	sit	on	the	client’s	lap.	Instead	of	the	term
“defusion,”	 we	 often	 talk	 about	 “letting	 go”	 or	 “stepping	 back”	 or
“distancing,”	“separating,”	“disentangling,”	or	“dropping	the	story”—and
again,	as	the	client	separates	from	the	clipboard	and	lets	go	of	it,	the	metaphor
ties	in	well	with	such	ways	of	talking.
Section	4	highlights	the	ineffectiveness	and	the	costs	of	experiential
avoidance;	in	ACT,	this	process	is	referred	to	as	
creative	hopelessness
	or
confronting	the	agenda
.	Why	such	odd	names?	Because	we’re	trying	to	create
a	sense	of	hopelessness	in	the	client’s	agenda	of	controlling	her	thoughts	and
feelings.	This	paves	the	way	for	the	alternate	agenda	of	mindfulness	and
acceptance,	which	is	the	very	opposite	of	control.
Finally,	section	5	highlights	the	link	between	mindfulness,	values,	and
committed	action.	Presenting	the	entire	ACT	in	a	Nutshell	Metaphor	as	an
exercise	generally	takes	no	more	than	about	five	minutes.
What’s	Next?
In	the	next	chapter,	we’ll	look	at	cognitive	fusion	and	experiential
avoidance	in	more	detail	and	see	how	they	readily	lead	to	six	core
pathological	processes	that	are	the	“flip	sides”	of	the	six	core	therapeutic
processes.	But	before	reading	on,	why	not	try	the	ACT	in	a	Nutshell	Exercise
on	a	friend	or	colleague	to	see	if	you	can	summarize	what	ACT	is	about?
First,	I	recommend	that	you	act	it	out	loud	a	couple	of	times:	run	through	each
step	with	an	imaginary	client,	as	if	you’re	an	actor	rehearsing	for	a	play.	Then
give	it	a	go	for	real.
I	suspect	you	may	be	somewhat	reluctant	to	do	this;	you	may	be	thinking
it’s	silly,	or	unimportant,	or	just	not	your	style.	However,	even	if	you	never	do
this	with	a	real	client,	running	through	the	metaphor	in	this	way	will	be	a
valuable	learning	experience.	Not	only	will	it	help	you	to	grasp	the	model,
it’ll	also	help	you	enormously	if	you	ever	want	to	explain	it	to	curious	friends,
colleagues,	relatives,	or	guests	at	your	next	dinner	party.	So	even	though
you’re	probably	feeling	reluctant,	why	not	give	it	a	go?	You	may	be
pleasantly	surprised	at	the	results.
Chapter	2.	Stuck,	Not	Broken
Where	There’s	Pain,	There’s	Life
The	ACT	model	is	inherently	optimistic.	ACT	assumes	that	even	in	the	midst
of	tremendous	pain	and	suffering,	there’s	an	opportunity	to	find	meaning,
purpose,	and	vitality.	We	can	find	awe-inspiring	examples	of	this	in	books
such	as	
Man’s	Search	for	Meaning
	by	Victor	Frankl	(1959),	which	chronicles
Frankl’s	experiences	as	an	inmate	in	the	Auschwitz	concentration	camp,	or
Long	Walk	to	Freedom
,	the	autobiography	of	Nelson	Mandela.	In	ACT,	we’re
not	aiming	to	merely	reduce	human	suffering;	we’re	also	aiming	to	help
people	learn	and	grow	as	a	result	of	their	suffering,	and	to	use	their	pain	as	a
springboard	into	creating	rich	and	meaningful	lives.	This	optimistic	attitude	is
evident	in	the	ACT	saying:	“Our	clients	are	not	broken,	they	are	just	stuck.”
And	what	is	it	that	gets	ordinary	people	so	stuck	that	they	end	up	depressed,
addicted,	isolated,	phobic,	or	suicidal?	Two	
normal
	processes	of	the	
normal
human	mind:	cognitive	fusion	and	experiential	avoidance.
Cognitive	Fusion
Why	the	term	“fusion”?	Well,	think	of	two	sheets	of	metal	fused	together.	If
you	couldn’t	use	the	term	“fused,”	how	would	you	describe	them?	Welded?
Melded?	Bonded?	Joined?	Attached?	Stuck?	All	these	terms	point	to	the	same
idea:	no	separation.	In	a	state	of	cognitive	fusion,	we’re	inseparable	from	our
thoughts:	we’re	welded	to	them,	bonded	to	them,	so	caught	up	in	them	that
we	aren’t	even	aware	that	we	are	thinking.	Thus	
de
fusion	means	separating,
detaching,	or	distancing	from	our	thoughts:	taking	a	step	back	and	seeing
them	for	what	they	are:	nothing	more	or	less	than	words	and	pictures.
Cognitive	fusion	basically	means	that	our	thoughts	dominate	our	behavior.
Thus	in	ACT,	we	may	talk	with	clients	of	being	“pushed	around	by	your
thoughts”	or	“allowing	thoughts	to	tell	you	what	to	do,”	or	we	may	talk	of
thoughts	as	bullies,	or	we	may	compare	the	mind	to	a	fascist	dictator,	or	we
may	ask,	“What	happens	when	you	let	that	thought	run	your	life?”	Similarly,
when	our	thoughts	dominate	our	attention,	we	often	talk	about	being
“hooked,”	“entangled,”	“caught	up,”	or	“carried	off”	by	them.	(A	quick
reminder:	when	we	use	the	terms	“thinking,”	“thoughts,”	“cognition,”	and
“mind”	in	ACT,	we	use	them	all	as	metaphors	for	“human	language,”	which
includes	beliefs,	assumptions,	thoughts,	attitudes,	memories,	images,	words,
gestures,	fantasies,	and	some	aspects	of	emotions.)
Human	beings	dwell	in	two	different	worlds.	At	birth,	we	dwell	only	in	the
“world	of	direct	experience,”	the	world	as	we	know	it	directly	through	the
five	senses:	the	world	that	we	can	see,	hear,	touch,	taste,	and	smell.	But	as	we
grow	older,	we	learn	to	think,	and	as	that	ability	grows,	we	start	to	spend
more	and	more	time	in	a	second	world,	the	“world	of	language.”	Fusion
means	we’re	stuck	in	the	world	of	language:	we’re	so	caught	up	in	all	those
words	and	pictures	running	through	our	head	that	we	lose	contact	with	the
world	of	direct	experience.	Mindfulness	is	like	a	shuttle	between	these	two
worlds:	it	transports	us	from	the	world	of	language	into	the	world	of	direct
experience.
Hands	As	Thoughts	Metaphor
Imagine	for	a	moment	that	your	hands	are	your	thoughts.	When	you	reach
the	end	of	this	paragraph,	I’d	like	you	to	put	this	book	down	and	hold	your
hands	together,	palms	open,	as	if	they’re	the	pages	of	an	open	book.	Then	I’d
like	you	to	slowly	and	steadily	raise	your	hands	up	toward	your	face.	Keep
going	until	they’re	covering	your	eyes.	Then	take	a	few	seconds	to	look	at	the
world	around	you	through	the	gaps	in	between	your	fingers	and	notice	how
this	affects	your	view	of	the	world.	Please	do	this	exercise	now,	before
reading	on.
*	*	*
So	what	would	it	be	like	going	around	all	day	with	your	hands	covering
your	eyes	in	this	manner?	How	much	would	it	limit	you?	How	much	would
you	miss	out	on?	How	would	it	reduce	your	ability	to	respond	to	the	world
around	you?	This	is	like	fusion:	we	become	so	caught	up	in	our	thoughts	that
we	lose	contact	with	many	aspects	of	our	here-and-now	experience,	and	our
thoughts	have	such	a	huge	influence	over	our	behavior	that	our	ability	to	act
effectively	is	significantly	reduced.
Now	once	again,	when	you	reach	the	end	of	this	paragraph,	I’d	like	you	to
cover	your	eyes	with	your	hands,	but	this	time,	lower	them	from	your	face
very,	very	slowly.	As	the	distance	between	yourhands	and	your	face	increases,
notice	how	much	easier	it	is	to	connect	with	the	world	around	you.	Please	do
this	now	before	reading	on.
*	*	*
What	you	just	did	is	like	defusion.	How	much	easier	is	it	to	take	effective
action	without	your	hands	covering	your	eyes?	How	much	more	information
can	you	take	in?	How	much	more	connected	are	you	with	the	world	around
you?
This	metaphor	(Harris,	2009),	which	you	can	use	with	clients	to	explain
fusion	and	defusion,	demonstrates	the	purposes	of	defusion:	to	engage	fully	in
our	experience	and	facilitate	effective	action.	People	often	feel	better	when
they	defuse	from	painful	thoughts	and	memories,	but	in	ACT	we	consider	this
a	bonus	or	by-product;	it’s	not	the	intention	or	goal.	(Remember,	we’re	not
trying	to	reduce	or	eliminate	our	symptoms.	We’re	trying	to	fundamentally
transform	our	relationship	with	painful	thoughts	and	feelings	so	we	no	longer
perceive	them	as	“symptoms.”)	Thus	defusion	is	not	some	clever	tool	to
control	feelings:	it’s	a	means	to	become	present	and	take	effective	action.	We
need	to	make	this	clear	to	our	clients,	because	if	they	start	using	defusion
techniques	to	try	and	control	their	feelings,	they’ll	soon	be	disappointed.
We	facilitate	defusion	through	experiential	exercises.	If	we	try	to	explain	it
conceptually	before	doing	it	experientially,	we’ll	probably	get	bogged	down
in	all	sorts	of	time-wasting	intellectual	discussions.	However,	after	we’ve
taken	clients	experientially	through	defusion,	we	may	then	like	to	explain	it
didactically,	as	below.
Simple	Summary	of	Fusion	vs.	Defusion
In	a	state	of	fusion,	a	thought	can	seem	like
the	absolute	truth;
a	command	you	have	to	obey	or	a	rule	you	have	to	follow;
a	threat	you	need	to	get	rid	of	as	soon	as	possible;
something	that’s	happening	right	here	and	now	even	though
it’s	about	the	past	or	the	future;
something	very	important	that	requires	all	your	attention;
something	you	won’t	let	go	of	even	if	it	worsens	your	life.
In	a	state	of	defusion,	you	can	see	a	thought	for	what	it	is:	nothing	more	or
less	than	a	bunch	of	words	or	pictures	“inside	your	head.”	In	a	state	of
defusion,	you	recognize	that	a	thought
may	or	may	not	be	true;
is	definitely	not	a	command	you	have	to	obey	or	a	rule	you
have	to	follow;
is	definitely	not	a	threat	to	you;
is	not	something	happening	in	the	physical	world—it’s
merely	words	or	pictures	inside	your	head;
may	or	may	not	be	important—you	have	a	choice	as	to	how
much	attention	you	pay	it;
can	be	allowed	to	come	and	go	of	its	own	accord	without
any	need	for	you	to	hold	on	to	it	or	push	it	away.
Workability
The	whole	ACT	model	rests	on	a	key	concept:	“workability.”	Please
engrave	that	word—
workability—
into	your	cerebral	cortex,	because	it’s	at	the
very	heart	of	every	intervention	we	do.	To	determine	workability,	we	ask	this
question:	“Is	what	you’re	doing	working	to	make	your	life	rich,	full,	and
meaningful?”	If	the	answer	is	yes,	then	we	say	it’s	“workable,”	so	there’s	no
need	to	change	it.	And	if	the	answer	is	no,	then	we	say	it’s	“unworkable,”	in
which	case	we	can	consider	alternatives	that	work	better.
Thus	in	ACT	we	don’t	focus	on	whether	a	thought	is	true	or	false,	but
whether	it	is	workable.	In	other	words,	we	want	to	know	if	a	thought	helps	a
client	move	toward	a	richer,	fuller,	and	more	meaningful	life.	To	determine
this,	we	may	ask	questions	like	these:	“If	you	let	this	thought	guide	your
behavior,	will	that	help	you	create	a	richer,	fuller,	and	more	meaningful	life?
If	you	hold	on	to	this	thought	tightly,	does	it	help	you	to	be	the	person	you
want	to	be	and	do	the	things	you	want	to	do?”
Here’s	a	transcript	that	exemplifies	this	approach:
Client:
	But	it’s	true.	I	really	am	fat.	Look	at	me.	(
She	grabs	hold	of	two	large
rolls	 of	 fat	 from	 around	 her	 abdomen	 and	 squeezes	 them	 to
emphasize	the	point.
)
Therapist:
	One	thing	I	can	guarantee	you:	in	this	room,	we’re	never	going	to
have	a	debate	about	what’s	true	and	what’s	false.	What	we’re
interested	in	here	is	what’s	helpful	or	what’s	useful	or	what	helps
you	to	live	a	better	life.	So	when	your	mind	starts	telling	you	“I’m
fat,”	what	happens	when	you	get	all	caught	up	in	those	thoughts?
Client:
	I	feel	disgusted	with	myself.
Therapist:
	And	then	what?
Client:
	Then	I	get	depressed.
Therapist:
	And	if	I	were	watching	a	video	of	you,	what	would	I	see	you	doing
when	you’re	feeling	depressed	and	disgusted	with	yourself?
Client:
	I’d	probably	be	sitting	in	front	of	the	TV	and	eating	ice	cream.
Therapist:
	So	getting	all	caught	up	in	“I’m	fat,”	doesn’t	seem	too	helpful,
does	it?
Client:
	No,	but	it’s	
true!
Therapist:
	Well,	let	me	say	this	again:	with	this	approach,	what	we’re
interested	in	is	not	whether	a	thought	is	true	or	false,	but	whether
it’s	helpful.	When	that	thought	pops	into	your	head,	does	it	help	you
to	get	all	caught	up	in	it?	Does	it	motivate	you	to	exercise,	or	eat
well,	or	spend	time	doing	the	things	that	make	life	rich	and
rewarding?
Client:
	No.
Therapist:
	So	what	about	if	we	could	do	something	here	that	could	make	a
difference;	what	if	you	could	learn	a	skill	so	that	next	time	your
mind	starts	telling	you	the	“I’m	fat”	story,	you	don’t	have	to	get	all
absorbed	in	it?
When	we	use	the	basic	framework	of	“workability,”	we	never	need	to	judge
a	client’s	behavior	as	“good”	or	“bad,”	“right”	or	“wrong”;	instead	we	can
ask,	nonjudgmentally	and	compassionately,	“Is	this	working	to	give	you	the
life	you	want?”	Likewise,	we	never	need	to	judge	thoughts	as	irrational	or
dysfunctional,	or	get	into	debates	about	whether	they’re	true	or	false.	Instead
we	can	simply	ask,	“Does	holding	on	tightly	to	those	thoughts	help	you	to	live
the	life	you	truly	want?”	or	“How	does	it	work	in	the	long	run,	if	you	let	that
belief	be	in	charge	of	your	life?”	or	“If	you	get	all	caught	up	in	those
thoughts,	does	it	help	you	to	do	the	things	you	want?”	or	“If	you	let	those
thoughts	push	you	around,	does	that	help	you	to	be	the	person	you	want	to
be?”
Note	that	in	the	transcript	above,	the	therapist	makes	no	attempt	to	change
the	content	of	the	thoughts.	In	ACT,	the	content	of	a	thought	is	not	considered
problematic;	it’s	only	
fusion
	with	the	thought	that	creates	the	problem.	In
many	psychology	textbooks,	you’ll	discover	this	quotation	from	the	works	of
William	Shakespeare:	“There	is	nothing	either	good	or	bad,	but	thinking
makes	it	so.”	The	ACT	stance	would	be	fundamentally	different:	“Thinking
does	not	make	anything	good	or	bad.	But	if	you	fuse	with	your	thinking,	that
can	create	problems.”
Experiential	Avoidance
Experiential	avoidance
	means	trying	to	avoid,	get	rid	of,	suppress,	or	escape
from	unwanted	“private	experiences.”	(As	I	mentioned	earlier,	ACT	uses	the
term	
private	experience
	to	mean	any	experience	you	have	that	no	one	else
knows	about	unless	you	tell	them:	for	example,	thoughts,	feelings,	memories,
images,	urges,	and	sensations.)	Experiential	avoidance	is	something	that
comes	naturally	to	all	humans.	Why?	Well,	here’s	how	we	describe	it	to
clients	…
The	Problem-Solving	Machine:	A	Classic	ACT	Metaphor
Therapist:
	If	we	had	to	pick	one	ability	of	the	human	mind	that	has	enabled	us
to	be	so	resourceful	that	we’ve	not	only	changed	the	face	of	the
planet	but	also	traveled	outside	it,	it’d	have	to	be	our	capacity	for
problem	solving.	The	essence	of	problem	solving	is	this:	A	problem
means	something	unwanted.	And	a	solution	means	avoid	it	or	get
rid	of	it.	Now	in	the	physical	world,	problem	solving	often	works
very	well.	A	wolf	outside	your	door?	Get	rid	of	it:	throw	rocks	or
spears	at	it,	or	shoot	it.	Snow,	rain,	hail?	Well,	you	can’t	get	rid	of
those	things,	but	you	can	avoid	them	by	hiding	in	a	cave,	building	a
shelter,	or	wearing	protective	clothes.	Dry,	arid	ground?	You	can	get
rid	of	it	by	irrigation	and	fertilization,	or	you	can	avoid	it	by
moving	to	a	better	location.	So	our	mind	is	like	a	problem-solving
machine,	and	it’s	very	good	at	its	job.	And	given	that	problem-
solving	works	so	well	in	the	material	world,	it’s	only	natural	that
our	mind	tries	to	do	the	same	with	our	inner	world:	the	world	of
thoughts,	feelings,	memories,	sensations,	and	urges.	Unfortunately
all	too	often	when	we	try	to	avoid	or	get	rid	of	unwanted	thoughts
or	feelings,	it	doesn’t	work—or	if	it	does,	we	end	up	creating	a	lot
of	extra	pain	for	ourselves	in	the	process.
How	Experiential	Avoidance	Increases	Suffering
We’ll	return	to	the	Problem-Solving	Machine	Metaphor	in	later	chapters.
For	now,	let’s	consider	how	experiential	avoidance	increases	suffering.
Addictions	provide	an	obvious	example.	Many	addictions	begin	as	an	attempt
to	avoid	or	get	rid	of	unwanted	thoughts	and	feelings	such	as	boredom,
loneliness,	anxiety,	guilt,	anger,	sadness,	and	so	on.	In	the	short	run,
gambling,	drugs,	alcohol,	and	cigarettes	will	often	help	people	to	avoid	or	get
rid	of	these	feelings	temporarily,	but	in	the	long	run,	a	huge	amount	of	pain
and	suffering	results.
The	more	time	and	energy	we	spend	trying	to	avoid	or	get	rid	of	unwanted
private	experiences,	the	more	we’re	likely	to	suffer	psychologically	in	the
long	run.	Anxiety	disorders	provide	a	good	example.	It’s	not	the	presence	of
anxiety	that	comprises	the	essence	of	an	anxiety	disorder.	After	all,	anxiety	is
a	normal	human	emotion	that	we	all	experience.	At	the	core	of	any	anxiety
disorder	lies	excessive	experiential	avoidance:	a	life	dominated	by	trying	very
hard	to	avoid	or	get	rid	of	anxiety.	For	example,	suppose	I	feel	anxious	in
social	situations,	and	in	order	to	avoid	those	feelings	of	anxiety,	I	stop
socializing.	Now	I	have	“social	phobia.”	The	short-term	benefit	is	obvious—I
get	to	avoid	some	anxious	thoughts	and	feelings—but	the	long-term	cost	is
huge:	I	become	isolated	and	my	life	“gets	smaller.”
Alternatively	I	may	try	to	reduce	my	anxiety	by	playing	the	role	of	“good
listener.”	I	become	very	empathic	and	caring	toward	others,	and	in	social
interactions,	I	discover	lots	of	information	about	their	thoughts,	feelings,	and
desires,	but	I	reveal	little	or	nothing	of	myself.	This	helps	in	the	short	run	to
reduce	my	fear	of	being	judged	or	rejected,	but	in	the	long	run,	it	means	my
relationships	lack	intimacy,	openness,	and	authenticity.
Now	suppose	I	take	Valium,	or	some	other	benzodiazepine,	to	reduce	my
anxiety.	Again,	the	short-term	benefit	is	obvious:	less	anxiety.	But	long-term
costs	of	relying	on	benzodiazepines,	antidepressants,	marijuana,	or	alcohol	to
reduce	my	anxiety	could	include	(a)	psychological	dependence	on	my
medication,	(b)	possible	physical	addiction,	(c)	other	physical	and	emotional
side	effects,	(d)	financial	costs,	and	(e)	failure	to	learn	more	effective
responses	to	anxiety,	which	therefore	maintains	or	exacerbates	the	issue.Still
another	way	I	might	respond	to	social	anxiety	would	be	to	grit	my	teeth	and
socialize	
despite
	my	anxiety—that	is,	to	tolerate	the	feelings	even	though	I’m
distressed	by	them.	From	an	ACT	perspective,	this	too	would	be	experiential
avoidance.	Why?	Because,	although	I’m	not	avoiding	the	situation,	I’m	still
struggling	with	my	feelings	and	desperately	hoping	they’ll	go	away.	This	is
tolerance,	not	acceptance.	If	I	truly	accept	my	feelings,	then	even	though	they
may	be	very	unpleasant	and	uncomfortable,	I’m	not	distressed	by	them.
To	get	the	distinction	between	tolerance	and	acceptance,	consider	this:
Would	you	want	the	people	you	love	to	
tolerate
	you	while	you’re	present,
hoping	you’ll	soon	go	away	and	frequently	checking	to	see	if	you’ve	gone
yet?	Or	would	you	prefer	them	to	completely	and	totally	
accept
	you	as	you
are	with	all	your	flaws	and	foibles,	and	to	be	willing	to	have	you	around	for	as
long	as	you	choose	to	stay?
The	cost	of	tolerating	my	anxiety	(that	is,	gritting	my	teeth	and	putting	up
with	it)	is	that	it	takes	a	huge	amount	of	effort	and	energy,	and	it	makes	it	hard
to	remain	fully	engaged	in	any	social	interaction.	As	a	consequence,	I	miss
out	on	much	of	the	pleasure	and	fulfillment	that	commonly	accompanies
social	interaction.	And	this	in	turn	increases	my	anxiety	about	future	social
events	because	“I	won’t	enjoy	it”	or	“I’ll	feel	awful”	or	“It’s	too	much	effort.”
Sadly	the	more	importance	we	place	on	avoiding	anxiety,	the	more	we
develop	anxiety	about	our	anxiety.	It’s	a	vicious	cycle,	found	at	the	center	of
any	anxiety	disorder.	(After	all,	what	is	at	the	core	of	a	panic	attack,	if	not
anxiety	about	anxiety?)	A	large	body	of	research	shows	that	higher
experiential	 avoidance	 is	 associated	 with	 anxiety	 disorders,	 excessive
worrying,	depression,	poorer	work	performance,	higher	levels	of	substance
abuse,	lower	quality	of	life,	high-risk	sexual	behavior,	borderline	personality
disorder,	greater	severity	of	PTSD,	long-term	disability,	and	higher	degrees	of
overall	psychopathology	(Hayes,	Masuda,	Bissett,	Luoma,	&	Guerrero,
2004).	Indeed,	it’s	arguably	the	single	biggest	factor	in	psychopathology.
So	now	you	can	see	one	reason	why	ACT	doesn’t	focus	on	symptom
reduction:	to	do	so	is	likely	to	reinforce	experiential	avoidance,	the	very
process	that	fuels	most	clinical	issues.	Another	reason	is	that	attempts	to
reduce	symptoms	can	paradoxically	increase	them.	For	example,	research
shows	that	suppression	of	unwanted	thoughts	can	lead	to	a	rebound	effect:	an
increase	in	both	intensity	and	frequency	of	the	unwanted	thoughts	(Wenzlaff
&	Wegner,	2000).	Other	studies	show	that	trying	to	suppress	a	mood	can
actually	intensify	it	in	a	self-amplifying	loop	(Feldner,	Zvolensky,	Eifert,	&
Spira,	2003;	Wegner,	Erber,	&	Zanakos,	1993).
One	core	component	of	most	ACT	protocols	involves	getting	the	client	in
touch	with	the	costs	and	futility	of	experiential	avoidance.	This	is	done	to
undermine	the	
agenda	of	control
	(that	is,	the	agenda	of	trying	to	control	our
thoughts	and	feelings)	and	to	create	space	for	the	alternative	agenda:
acceptance.	However,	although	we	want	to	facilitate	mindful,	valued	living,
we	don’t	want	to	turn	into	…
“Mindfulness	Fascists”
We	are	not	“mindfulness	fascists”	in	ACT;	we	don’t	insist	that	people	must
always	be	in	the	present	moment,	always	defused,	always	accepting.	Not	only
would	that	be	ridiculous,	it	would	also	be	self-defeating.	We’re	all
experientially	avoidant	to	some	degree.	And	we	all	fuse	with	our	thoughts	at
times.	And	experiential	avoidance	and	cognitive	fusion	in	and	of	themselves
are	not	inherently	“bad”	or	“pathological”;	we	only	target	them	when	they	get
in	the	way	of	living	a	rich,	full,	and	meaningful	life.
In	other	words,	it’s	all	about	workability.	If	we	take	aspirin	from	time	to
time	in	order	to	get	rid	of	a	headache,	that’s	experiential	avoidance,	but	it’s
likely	to	be	workable—that	is,	it	improves	our	quality	of	life	in	the	long	run.
If	we	drink	one	glass	of	red	wine	at	night	primarily	to	get	rid	of	tension	and
stress,	that	too	is	experiential	avoidance—but	unless	we	have	certain	medical
conditions,	it’s	not	likely	to	be	harmful,	toxic,	or	life	distorting.	On	the
contrary,	it	will	actually	do	our	heart	some	good.	However,	if	we	drink	two
entire	bottles	each	night,	obviously	that’s	a	different	story.
The	same	holds	true	for	fusion.	There	are	certain	contexts—although	few
and	far	between—where	fusion	is	actually	life	enhancing,	such	as	when	we
allow	ourselves	to	“get	lost”	in	a	novel	or	a	movie.	And	there	are	other
contexts	where	we	fuse	with	our	thoughts,	and	although	it’s	not	life
enhancing,	it’s	not	usually	problematic	either—for	example,	when	we’re
daydreaming	while	waiting	in	a	supermarket	line.	But	generally	speaking,
we’re	better	off	defusing	from	our	thoughts	at	least	a	little.	(To	clarify	this,
recall	the	Hands	As	Thoughts	Exercise	you	did	earlier.	Even	a	small	gap
between	your	face	and	your	hands	allows	a	lot	more	information	about	the
world	to	get	through	to	you.)
A	Very	Important	Point	about	Acceptance	vs.	Control
In	ACT,	we	do	not	advocate	acceptance	of	all	thoughts	and	feelings	under
all	circumstances.	That	would	not	only	be	very	rigid	but	also	quite
unnecessary.	ACT	advocates	acceptance	under	two	circumstances:
1
.	
When	control	of	thoughts	and	feelings	is	limited	or
impossible.
2
.	
When	control	of	thoughts	and	feelings	
is
	possible,	but	the
methods	used	reduce	quality	of	life.
If	control	
is
	possible	and	assists	valued	living,	then	go	for	it.	Please	do
remember	this	point.	It	is	often	forgotten	or	misunderstood	by	new	ACT
practitioners,	and	remembering	it	will	save	you	a	lot	of	confusion.
The	Six	Core	Pathological	Processes
Cognitive	fusion	and	experiential	avoidance	together	give	rise	to	six	core
pathological	processes,	as	shown	in	figure	2.1	below.	(You	can	think	of	these
as	the	“flip	sides”	of	the	six	core	therapeutic	processes.)	As	I	take	you	through
each	process,	I’ll	use	clinical	depression	to	provide	examples.
Fusion
As	described	above,	fusion	means	entanglement	in	our	thoughts	so	that
they	dominate	our	awareness	and	have	a	huge	influence	over	our	behavior.
Depressed	clients	fuse	with	all	sorts	of	unhelpful	thoughts:	
I’m	bad,	I	don’t
deserve	any	better,	I	can’t	change,	I’ve	always	been	this	way,	Life	sucks,	It’s
all	too	hard,	Therapy	won’t	work,	It’ll	never	get	any	better,	I	can’t	get	out	of
bed	when	I	feel	this	way,	I’m	too	tired	to	do	anything.
	They	also	often	fuse
with	painful	memories	involving	things	such	as	rejection,	disappointment,
failure,	or	abuse.	(Extreme	fusion	with	a	memory—to	such	an	extent	that	it
seems	to	be	actually	happening	right	here	and	now—is	commonly	referred	to
as	a	
flashback.
)	In	clinical	depression,	fusion	often	manifests	as	worrying,
ruminating,	trying	to	figure	out	“why	I’m	like	this”	or	an	ongoing	negative
commentary:	“This	party	sucks.	I’d	rather	be	in	bed.	What’s	the	point	of	even
being	here?	They’re	all	having	such	a	good	time.	No	one	really	wants	me
here.”
Experiential	Avoidance
As	I’ve	mentioned	before,	experiential	avoidance	means	trying	to	get	rid
of,	avoid,	or	escape	from	unwanted	private	experiences	such	as	thoughts,
feelings,	and	memories.	It’s	the	polar	opposite	of	acceptance	(which	is	an
abbreviation	of	“experiential	acceptance”).	As	an	example,	let’s	look	at	the
role	 of	 experiential	 avoidance	 in	 depression.	 Your	 depressed	 clients
commonly	try	very	hard	to	avoid	or	get	rid	of	painful	emotions	and	feelings
such	as	anxiety,	sadness,	fatigue,	anger,	guilt,	loneliness,	lethargy,	and	so	on.
For	example,	they	often	withdraw	from	socializing	in	order	to	avoid
uncomfortable	thoughts	and	feelings.	This	may	not	be	apparent	at	first	glance,
so	let’s	think	it	through.	As	a	social	engagement	draws	nearer	and	nearer,
they’re	likely	to	fuse	with	all	sorts	of	thoughts	such	as	
I’m	boring,	I’m	a
burden,	I’ve	got	nothing	to	say,	I	won’t	enjoy	it,	I’m	too	tired,	or	I	can’t	be
bothered,
	as	well	as	memories	of	previous	social	events	that	have	been
unsatisfactory.	At	the	same	time,	their	feelings	of	anxiety	increase	and	they
often	report	a	sense	of	anticipatory	“dread.”	However,	the	moment	they
cancel	the	engagement,	there’s	instant	relief:	all	those	unpleasant	thoughts	and
feelings	instantly	disappear.	And	even	though	that	relief	doesn’t	last	for	long,
it’s	very	reinforcing,	which	increases	the	chance	of	future	social	withdrawal.
Fusion	and	avoidance	generally	go	hand	in	hand.	For	example,	depressed
clients	often	try	hard	to	push	away	the	very	thoughts	and	memories	they	keep
fusing	with—for	example,	painful	thoughts	such	as	
I’m	worthless
	or	
Nobody
likes	me
,	or	unpleasant	memories	of	rejection,	disappointment,	and	failure.
They	may	try	anything	from	drugs,	alcohol,	or	cigarettes	to	watching	TV	or
sleeping	excessively	in	vain	attempts	to	avoid	these	painful	thoughts.
Dominance	 of	 the	 Conceptualized	 Past	 and	 Future/Limited	 Self-
Knowledge
Fusion	and	avoidance	readily	lead	to	a	loss	of	contact	with	our	here-and-
now	experience.	We	all	readily	get	caught	up	in	a	conceptualized	past	and
future:	we	dwell	on	painful	memories	and	ruminate	over	why	things	happened
that	way;	we	fantasize	about	the	future,	worry	about	things	that	haven’t	yet
happened,	and	focus	on	all	the	things	we	have	to	do	next.	And	in	the	process,
we	miss	out	on	life	in	the	here	and	now.
Contacting	the	present	moment	includes	the	world	around	us	and	inside	us.
If	we	lose	contact	with	our	inner	psychological	world—if	we’re	out	of	touch
with	our	own	thoughts	and	feelings—then	we	lack	self-knowledge.	And
without	self-knowledge,	it’s	much	harder	to	change	our	behavior	in	adaptive
ways.
Depressed	 clients	 commonly	 spend	 a	 lot	 of	 time	 fused	 with	 a
conceptualized	past:	ruminating	on	painful	past	events,	often	having	to	do
with	rejection,	loss,	and	failure.	They	also	fuse	with	a	conceptualized	future:
worrying	about	all	the	“bad	stuff”	that	might	lie	ahead.
Lack	of	Values	Clarity/Contact
As	our	behavior	becomes	increasingly	driven	by	fusion	with	unhelpful
thoughts,	or	attempts	to	avoid	unpleasant	private	experiences,	our	values
often	get	lost,	neglected,	or	forgotten.	If	we’re	not	clear	about	our	values	or
not	in	psychological	contact	with	them,	then	we	can’t	use	them	as	an	effective
guide	for	our	actions.	Depressed	clients	often	lose	touch	with	their	values
around	connecting	with	and	contributing	to	others,	being	productive,
nurturing	health	and	well-being,	having	fun,	or	engaging	in	challenging
activities	such	as	sports,	work,	and	hobbies.
Our	aim	in	ACT	is	to	bring	behavior	increasingly	under	the	influence	of
values	rather	than	fusion	or	avoidance.	(Note:	Even	values	should	be	held
lightly	rather	than	fused	with.	If	we	fuse	with	values,	they	easily	become	rigid
rules.)	Consider	the	differences	between	going	to	work	under	these	three
conditions:
1
.	
Mainly	motivated	by	fusion	with	self-limiting	beliefs	such
as	“I	have	to	do	this	job.	It’s	all	I’m	capable	of.”
2
.	
Mainly	motivated	by	avoidance:	going	in	to	work	to	avoid
“feeling	like	a	loser”	or	to	get	rid	of	feelings	of	anxiety
related	to	tension	at	home.
3
.	
Mainly	motivated	by	values:	doing	this	work	guided	by
values	around	contribution,	self-development,	being	active,
or	connecting	with	others.
Which	form	of	motivation	is	likely	to	bring	the	greatest	sense	of	vitality,
meaning,	and	purpose?
Unworkable	Action
Unworkable	action	means	patterns	of	behavior	that	pull	us	away	from
mindful,	valued	living;	patterns	of	action	that	do	
not
	work	to	make	our	lives
richer	and	fuller,	but	rather	get	us	stuck	or	increase	our	struggles.	This
includes	action	that’s	impulsive,	reactive,	or	automatic	as	opposed	to	mindful,
considered,	 purposeful;	 action	 persistently	 motivated	 by	 experiential
avoidance	rather	than	values;	and	inaction	or	procrastination	where	effective
action	is	required	to	improve	quality	of	life.	Common	examples	of
unworkable	action	in	depression	include	using	drugs	or	alcohol	excessively,
withdrawing	socially,	being	physically	inactive,	ceasing	previously	enjoyable
activities,	avoiding	work,	sleeping	or	watching	TV	excessively,	attempting
suicide,	excessive	procrastination	on	important	tasks,	and	the	list	goes	on	and
on.
Attachment	to	the	Conceptualized	Self
We	all	have	a	story	about	who	we	are.	This	story	is	complex	and
multilayered.	It	includes	some	objective	facts	such	as	our	name,	age,	sex,
cultural	background,	marital	status,	occupation,	and	so	on.	It	also	includes
descriptions	and	evaluations	of	the	roles	we	play,	the	relationships	we	have,
our	strengths	and	weaknesses,	our	likes	and	dislikes,	and	our	hopes,	dreams,
and	aspirations.	If	we	hold	this	story	lightly,	it	can	give	us	a	sense	of	self	that
helps	to	define	who	we	are	and	what	we	want	in	life.	However,	if	we	fuse
with	this	story—if	we	start	to	think	we	
are
	the	story—it	readily	creates	all
sorts	 of	 problems.	 Most	 ACT	 textbooks	 refer	 to	 this	 story	 as	 the
conceptualized	self
	or	
self-as-content.
	I	prefer	the	term	
self-as-description
,	a
phrase	coined	by	psychologist	Patty	Bach,	because	that’s	essentially	what	it
is:	a	way	of	describing	ourselves.	And	when	we	fuse	with	our	self-
description,	it	seems	as	if	we	
are
	that	description,	that	all	those	thoughts	are
the	very	essence	of	who	we	are:	self-as-description.
Note	that	even	fusion	with	a	very	positive	self-description	is	likely	to	be
problematic.	For	example,	what	might	be	the	danger	of	fusing	with	“I	am
strong	and	independent?”	That	will	undoubtedly	give	me	high	self-esteem,
but	what	happens	when	I	really	need	help	and	I’m	so	fused	with	my	positive
self-description	that	I’m	unwilling	to	ask	for	it	or	accept	it?	And	what’s	the
potential	danger	of	fusing	with	“I	am	a	brilliant	car	driver.	I	can	drive
exceedingly	well	even	when	I	am	drunk!”?	Again,	this	gives	me	very	positive
self-esteem,	but	it	can	easily	lead	to	disaster.
In	 depression,	 clients	 generally	 fuse	 with	 a	 very	 “negative”	 self-
description:	 “I	 am
(bad/worthless/hopeless/unlovable/dumb/ugly/fat/incompetent/a	 loser/a
failure/damaged	goods/disgusting/boring/unlikeable),”	and	so	on.	However,
you	may	also	get	“positive”	elements	in	there—for	example,	“I’m	a	strong
person;	I	shouldn’t	be	reacting	like	this,”	or	“I’m	a	good	person;	why	is	this
happening	to	me?”	or	even	“I	don’t	need	any	help.	I	can	get	through	this	on
my	own.”
Overlap	among	Pathological	Processes
You’ll	notice	that	there’s	considerable	overlap	among	these	pathological
processes;	as	with	psychological	flexibility,	they’re	all	interconnected.	For
example,	if	your	client	ruminates	on	“Why	am	I	such	a	failure?”	you	could
class	that	as	fusion	or	self-as-description.	And	if	he	spends	the	evening	pacing
up	and	down	ruminating	instead	of	doing	something	life	enhancing,	you	could
class	it	as	unworkable	action.	And	if	he’s	lost	in	his	thoughts	while	spending
time	with	his	wife	and	kids,	then	not	only	is	he	losing	contact	with	the	present
moment,	he’s	probably	losing	contact	with	his	values	around	connecting	and
engaging	with	others.	Rumination	could	even	serve	as	experiential	avoidance,
if	he’s	doing	it	primarily	to	avoid	thinking	about	or	dealing	with	other	painful
issues,	or	to	distract	himself	from	feelings	in	his	body.
So	Who	Is	ACT	Suitable	For?
ACT	has	been	scientifically	studied	and	shown	to	be	effective	with	a	wide
range	of	conditions	including	anxiety,	depression,	obsessive-compulsive
disorder,	 social	 phobia,	 generalized	 anxiety	 disorder,	 schizophrenia,
borderline	personality	disorder,	workplace	stress,	chronic	pain,	drug	use,
psychological	adjustment	to	cancer,	epilepsy,	weight	control,	smoking
cessation,	and	self-management	of	diabetes	(Bach	&	Hayes,	2002;	Bond	&
Bunce,	2000;	Brown	et	al.,	2008;	Branstetter,	Wilson,	Hildebrandt	&	Mutch,
2004;	Dahl,	Wilson,	&	Nilsson,	2004;	Dalrymple	&	Herbert,	2007;	Gaudiano
&	Herbert,	2006.;	Gifford	et	al.,	2004;	Gratz	&	Gunderson,	2006;	Gregg,
Callaghan,	Hayes,	&	Glenn-Lawson,	2007;	Hayes,	Masuda,	Bissett,	Luoma,
&	Guerrero,	2004;	Hayes,	Bissett,	et	al.,	2004;	Tapper	et	al.,	2009;	Lundgren,
Dahl,	Yardi,	&	Melin,	2008;	Ossman	&	Wilson,	2006;	Twohig,	Hayes,	&
Masuda,	2006;	Zettle,	2003).When	therapists	ask	me,	“Who	is	ACT	suitable
for?”	my	reply	is	“Can	you	think	of	anyone	who	ACT	is	
not
	suitable	for?”
Who	wouldn’t	benefit	from	being	more	psychologically	present;	more	in
touch	with	their	values;	more	able	to	make	room	for	the	inevitable	pain	of
life;	more	able	to	defuse	from	unhelpful	thoughts,	beliefs,	and	memories;
more	able	to	take	effective	action	in	the	face	of	emotional	discomfort;	more
able	to	engage	fully	in	what	they’re	doing;	and	more	able	to	appreciate	each
moment	of	their	life,	no	matter	how	they’re	feeling?	Psychological	flexibility
brings	all	these	benefits,	and	more.	ACT	therefore	seems	relevant	to	just
about	everyone.
(Of	course,	if	humans	have	significant	deficits	in	their	ability	to	use
language,	such	as	some	people	with	autism,	acquired	brain	injury,	or	other
disabilities,	then	ACT	may	be	of	limited	use.	However,	RFT	(relational	frame
theory)	has	all	sorts	of	useful	applications	for	these	populations.)
To	help	you	start	thinking	in	terms	of	this	model,	I’m	going	to	close	this
chapter	with	an	exercise	in	case	conceptualization.	I’d	like	you	to	pick	one	of
your	clients	and	find	examples	of	the	six	core	pathological	processes	outlined
in	this	chapter.	To	help	you	with	this	task,	please	use	the	worksheet	Assessing
Psychological	Inflexibility:	Six	Core	Processes.	(You’ll	find	it	at	the	end	of
this	chapter.	It’s	also	downloadable	from	
www.actmadesimple.com
.)	If	you
get	stuck	on	any	heading,	don’t	fret	about	it,	just	move	on	to	the	next	one.
And	keep	in	mind,	there’s	a	lot	of	overlap	between	these	processes,	so	if
you’re	wondering,	“Is	this	fusion	or	avoidance?”	then	the	answer	is	probably
yes—in	which	case,	write	it	down	under	both	headings.	This	exercise	is
purely	to	get	you	started.	Later	on	in	the	book,	we’ll	focus	on	case
conceptualization	in	more	detail.	For	now,	just	give	it	a	shot,	and	see	how	you
do.
Better	still,	run	through	this	exercise	for	two	or	three	clients	because	(like
pretty	much	everything)	with	practice,	it	gets	easier.
And	even	better	still:	if	you	really	want	to	get	your	head	around	this
approach	to	human	psychopathology,	pick	two	or	three	
DSM-IV
	disorders	and
identify	the	fusion,	avoidance,	and	unworkable	action	going	on:	What	kind	of
mental	content	do	sufferers	fuse	with	(in	terms	of	worrying,	ruminating,	self-
image,	and	self-defeating	beliefs	and	attitudes)?	What	feelings,	urges,
sensations,	thoughts,	and	memories	are	sufferers	unwilling	to	have	or	actively
trying	to	avoid?	What	unworkable	actions	do	sufferers	typically	take?	What
core	values	do	they	lose	touch	with?
Last	but	not	least:	run	through	this	exercise	on	yourself.	If	you	want	to
learn	ACT,	the	best	person	to	practice	on	is	
you
.	So	take	some	time	to	do	this
seriously:	identify	what	you	fuse	with,	what	you	avoid,	what	values	you	lose
touch	with,	and	what	ineffective	actions	you	take.	The	more	you	apply	this
model	to	your	own	issues	and	notice	how	it	works	in	your	own	life,	the	more
experience	you	can	draw	on	in	the	therapy	room.
Chapter	3.	The	House	of	ACT
What	Took	You	So	Long,	ACT?
Why	did	it	take	ACT	so	long	to	become	popular,	given	that	as	long	ago	as
1986	there	were	randomized	controlled	trials	showing	it	to	be	equivalent	or
superior	to	traditional	cognitive	behavioral	therapy	(CBT)	for	treatment	of
depression?	Steve	Hayes,	the	creator	of	ACT,	answers	that	question	like	this:
“If	ACT	had	been	popular	twenty	years	ago	it	could	not	have	withstood
scrutiny.	The	model	was	not	well	developed	and	its	foundation	was	weak	…
We	were	willing	to	spend	years	on	philosophy,	basic	theory,	measures,	and
applied	theory	before	even	publishing	the	approach	in	book	form	(in	1999)	…
But	because	we	waited	and	worked	on	the	foundation,	now	when	people	peel
back	the	layers	they	see	how	much	has	been	done	on	the	foundations	of	the
work”	(Harris,	2008b)
As	a	result	of	all	this	foundational	work,	ACT	is	now	like	the	top	floor	of	a
three-story	mansion.	On	the	next	floor	down,	you’ll	find	relational	frame
theory	(RFT),	which	is	a	behavioral	theory	of	human	language	and	cognition.
Then	on	the	ground	floor	you’ll	find	applied	behavioral	analysis	(ABA),	a
powerful	model	for	the	prediction	and	influence	of	behavior	that	has	had	an
enormous	impact	on	almost	every	branch	of	modern	psychology.	And	the
ground	on	which	the	entire	mansion	rests	is	a	philosophy	called	functional
contextualism	(FC).
While	the	rest	of	this	book	is	primarily	focused	on	ACT,	in	this	chapter
we’re	going	to	take	a	quick	look	at	functional	contextualism.	You	don’t	have
to	know	this	stuff—you	can	skip	this	chapter	if	you	wish—but	I	encourage
you	to	read	on	because	it	will	help	your	understanding	of	ACT.	(Originally
this	chapter	also	included	an	introduction	to	ABA	and	RFT,	but	unfortunately
we	had	to	cut	it	for	lack	of	space.	However,	you	can	download	that
introduction	from	
www.actmadesimple.com/the_house_of_ACT
.)
Functional	Contextualism	and	the	Three-legged	Chair
I’d	like	you	to	imagine	a	chair	that	has	four	legs,	but	the	moment	anyone	sits
on	it,	one	of	the	legs	drops	off.	Would	you	describe	this	chair	as	“broken,”
“faulty,”	or	“damaged”?	Would	you	call	it	a	“dysfunctional	chair”	or	even	a
“maladaptive	chair”?	I’ve	asked	this	question	of	many	hundreds	of	therapists,
and	they	always	answer	yes	to	at	least	one	of	the	above	descriptions.	The
problem	is	that	this	instinctive	answer—“Yes,	there	is	something	wrong,
faulty,	or	flawed	in	the	chair”—forgets	to	take	into	account	the	all-important
role	of	context.	So	I	invite	you	now	to	think	laterally:	think	of	at	least	three	or
four	contexts	in	which	we	could	say	this	chair	functions	very	effectively	to
serve	our	purposes.
*	*	*
Did	you	come	up	with	some?	Here	are	a	few	I	thought	of:
Playing	a	practical	joke.
Creating	an	art	exhibition	of	broken	furniture.
Finding	props	for	a	clown’s	act	or	a	comedy	show.
Demonstrating	design	flaws	in	a	furniture-making	class.
Improving	balance,	coordination,	and	muscle	strength	(that
is,	you	try	sitting	down	without	making	the	leg	fall	off).
Hoping	to	injure	yourself	at	work	to	get	a	compensation
claim.
In	all	of	these	contexts,	this	chair	functions	very	effectively	to	serve	our
purposes.	This	example	illustrates	how	
functional	 contextualism
	gets	its
name:	it	looks	at	how	things	function	in	specific	contexts.	From	the	viewpoint
of	FC,	no	thought	or	feeling	is	inherently	problematic,	dysfunctional,	or
pathological.	In	a	context	that	includes	cognitive	fusion	and	experiential
avoidance,	our	thoughts,	feelings,	and	memories	often	function	in	a	manner
that	is	toxic,	harmful,	or	life	distorting.	However,	in	a	context	of	defusion	and
acceptance	(that	is,	mindfulness),	those	very	same	thoughts,	feelings,	and
memories	function	very	differently:	they	have	much	less	impact	and	influence
over	us.	They	may	still	be	painful,	but	they’re	no	longer	toxic,	harmful,	or	life
distorting—and	more	importantly,	they	don’t	hold	us	back	from	valued	living.
Most	models	of	psychology	are	based	on	a	philosophy	called	
mechanism.
Mechanistic	models	treat	the	mind	as	if	it’s	a	machine	made	up	of	lots	of
separate	parts.	“Problematic”	thoughts	and	feelings	are	seen	as	faulty	parts	of
the	machine	or	errors	in	the	structure	of	the	machine.	The	aim	in	such	models
is	to	repair,	replace,	or	remove	these	faulty	parts	so	the	machine	can	function
normally.	Mechanistic	models	of	psychology	assume	that	there	are	such
things	 as	 inherently	 “dysfunctional,”	 “maladaptive,”	 or	 “pathological”
thoughts,	feelings,	and	memories.	In	other	words,	there	are	memories,
thoughts,	feelings,	emotions,	urges,	schemas,	narratives,	ego	states,	core
beliefs,	and	so	on	that	are	fundamentally	problematic,	dysfunctional,	or
pathological,	and	much	like	a	“faulty	chair,”	they	need	to	be	either	fixed,
replaced,	or	removed.
Mechanism	has	been	the	most	successful	philosophy	of	science	in	most
scientific	fields,	so	it’s	not	surprising	that	most	models	in	psychology	are
based	on	some	sort	of	mechanistic	philosophy.	And	there	is	nothing	“wrong”
or	“bad”	or	“inferior”	or	“basic”	about	mechanism.	I’m	merely	emphasizing
that	functional	contextualism	is	a	radically	different	philosophical	approach	to
the	mainstream,	and	it	naturally	leads	to	a	different	way	of	doing	therapy.
Are	Clients	“Damaged	Goods”?
Our	clients	often	come	to	therapy	with	mechanistic	ideas.	They	believe	that
they’re	faulty,	damaged,	or	flawed,	and	they	need	to	be	fixed	up	or	repaired.
Sometimes	they	even	refer	to	themselves	as	“damaged	goods.”	They	often
believe	they’re	lacking	important	components	such	as	“confidence”	or	“self-
esteem.”	Or	they	believe	they	have	faulty	parts—such	as	feelings	of	anxiety,
negative	thoughts,	or	painful	memories—that	need	to	be	removed.	Most
mechanistic	models	readily	reinforce	these	notions	through	two	processes:
1
.	
They	 use	 words—for	 example,	 terms	 such	 as
“dysfunctional,”	 “maladaptive,”	 “irrational,”	 or
“negative”—that	 imply	 we	 have	 faulty	 or	 damaged
components	in	our	minds.
2
.	
They	use	a	wide	variety	of	tools	and	techniques	designed	to
directly	reduce,	replace,	or	remove	these	unwanted	thoughts
and	feelings	(usually	on	the	assumption	that	this	is	an
essential	step	for	improving	quality	of	life).
In	ACT,	our	attitude	is	very	different.	We	don’t	set	out	to	reduce	or
eliminate	“symptoms”;	instead	we	aim	to	fundamentally	transform	the	client’s
relationship	with	her	thoughts	and	feelings	so	that	she	no	longer	perceives
them	as	“symptoms.”	After	all,	the	moment	we	label	a	thought	or	feeling	as	a
“symptom,”	that	implies	that	it’s	“bad,”	“harmful,”	“abnormal,”	and	therefore
something	we	need	to	get	rid	of	in	order	to	be	normal	and	healthy.	This
attitude	readily	sets	us	up	to	struggle	with	our	own	thoughts	and	feelings—a
struggle	that	often	has	disastrous	consequences.
Suppose	there’s	a	plant	that	you	judge	as	“ugly,”	growing	right	in	the	center
of	your	front	garden.	And	suppose	that	there’s	no	way	to	get	rid	of	it	without
destroying	your	entire	garden.	(You	may	be	thinking,	
But	there	must	be	some
way	to	get	rid	of	it.
	If	so,	just	step	back	for	a	minute	and	make	a	hypothetical
leap:	imagine,	for	the	purposes	of	this	exercise,	that	you	
can’t
	get	rid	of	this
plant	without	destroying	your	garden.)	Now	if	you	view	this	plant	as	a
“weed,”	what	is	likely	to	happen	to	your	relationship	with	it?	Chances	are	you
won’t	like	it	and	you	won’t	want	it	there.	And	you	may	well	get	upset	or
angry	about	it.	You	could	easily	waste	lots	of	time	thinking	about	how	much
better	your	garden	would	be	without	it.	You	might	even	hesitate	to	let	people
into	your	front	garden,	for	fear	they’ll	judge	you	on	account	of	it.	Perhaps	you
might	even	start	leaving	by	the	back	of	your	house	so	you	don’t	have	to	look
at	this	“ugly	weed.”	In	other	words,	this	“ugly	weed”	has	become	A	VERY
IMPORTANT	THING	IN	YOUR	LIFE—so	much	so,	that	it	now	has	a
significant	impact	on	your	behavior.
But	what	happens	if,	instead	of	viewing	that	plant	as	an	“ugly	weed,”	you
view	it	as	just	an	unfortunate	fact	of	life:	a	natural	part	of	the	native
environment,	a	common	example	of	American	indigenous	flora?	Now	it’s	the
same	plant,	in	the	same	location,	but	your	relationship	with	it	has
fundamentally	changed.	Now	you	no	longer	have	to	struggle	with	it.	Now	you
need	no	longer	be	upset	or	embarrassed	about	it,	or	waste	so	much	time
thinking	about	it.	Now	you	can	let	people	into	your	garden	without	hesitation,
and	you	can	leave	by	the	front	of	the	house.	The	plant	itself	has	not	changed,
but	you	no	longer	make	it	into	A	VERY	IMPORTANT	THING	IN	YOUR
LIFE.	It	now	has	much	less	impact	or	influence	over	you.
Mindfulness	enables	us	to	make	a	similar	attitude	shift	toward	all	those
thoughts,	feelings,	sensations,	and	memories	that	we	so	readily	judge	as
“problematic”;	it	enables	us	to	choose	the	relationship	we	have	with	them.	By
changing	the	context	from	one	of	fusion	and	avoidance	to	one	of	defusion	and
acceptance	(that	is,	mindfulness),	we	alter	the	function	of	those	thoughts	and
feelings	so	they	have	much	less	impact	and	influence	over	us.	In	a	context	of
mindfulness,	they’re	no	longer	“symptoms”	or	“problems”	or	“things	that	stop
us	from	living	a	rich	and	full	life”;	they’re	nothing	more	or	less	than	thoughts,
feelings,	sensations,	memories,	and	so	on.
In	one	sense,	mindfulness	is	the	ultimate	reframing	tool:	it	moves	all	these
painful	thoughts	and	feelings	from	the	old	frame	of	“abnormal	pathological
symptoms	that	are	obstacles	to	a	rich	and	meaningful	life”	into	the	new	frame
of	“normal	human	experiences	that	are	natural	parts	of	a	rich	and	meaningful
life.”
What	Is	the	Goal	of	Functional	Contextualism?
The	goal	of	FC	is	to	predict	and	influence	behavior	accurately	and
effectively,	using	empirically	supported	principles.	And	what	is	the	purpose	of
predicting	and	influencing	behavior?	In	ACT,	the	purpose	is	specifically	to
help	humans	create	rich,	full,	and	meaningful	lives—that	is,	to	enable
mindful,	valued	living.	Thus	ACT	teaches	people	to	increase	awareness	of
their	own	behavior	(both	public	and	private),	and	to	notice	how	it	functions	in
the	context	of	their	life:	does	it	improve	their	quality	of	life,	or	lower	it?	You
may	recall	that	in	ACT,	we	refer	to	this	concept	as	“workability.”
Now	let’s	take	a	moment	to	consider	the	word	“function.”	It’s	a	technical
term	(not	one	that	you’d	use	with	clients)	that	you’ll	find	in	most	ACT
textbooks.	When	we	ask	“What	is	the	
function
	of	this	behavior?”	we	mean
“What	effects	does	this	behavior	have?	What	are	the	consequences?”	In	other
words,	we’re	asking,	“What	purpose	does	this	behavior	serve?	What	is	it
intended	to	achieve?”
To	clarify	this,	imagine	five	different	people,	in	five	different	situations,
each	making	cuts	across	their	forearm	with	a	sharp	knife.	Now	see	if	you	can
come	up	with	five	possible	functions	for	this	behavior.
*	*	*
Here	are	some	possibilities:
Getting	attention
Self-punishment
Release	of	tension
Distraction	from	painful	emotions
Creating	body	art
Trying	to	feel	something	if	you	are	“totally	numb”
Attempting	to	get	admitted	to	a	hospital
Notice	in	all	these	scenarios	the	
form
	of	the	behavior	is	the	same—cutting
one’s	arm—but	the	
function
	of	the	behavior—the	purpose	it	serves—is
different.
Now	let’s	suppose	your	partner	is	lost	in	thought,	and	your	purpose	is	to
gain	his	attention.	Think	of	five	different	
forms
	of	behavior	that	might	achieve
this.
*	*	*
Here	are	a	few	ideas:
Wave	at	him.
Shout	“Hello,	is	there	anybody	in	there?”
Pour	a	cup	of	water	over	his	head.
Bang	loudly	on	some	furniture.
Say,	“Darling,	can	I	have	your	attention	for	a	moment,
please?”
In	this	example,	you	can	see	that	many	different	
forms
	of	behavior	all	have
the	same	function:	they	serve	the	purpose	of	getting	attention.	In	functional
contextualism,	we’re	interested	in	the	function	of	a	behavior	rather	than	the
form	of	it.	But	notice,	we	can	only	know	the	function	of	a	behavior	if	we
know	the	context	in	which	it	occurs.	If	someone	raises	an	arm	up	high	in	the
air,	what	purpose	does	that	serve?	Is	he	in	a	lecture	hall,	asking	a	question?	Is
she	pointing	up	at	a	plane	in	the	sky?	Or	is	he	perhaps	trying	to	hail	a	taxi?
Without	knowing	the	context,	we	can’t	know	the	function	of	the	behavior	and
vice	versa.	And	that	brings	up	another	important	question:	What	do	we	mean
by	“behavior”—and	“behaviorism”?
“Behaviorism”:	A	Misunderstood	Word
When	I	first	discovered	ACT,	I	couldn’t	believe	that	such	a	spiritual,
humanistic	model	came	out	of	behaviorism.	I	thought	behaviorists	treated
humans	like	robots	or	rats,	that	they	had	no	interest	in	thoughts	and	feelings,
and	considered	them	unimportant	or	irrelevant.	Boy,	was	I	wrong!	I	soon
discovered	there	are	several	different	schools	of	behaviorism,	and	some	of
them	have	ideas	that	directly	contradict	essential	elements	of	ACT	and	RFT.
ACT	comes	from	a	branch	known,	somewhat	unfortunately,	as	“radical
behaviorism.”	But	don’t	let	the	name	put	you	off.	
Radical	behaviorists
	do	not
run	around	in	combat	gear,	armed	with	assault	rifles—they	get	their	name
because	of	their	radical	viewpoint:	they	consider	everything	that	an	organism
does	is	behavior.	Yes,	you	read	that	correctly:	
everything
	that	an	organism
does	is	behavior
.
	Thus,	to	a	radical	behaviorist,	processes	such	as	thinking,
feeling,	and	remembering	are	all	considered	to	be	forms	of	behavior—and	
all
are	considered	very	important.
Radical	behaviorists	talk	of	two	broad	realms	of	behavior.	One	realm	is
“public”	behavior—that	is,	behavior	that	can	directly	be	observed	by	others
(provided	they	are	present	to	witness	it).	Thus,	if	we	watched	a	video	of	you,
whatever	we	could	see	you	doing	or	hear	you	saying	would	be	public
behavior.	In	everyday	language,	we	commonly	refer	to	these	public	behaviors
as	“actions.”	The	other	realm	is	“private”	behavior—that	is,	behavior	that	can
only	be	directly	observed	by	the	person	doing	it:	thinking,	feeling,
remembering,	fantasizing,	worrying,	tasting,	smelling,	and	so	on.	Radical
behaviorists	are	very	interested	in	both	these	realms.
Behaviorism	has	had	a	profound	impact	on	clinical	psychology.	Through
rigorous	scientific	study,	the	behaviorists	discovered	a	wide	range	of	powerful
methods	for	reliably	and	effectively	influencing	human	behavior	(both	public
and	 private):	 methods	 that	 include	 exposure,	 reinforcement,	 shaping,
extinction,	and	classical	and	operant	conditioning.	Many	models	of	therapy
have	been	extremely	influenced	by	these	ideas,	although	many	fail	to
acknowledge	it	or	even	realize	it.	Indeed,	it’s	hard	to	imagine	an	effective
therapist	or	coach	that	does	not	utilize	at	least	some	of	these	basic	principles,
given	they	have	proven	so	effective	for	facilitating	behavioral	change.
Many	of	these	ideas	are	hugely	influential	in	everyday	life.	For	example,
business	leadership	programs	advise	managers	to	catch	their	coworkers
“doing	something	right”	and	sincerely	praise	them	for	it.	Likewise,	positive
parenting	programs	advise	parents	to	actively	notice	when	their	children	are
behaving	well	and	reward	them	for	it.	All	this	excellent	advice	is	based	on	the
powerful	behavioral	principle	of	“positive	reinforcement.”
The	Three	Waves	of	Behaviorism
Now	let’s	take	a	quick	tour	of	behaviorism	to	see	how	we	got	to	where	we
are	today.	There	have	been	three	“waves”	of	behavioral	therapies	in	the	last
century.	The	“first	wave,”	which	reached	its	peak	of	popularity	in	the	1950s
and	60s,	focused	primarily	on	overt	behavioral	change	and	utilized	techniques
linked	to	operant	and	classical	conditioning	principles.	Many	practitioners	in
this	 first	 wave	 placed	 little	 importance	 on	 thoughts	 and	 feelings.
Unfortunately	this	led	to	
all
	behaviorists	being	painted	with	the	same	brush:
that	they	treated	humans	like	rats	or	robots.
The	“second	wave”	of	behaviorism,	which	took	off	in	the	1970s,	included
cognitive	interventions	as	a	key	strategy	in	behavior	change.	In	particular,	the
“second	wave”	placed	a	major	emphasis	on	challenging	or	disputing
irrational,	dysfunctional,	negative,	or	erroneous	thoughts,	and	replacing	them
with	more	rational,	functional,	positive,	or	realistic	thoughts.	Cognitive
behavioral	therapy	(CBT)	eventually	came	to	dominate	this	“second	wave,”
closely	followed	by	rational	emotive	behavior	therapy	(REBT).
ACT	is	part	of	the	so-called	“third	wave”	of	behavioral	therapies—along
with	dialectical	behavior	therapy	(DBT),	mindfulness-based	cognitive	therapy
(MBCT),	functional	analytic	psychotherapy	(FAP),	and	several	others—all	of
which	place	a	major	emphasis	on	acceptance	and	mindfulness,	in	addition	to
traditional	behavioral	interventions.
And	the	Rest	of	the	Tour?
If	you’d	like	to	tour	the	rest	of	the	house	of	ACT,	then	I	recommend	you	read
The	 ABCs	 of	 Human	 Behavior:	 Behavioral	 Principles	 for	 the	 Practicing
Clinician
	by	Jonas	Ramnerö	and	Niklas	Törneke.	This	is	an	excellent	book
that	takes	you	step-by-step,	simply	and	clearly,	through	all	the	details	of	FC,
ABA,	and	RFT,	tying	them	all	together	with	ACT	via	numerous	clinical
examples	and	annotated	transcripts	of	therapy.	There’s	also	a	free	online
tutorial	on	RFT,	available	at	www.contextualpsychology.org/rft_tutorial.
But	that’s	enough	of	this	intellectual	talk.	Now	it’s	time	to	start	getting
experiential	…
Chapter	4.	Getting	Experiential
Less	Talk,	More	Action:	ACT	as	Experiential	Therapy
ACT	is	a	very	active	therapy.	We	take	clients	through	a	wide	array	of
experiential	exercises,	which	range	in	duration	from	ten	seconds	to	half	an
hour.	Now,	if	you’re	already	well-versed	in	experiential	therapy,	you	may	take
this	in	stride.	However,	for	many	practitioners,	the	idea	of	leading	such
exercises	is	not	only	challenging,	but	it’s	also	daunting.	So	in	this	chapter,
we’ll	look	at	how	to	acclimatize	clients	to	the	experiential	nature	of	ACT,	and
how	to	develop	your	ability	to	lead	these	exercises.
The	Proof	of	the	Pudding
There’s	an	old	saying,	“The	proof	of	the	pudding	is	in	the	eating.”	You	can
talk	until	the	cows	come	home,	trying	to	describe	the	pudding	you	want	me	to
taste,	but	until	I	actually	place	it	in	my	mouth,	I	won’t	know	what	it	tastes
like.	One	of	the	most	common	pitfalls	when	we’re	new	to	ACT	is	trying	to
describe	or	explain	ACT	processes	instead	of	actually	doing	them.	If	we’re
not	careful,	it’s	easy	to	get	bogged	down	in	wordy	conversations	and	waste	a
lot	of	time	on	intellectual	discussion	instead	of	doing	something	that’s
practical	and	useful.
Because	of	this,	you’re	better	off	to	go	through	a	process	experientially	and
then	talk	about	it	later,	rather	than	the	other	way	around.	And	if	you	do
choose	to	explain	an	exercise	in	advance,	then	preferably	do	so	via	a
metaphor;	I’ll	give	you	plenty	of	examples	as	we	go.
A	Quick	Note	on	the	Therapeutic	Relationship
Throughout	this	book,	you’ll	encounter	a	lot	of	techniques,	metaphors,
worksheets,	strategies,	and	other	interventions.	None	of	this	will	be	effective
if	you	don’t	have	a	good	relationship	with	your	client.	In	ACT,	we	aim	to	be
fully	present	with	our	clients:	open,	authentic,	mindful,	compassionate,
respectful,	and	in	touch	with	our	own	core	values.	In	other	words,	we	aim	to
live	and	breathe	ACT	ourselves,	and	to	deliver	it	with	heart	and	soul	rather
than	coldly	and	mechanically	using	it	like	a	fancy	tool	kit.
Kelly	Wilson,	one	of	the	pioneers	of	ACT,	puts	this	very	simply.	He
advises	us	to	see	our	clients	as	sunsets,	not	as	math	problems.	And	he	reminds
us	that	we	don’t	do	interventions	
to
	clients—we	do	interventions	
with
	clients.
As	part	of	this	respectful	stance	toward	our	clients,	we	repeatedly	ask	their
permission	to	begin	and/or	persist	with	experiential	exercises.	For	example,
we	might	say,	“I’m	just	wondering—there’s	an	exercise	that	I	think	could	be
really	useful	for	you	in	dealing	with	this	issue.	Would	you	be	willing	to	give	it
a	go?”
Similarly,	in	the	midst	of	some	exercise	where	our	client	is	in	touch	with
strong	emotions,	you	might	ask,	“I’m	just	checking—is	it	okay	if	we	keep
going	with	this?	I	don’t	want	you	to	feel	in	any	way	coerced.	We	can	stop	at
any	point.”
And	if	we	should	notice	we’ve	spent	a	long	time	discussing	ACT	processes
as	opposed	to	actually	doing	them,	we	might	say,	“I’ve	just	noticed	something
here.	We’ve	been	doing	a	lot	of	talking	in	this	session	but	not	much	practice.
Obviously	you	can’t	learn	to	play	a	guitar	by	talking	about	it;	you	have	to
actually	pick	it	up	and	strum	the	strings.	And	it’s	the	same	with	this	therapy.
So	would	it	be	okay	if	we	stopped	talking	for	a	while,	and	instead	could	we
do	a	little	exercise	related	to	this	issue?”
Relevance	and	Rationale
We	want	to	make	our	metaphors	and	exercises	directly	relevant	to	the
issues	we’re	dealing	with	in	the	session	rather	than	trotting	out	some	exercise
simply	because	we	like	it,	it’s	fresh	in	our	memory,	or	it	worked	well	with	our
previous	client.	For	longer	exercises,	it’s	often	useful	to	provide	a	rationale.
For	example:
Therapist:
	So,	in	summary,	it	seems	like	you	spend	a	lot	of	time	caught	up	in
all	these	worrying	thoughts,	and	it’s	making	you	pretty	miserable.
Client:
	Yes.	I	know	it’s	stupid,	but	I	can’t	help	it.	That’s	the	way	I	am.	We’re
all	worriers	in	my	family.	My	mom’s	the	worst.
Therapist:
	What	if	you	could	learn	a	new	skill	so	that	when	these	worrying
thoughts	pop	into	your	head,	you	could	let	them	come	and	go—as	if
they	were	just	cars,	driving	past	outside	your	house—instead	of
getting	all	caught	up	in	them.	Would	that	be	something	you’d	be
interested	in?
Client:
	I	know	what	you’re	saying,	but	(
laughing
)	I	really	don’t	think	I	could
do	that.
Therapist:
	Well,	would	it	be	okay	to	give	it	a	go,	and	see	how	it	works?	It’s	a
very	simple	exercise—you	can	do	with	your	eyes	open,	or	closed,
whichever	you	prefer.
Client:
	I	can	try,	I	guess.
Establishing	Structure
In	the	very	first	session,	we	generally	say	something	like	this:	“One	of	the
things	that	makes	ACT	different	from	many	other	therapies	is	that	during	our
sessions,	we	spend	a	lot	of	time	practicing	skills	such	as	learning	new	ways	to
handle	difficult	thoughts	and	feelings	more	effectively.	And	you	can’t	learn
these	skills	simply	by	talking	about	them—you	have	to	actually	practice
them.	So	quite	often,	if	it’s	okay	with	you,	I’ll	be	asking	you	during	the
session	to	do	some	simple	exercises.	Would	you	be	okay	with	that?”
(Note:	Not	all	clients	will	answer	yes;	some	will	want	to	know	more	about
these	exercises.	We’ll	cover	how	to	deal	with	this	in	the	next	chapter.)
Usually	within	the	first	session	or	two,	we’ll	take	our	client	through	at	least
one	mindfulness	exercise	that	lasts	five	minutes	or	more.	Until	clients	know
what	to	expect,	I	generally	introduce	all	exercises	with	a	short	spiel,	such	as
this:	“This	exercise	will	take	[estimate	duration].	You	can	do	it	with	your	eyes
open	or	closed,	whichever	you	prefer.	And	there’s	no	need	to	speak	to	me
during	it,	but	you	can	talk	at	any	time	if	you	wish,	and	stop	me	whenever	you
like.”
Once	we’ve	done	a	couple	of	mindfulness	exercises,	we	could	say,	“If	it’s
okay	with	you,	I’d	like	to	start	each	session	with	a	short	mindfulness	exercise,
a	bit	like	the	one	we’ve	just	done.	Would	that	be	okay?”	If	your	client	agrees
—as	most	will—you	now	have	a	lovely	way	to	open	each	session	that	gets
both	you	and	your	client	into	the	space	of	mindfulness.	Of	course,	if	you
don’t	want	to	structure	your	sessions	this	way,	it’s	by	no	means	essential;	this
is	merely	a	suggestion,	not	a	commandment.	And	of	course,	some	clients	will
hate	this	idea.	So	if	your	client’s	not	keen,	whatever	you	do,	don’t	push	it!
Remember:	 if	 we	 ever	 find	 oursevles	 pushing,	 persuading,	 coercing,
convincing,	debating,	or	arguing	with	our	clients,	then	we’re	not	doing	ACT.
Flexibility,	Creativity,	and	Spontaneity
When	leading	exercises,	be	flexible.	Make	them	longer	or	shorter,	as
required.	Change	the	words	to	suit	your	own	style,	and	adapt	them	for	the
clients	you’re	dealing	with.	And	feel	free	to	interrupt	any	exercise	at	any
point	to	check	in	with	your	client	and	ask	how	he’s	doing.	Also	use	your
creativity	to	incorporate	thoughts,	feelings,	comments,	or	metaphors	that	your
client	has	made	in	this	session	or	previous	ones.
Improving	Delivery
As	you	work	through	this	book,	don’t	just	read	the	exercises	to	yourself.	I
strongly	urge	you	to	read	them	out	loud	and	pretend	that	you’re	actually
working	with	a	client.	This	may	seem	odd,	but	it’s	a	simple	and	effective	way
to	build	your	skills	and	confidence.	When	you	rehearse	by	yourself,	it
prepares	you	for	the	therapy	room:	your	words	will	flow	more	smoothly,	and
you’ll	have	to	exert	less	conscious	effort.	(Better	still,	find	a	colleague	to
practice	with.)
I	used	to	practice	mindfulness	scripts	into	a	tape	recorder	(and	as
technology	advanced,	into	an	MP3	recorder).	Then	I	played	them	back	and
analyzed	them.	I	then	worked	on	the	bits	that	were	shaky	until	I	knew	what	I
was	doing.	This	meant	that	even	if	I	was	reading	from	a	script	in	session,	the
script	became	just	a	guide	to	improvise	around	rather	than	something	I	had	to
slavishly	follow	word	for	word.	This	allows	for	a	fluidity	and	spontaneity	that
brings	scripts	to	life	rather	than	making	them	sound	stilted,	awkward,	and
unnatural.
The	same	holds	true	for	the	many	metaphors	ACT	utilizes.	Some	people
are	natural-born	storytellers.	They’ll	hear	a	metaphor	once,	and	then	retell	it
in	their	own	way,	and	it	will	come	out	wonderfully.	They’re	very	lucky!	Most
of	us	aren’t	so	talented.	We	need	practice.	I	suggest	that	you	try	saying	a
metaphor	out	loud	a	few	times.	Then	once	you	have	it	down	pat,	try	telling	it
to	someone	else.
As	a	general	rule,	mindfulness	exercises	are	best	delivered	at	a	slow,
deliberate	pace	and	in	a	calm,	still	voice.	Generally	it’s	better	to	go	too	slow
than	too	fast.	In	many	of	the	scripts	in	this	book,	I’ve	indicated	pauses	of	five,
ten,	fifteen,	or	twenty	seconds,	but	these	are	only	rough	guidelines,	so	please
don’t	try	to	slavishly	follow	them—find	your	own	natural	rate	and	rhythm.
For	most	people,	one	slow	deep	breath	all	the	way	in	and	all	the	way	out	is
about	ten	seconds.	I	have	recorded	some	CDs	and	MP3s	that	you	can	use	for
guidance,	if	you	wish	(see	appendix	2).
If	you	wish	to	read	from	a	script	during	a	session,	it’s	a	good	idea	to	say
something	to	your	client	like	“There’s	an	exercise	I’d	really	like	to	take	you
through,	but	I	haven’t	yet	memorized	the	whole	thing,	so	do	you	mind	if	I
read	it	from	this	book?”	However,	don’t	read	the	text	word	for	word	as
written,	or	it	will	sound	stilted	and	unnatural;	improvise	around	it.
Finally,	remember	to	be	yourself.	I	encourage	you	to	alter	the	words	and
phrases	in	every	exercise	and	metaphor	within	this	book	to	suit	your	own
style,	your	own	way	of	speaking,	and	the	clientele	you	work	with.
The	Hexaflexercise
We’re	now	going	to	look	at	the	Hexaflexercise,	which	covers	all	elements	of
the	hexaflex	(see	chapter	1)in	“one	hit.”	I	use	it	in	all	my	workshops,	talks,
and	lectures;	at	the	start	of	group	sessions;	and	as	a	brief	“refresher	course”	in
later	sessions	with	my	individual	clients.	As	written	here,	it	takes	from	ten	to
fifteen	minutes,	depending	on	how	fast	you	talk	and	how	long	you	pause.
Please	practice	it	a	few	times	before	continuing	on	with	the	book	because	(a)
it	will	help	you	to	understand	the	model,	and	(b)	it	will	give	you	a	foundation
for	many	of	the	exercises	to	come.
This	exercise,	used	in	its	entirety	is	undoubtedly	too	long	for	some	clients.
But	you	can	easily	do	abbreviated	versions	or	use	“chunks”	of	it.	I’ve
numbered	different	sections	of	the	exercise	so	we	can	dissect	it	and	refer
back	to	it	in	later	chapters.
Now	…	please	read	the	exercise	out	loud.	Read	it	in	a	slow,	calm,	steady
voice,	and	pretend	that	you’re	saying	it	to	a	client.
SECTION	1
Therapist:
	I	invite	you	now	to	sit	up	straight,	let	your	shoulders	drop	and
gently	push	your	feet	into	the	floor	…	and	get	a	sense	of	the	ground
beneath	you	…	and	you	can	either	fix	your	eyes	on	a	spot,	or	close
them,	whichever	you	prefer.	Now	just	take	a	moment	to	notice	how
you	are	sitting.	(
Pause	 5	 seconds.
)	And	notice	how	you	are
breathing.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	Notice	what	you	can	see.	(
Pause	5
seconds.
)	And	notice	what	you	can	hear.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	Notice
what	you	can	feel	against	your	skin.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	And	notice
what	you	can	taste	or	sense	in	your	mouth.	(
Pause	 5	 seconds.
)
Notice	what	you	can	smell	or	sense	in	your	nostrils.	(
Pause	 5
seconds.
)	And	notice	what	you	are	feeling.	(
Pause	 5	 seconds.
)
Notice	what	you	are	thinking.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	Notice	what	you
are	doing.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)
SECTION	2
Therapist:
	So	there’s	a	part	of	you	in	there	that	can	notice	everything	that	you
see,	hear,	touch,	taste,	smell,	think,	and	feel.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	We
don’t	have	a	good	word	for	this	part	of	you	in	everyday	language.
I’m	going	to	call	it	“the	observing	self,”	but	you	don’t	have	to	call	it
that.	You	can	call	it	whatever	you	like.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	Life	is
like	a	stage	show.	And	on	that	stage	are	all	your	thoughts,	and	all
your	feelings,	and	everything	that	you	can	see,	hear,	touch,	taste,
and	smell.	The	observing	self	is	that	part	of	you	that	can	step	back
and	watch	the	stage	show:	focus	in	on	any	part	of	it,	or	step	back
and	take	it	all	in	at	once.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)
SECTION	3
Therapist:
	Now	take	a	moment	to	reflect	on	why	you	came	here	today.	There
is	something	that	matters	to	you,	something	that	is	important	deep
in	your	heart	that	motivated	you	to	come	here	…	Is	it	about
improving	your	life?	…	Personal	growth?	…	Learning	new	skills?
…	Building	better	relationships?	…	Is	it	about	improving	things	at
work,	or	with	your	family,	or	your	friends?	…	Or	perhaps	it’s	about
your	health:	nurturing	your	body	or	enhancing	your	well-being?	…
Just	do	a	search,	deep	inside	your	heart,	to	clarify	what	values	led
you	here	today.	(
Pause	15	seconds.
)
SECTION	4
Therapist:
	And	now	take	a	moment	to	reflect	on	how	you	got	here	today.	You
didn’t	get	here	by	magic.	You	are	only	here	because	of	committed
action.	You	had	to	organize	the	appointment.	You	had	to	reschedule
things.	You	had	to	invest	time	and	effort	and	energy	to	get	here.
And	 chances	 are	 that	 getting	 here	 today	 brought	 up	 some
uncomfortable	thoughts	and	feelings	for	you.	And	yet	…	here	you
are.	(
Pause	 10	 seconds.
)	And	recognize	that	right	now,	in	this
moment,	you	are	taking	action.	You	are	sitting	here	in	a	chair,	doing
an	exercise	that	probably	seems	a	bit	odd	or	unusual…	and	you
probably	have	all	sorts	of	thoughts	whizzing	through	your	head…
and	all	sorts	of	feelings	passing	through	your	body.	(
Pause	 5
seconds.
)	And	there	are	all	sorts	of	things	you	could	be	doing	right
that	are	much	more	fun	than	this,	and	yet	here	you	are,	taking	action
to	improve	and	enrich	your	life.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)
SECTION	5
Therapist:
	Now	for	the	next	few	breaths,	I’d	like	you	to	focus	on	emptying
out	your	lungs:	push	all	the	air	out	of	them	until	there’s	no	more
left,	and	then	allow	them	to	gently	fill,	all	by	themselves.	(
Pause	5
seconds.
)	Really	notice	the	breath—notice	it	flowing	in	and	out.
(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	Observe	it	as	if	you’re	a	curious	scientist	who
has	never	encountered	breathing	before.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	Notice
how	once	the	lungs	are	empty,	they	automatically	refill,	all	by
themselves.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	You	can	take	a	deep	breath	in	if	you
want	to,	but	notice	how	there’s	really	no	need	to:	the	breath	just
happens	by	itself.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	And	I	invite	you	now	to
undertake	a	challenge:	for	the	next	couple	of	minutes,	keep	your
attention	on	your	breath,	observing	it	as	it	flows	in	and	out.	(
Pause
10	seconds.
)
SECTION	6
Therapist:
	You	will	find	this	hard,	because	your	mind	is	a	masterful
storyteller.	It	will	tell	you	all	sorts	of	interesting	stories	to	grab	your
attention	and	pull	you	away	from	what	you’re	doing.	(
Pause	5
seconds.
)	See	if	you	can	let	those	thoughts	come	and	go,	as	if	they
are	merely	passing	cars—just	cars	driving	past,	outside	your	house
—and	keep	your	attention	on	the	breath.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	Notice
your	breath	flowing	in	and	out.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	Notice	your
abdomen,	rising	and	falling.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	Notice	the	rise	and
fall	of	your	chest.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	Let	your	mind	chatter	away
as	if	it’s	just	a	radio	playing	in	the	background.	Don’t	try	to	turn	the
radio	off;	it’s	impossible—not	even	Zen	masters	can	do	that.	Just	let
it	play	on	in	the	background,	and	keep	your	attention	on	the	breath.
(
Pause	10	seconds.
)From	time	to	time,	your	mind	will	succeed	in
distracting	you:	it	will	hook	you	in	with	a	good	story,	and	you’ll
lose	track	of	your	breathing.	This	is	normal	and	natural,	and	it	will
happen	repeatedly.	The	moment	you	realize	this	has	happened,	take
a	moment	to	note	what	hooked	you,	and	then	gently	refocus	on	your
breathing.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)Again	and	again	and	again,	you	will
drift	off	into	your	thoughts.	This	is	normal	and	natural.	It	happens
to	everyone.	As	soon	as	you	realize	it,	gently	acknowledge	it	and
refocus	on	your	breath.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)
SECTION	7
Therapist:
	As	this	exercise	continues,	the	feelings	and	sensations	in	your
body	will	change.	There	may	be	pleasant	feelings	showing	up—
such	 as	 relaxation,	 calm,	 peacefulness—and	 there	 may	 be
unpleasant	 ones—such	 as	 boredom,	 frustration,	 anxiety,	 or
backache.	See	if	you	can	allow	those	feelings	to	be	exactly	as	they
are	in	this	moment.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	Don’t	try	to	control	your
feelings,	just	let	them	be	as	they	are—regardless	of	whether	they
are	pleasant	or	unpleasant—and	keep	your	attention	on	your
breathing.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	Again	and	again,	you’ll	drift	off	into
your	thoughts.	As	soon	as	you	realize	it,	acknowledge	it	and	refocus
on	your	breath.	
(Pause	 10	 seconds.
)	This	is	
not
	a	relaxation
technique.	You	are	not	trying	to	relax.	The	aim	is	to	let	your
feelings	be	as	they	are,	to	feel	whatever	you	feel	without	a	struggle.
So	if	you’re	noticing	a	difficult	feeling,	then	silently	say	to	yourself,
Here’s	 a	 feeling	 of	 frustration
	or	
Here’s	 a	 feeling	 of	 anxiety
	or
Here’s	a	feeling	of	boredom.
	Acknowledge	it’s	there,	and	keep	your
attention	on	the	breath.	(
Pause	20	seconds.
)
SECTION	8
Therapist:
	So	life	is	like	a	stage	show.	And	on	that	stage	are	all	your	thoughts
and	all	your	feelings,	and	everything	that	you	can	see,	hear,	touch,
taste,	and	smell.	In	this	exercise,	you	dimmed	the	lights	on	the	stage
and	you	focused	a	spotlight	on	your	breathing.	And	now	it’s	time	to
bring	up	the	rest	of	the	lights.	This	breathing	is	happening	inside	a
body,	so	now	bring	up	the	lights	on	your	body:	sit	up	in	the	chair,
and	notice	your	arms	and	legs,	head,	neck,	chest,	and	abdomen.
(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	And	your	body	is	inside	a	room,	so	now	bring
up	the	lights	on	the	room	around	you.	Look	around,	and	notice	what
you	can	see	and	hear,	and	smell	and	taste	and	touch.	(
Pause	10
seconds.
)	And	notice	what	you’re	feeling.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	And
notice	what	you’re	thinking.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	So	there’s	a	part	of
you	in	there	that	can	notice	everything:	whatever	you	see,	hear,
touch,	taste,	smell,	think,	feel,	or	do	in	any	moment.	And	that
basically	brings	the	exercise	to	an	end.	So	let’s	take	a	good	stretch,
and	then	we	can	talk	about	it.
Pulling	It	All	Apart
We	will	now	analyze	the	Hexaflexercise,	section	by	section.	Please	go	back
and	reread	each	section	of	the	exercise	out	loud	before	reading	the
explanation	below.
SECTION	1:	BE	HERE	NOW
Section	1	covers	contact	with	the	present	moment.	This	section	consists	of
the	basic	instruction	at	the	core	of	all	mindfulness	exercises:	“notice	X.”	
“
X”
can	be	anything	that	is	here,	right	now,	in	this	moment.	It	could	be	your
breathing,	the	sounds	in	the	room,	the	tension	in	your	body,	the	thoughts	in
your	head,	the	taste	in	your	mouth,	the	view	from	the	window,	and	so	on.
Common	alternatives	to	the	word	“notice”	include	“pay	attention	to,”	“bring
your	awareness	to,”	“focus	on,”	or	“observe.”Note	that	the	pauses	at	this	point
are	brief—only	five	seconds.	Later	on	in	the	exercise,	they	increase.	You	can
easily	adapt	this	section	into	a	brief	mindfulness	exercise,	suitable	for	any
session	as	a	grounding	or	centering	technique.
SECTION	2:	PURE	AWARENESS
Section	2	covers	self-as-context.	Here	we	refer	to	it	as	the	“observing	self”:
the	part	of	you	that	does	all	the	noticing.	I	originally	came	up	with	the	Stage
Show	Metaphor	specifically	to	facilitate	self-as-context,	but	as	we’ll	see	later,
you	can	use	it	to	enhance	any	other	mindfulness	process:	acceptance,
defusion,	or	contact	with	the	present	moment.
Before	you	take	clients	through	this	section,	it’s	a	good	idea	to	give	a	brief
explanation	about	the	two	parts	of	the	mind—the	thinking	self	and	the
observing	self—so	the	term	“observing	self”	won’t	take	them	by	surprise.
The	following	transcript	exemplifies	this.
THE	THINKING	SELF	AND	THE	OBSERVING	SELF
Therapist:
	So	one	of	the	things	that’s	important	in	our	work	here	is	to
recognize	that	there	are	two	very	distinct	parts	of	the	mind.	There’s
the	part	we’re	all	very	familiar	with—the	part	that	thinks,	imagines,
remembers,	analyzes,	plans,	fantasizes,	and	so	on.	Let’s	call	that	the
“thinking	self.”	But	there’s	another	part	of	the	mind	that	virtually
never	gets	talked	about—we	don’t	even	have	a	word	for	it	in
common	everyday	language.	It’s	a	part	of	your	mind	that	doesn’t
think,	can’t	think—it	just	notices.	It	notices	whatever	you’re
thinking	and	feeling	and	doing	and	seeing	and	hearing	and	tasting
and	so	on.	The	closest	words	we	have	to	it	in	everyday	language	are
“awareness,”	“attention,”	or	“focus.”	In	ACT,	we	call	it	the
“observing	self”	because	it	doesn’t	think—it	merely	observes.	To
give	you	an	example,	have	you	ever	encountered	a	magnificent
sunset	and	for	a	moment,	your	thinking	self	goes	quiet.	There	are	no
thoughts—you’re	just	silently	observing	this	amazing	sunset.	That’s
your	observing	self	in	action—silently	noticing.	But	the	silence
doesn’t	last	long.	Within	seconds,	the	thinking	self	pipes	up:	“Oh,
look	at	all	those	lovely	colors.	I	wish	I	had	my	camera.	This
reminds	me	of	that	trip	to	Hawaii.”	And	as	you	get	more	and	more
caught	up	in	your	thoughts,	you	start	to	disconnect	from	the	sunset.
SECTION	3:	KNOW	WHAT	MATTERS
Section	3	covers	values:	what	matters	enough	to	this	client	that	he	has
bothered	to	come	and	see	you?	(Even	if	he	was	mandated	by	a	court	of	law
under	threat	of	going	to	prison,	he	still	didn’t	have	to	come:	he	came	because
he	valued	being	free.)	Ideally	we	individualize	this	section	to	specifically
mention	any	core	values	already	identified—for	example,	“Is	it	about	being	a
better	mother	to	your	kids?”
SECTION	4:	DO	WHAT	IT	TAKES
Section	4	covers	committed	action:	taking	the	action	necessary	to	live	by
your	values	even	when	it’s	difficult	and	painful.	Here	we	acknowledge	and
validate	that	the	client	has	committed	to	action	even	though	it	has	brought	up
discomfort.	This	is	a	message	we’ll	reinforce	throughout	therapy:	the	actions
we	take	to	make	our	lives	meaningful	often	give	rise	to	pain.	At	times,	we’ll
feel	good	as	a	result	of	them,	and	at	other	times,	we	won’t.	The	question	life
repeatedly	asks	each	one	of	us	is	this:	“Am	I	willing	to	make	room	for	these
feelings	in	order	to	do	what	matters	to	me?”
SECTION	5:	BE	HERE	NOW	(AGAIN!)
Here	we’re	back	to	the	basic	mindfulness	instruction	of	“notice	X.”	In	this
case,	“X”	is	the	sensations	of	breathing.	Sections	5	and	6	taken	together
constitute	a	quick	and	simple	mindful	breathing	exercise	that	you	can	use	in
any	session.
SECTION	6:	WATCH	YOUR	THINKING
Section	6	covers	defusion:	putting	some	distance	between	you	and	your
thoughts	so	you	can	let	them	come	and	go	without	getting	entangled	in	them.
We’re	using	three	different	metaphors	here	to	facilitate	defusion:	(1)	the
notion	of	the	mind	as	a	storyteller	and	thoughts	as	stories;	(2)	treating	your
thoughts	like	passing	cars;	and	(3)	treating	your	mind	as	if	it’s	a	radio	playing
in	the	background.	Any	and	all	of	these	metaphors	can	be	usefully	added	into
any	mindfulness	exercise	you	do.
We	also	emphasize	over	and	over	that	it’s	“normal	and	natural”	to
repeatedly	drift	off	into	your	thoughts	(that	is,	to	fuse	with	them).	This	is
important	because	many	clients	(like	many	therapists)	have	a	strong
perfectionist	streak,	and	they’ll	be	disappointed	if	they	expect	to	maintain
total	focus.	Indeed,	many	clients	(and	therapists)	are	shocked	at	just	how	hard
it	is	to	stay	focused	for	more	than	a	few	seconds.
SECTION	7:	OPEN	UP
Section	7	covers	acceptance:	opening	up	to	and	making	room	for	painful
private	experiences.	(Note:	Acceptance	is	short	for	“experiential	acceptance,”
the	opposite	of	experiential	avoidance.)	Here	we	introduce	the	notion	of
allowing	your	feelings	and	sensations	to	be	as	they	are	without	trying	to
change	them	or	get	rid	of	them.	When	you	silently	name	and	acknowledge	a
painful	feeling,	this	often	facilitates	acceptance,	so	it’s	a	useful	little	technique
to	slip	into	this	section.	And	you	can	easily	assign	it	as	a	simple	technique	to
practice	in	between	sessions.
You’ll	notice	too	that	we	emphasize	that	this	is	not	a	relaxation	technique.
This	is	important	because	many	clients	will	find	this	experience	calming,	and
they’ll	often	mistake	relaxation	as	the	purpose	of	the	exercise	when	in	fact	it’s
merely	a	beneficial	by-product.
SECTION	8:	WRAPPING	IT	UP
Section	8	wraps	up	the	exercise	with	the	Stage	Show	Metaphor	to	facilitate
contact	with	the	present	moment	and	briefly	revisit	self-as-context.
Practice,	Practice	Practice
Now	before	reading	on,	I	strongly	encourage	you	to	go	back	and	read
through	every	transcript	in	this	chapter—but	this	time,	read	the	words	
out
loud
,	as	if	you’re	actually	speaking	to	a	client.	This	is	especially	important	for
the	Hexaflexercise.	I	ask	you	to	do	this	because	only	through	practice	will
you	master	this	model.	So	why	wait	until	you’re	working	with	your	clients?
Start	right	now!
Chapter	5.	Opening	ACT
The	First	Session
Therapists	come	to	ACT	from	a	vast	array	of	backgrounds	and	therefore	often
have	widely	differing	ideas	about	the	first	session.	For	example,	many
therapists	like	to	do	an	“intake	session”	or	“pretreatment	session”	before	the
first	session	of	“active”	therapy.	This	could	involve	some	or	all	of	the
following:	taking	a	detailed	history,	filling	in	assessment	forms,	conducting
specialized	assessments	such	as	a	mental	status	examination,	obtaining
informed	consent,	and/or	agreeing	to	a	therapeutic	contract.
Some	ACT	textbooks	actively	recommend	a	pretreatment	session,	and
others	implicitly	assume	it.	However,	practitioners	with	a	background	in	brief
therapy	often	prefer	
not
	to	do	a	pretreatment	session;	instead	they	actively
jump	into	therapy	on	the	very	first	encounter.	There	are	pros	and	cons	to	both
approaches,	and	this	book	isn’t	the	place	to	discuss	them;	presumably	you
already	have	your	own	approach,	and	if	it’s	working,	there’s	no	need	for	you
to	change	it.	For	the	sake	of	clarity,	throughout	this	book	I	treat	session	1	as
the	very	first	client-therapist	encounter	(that	is,	there’s	no	pretreatment
session).	If	you	don’t	work	this	way,	just	add	a	pretreatment	session	or
“stretch	out”	the	first	session	into	two.
Ideally	in	session	1,	we	aim	to
establish	rapport;
take	a	history;
obtain	informed	consent;
agree	on	initial	treatment	goals;	and
agree	on	the	number	of	sessions.
In	addition,	if	time	allows,	we	may	also	be	able	to
do	a	brief	experiential	exercise,	and
give	some	simple	“homework.”
With	high-functioning	clients	or	those	who	have	a	very	specific	problem,
you	can	often	accomplish	all	of	the	above	in	one	session.	However,	for	low-
functioning	clients	or	those	with	multiple	problems	and	complex	histories,
this	could	easily	spill	over	into	two	sessions,	especially	if	you	want	your
client	to	fill	in	a	battery	of	assessment	forms.
Also	keep	in	mind,	if	your	client	has	a	long	history	of	trauma	or	repeated
experiences	of	abuse	and	betrayal	in	intimate	relationships,	there	may	well	be
significant	trust	issues.	If	so,	you	may	want	to	spend	two	or	three	sessions
primarily	taking	a	history	and	building	rapport—going	slowly	and	taking	your
time	in	order	to	gradually	establish	a	trusting	relationship.
Establish	Rapport
All	models	of	therapy	place	importance	on	the	therapeutic	relationship;	in
ACT,	this	is	especially	so.	Most	ACT	textbooks	ask	readers	to	apply	ACT	to
themselves.	Why?	Because	ACT	is	far	more	effective	when	we,	the
practitioners,	actually	embody	it	in	the	therapy	room.	When	we’re	fully
present	with	our	clients,	open	to	whatever	emotional	content	arises,	defused
from	our	own	judgments,	and	in	touch	with	our	core	values	around
connection,	compassion,	and	contribution,	then	we’ll	naturally	facilitate	a
warm,	resonant,	open,	and	authentic	relationship.	Indeed,	when	we	give	our
full	attention	to	another	human	being	with	openness,	compassion,	and
curiosity—that	in	itself	is	therapeutic.
The	ACT	stance	is	that	we	as	therapists	are	in	the	same	boat	as	our	clients:
we	both	readily	get	entangled	in	our	minds,	lose	touch	with	the	present,	and
engage	in	futile	battles	with	our	own	thoughts	and	feelings;	repeatedly	lose
touch	with	our	core	values	and	act	in	self-defeating	ways;	and	we	both	will
encounter	many	similar	struggles	in	our	lives,	including	disappointment,
rejection,	failure,	betrayal,	loss,	loneliness,	sickness,	injury,	grief,	resentment,
anxiety,	insecurity,	and	death.	This	is	all	part	of	the	human	experience.	So
given	that	client	and	therapist	are	fellow	travelers	on	the	same	human	journey,
we	can	both	learn	a	lot	from	each	other.
In	ACT,	a	compassionate,	open,	and	respectful	therapeutic	relationship	is	of
utmost	importance.	Without	it,	many	of	our	tools,	techniques,	strategies,	and
interventions	will	fail,	backfire,	or	come	across	as	insensitive	or	invalidating.
In	particular,	we	need	to	be	alert	for	any	trace	of	“one-upmanship”	or
“superiority”	in	ourselves;	this	would	be	inconsistent	with	the	ACT	stance
that	the	therapist	and	client	are	equals.	The	Two	Mountains	Metaphor	(Hayes,
Strosahl,	&	Wilson,	1999)	effectively	conveys	this	stance,	and	I	generally
share	this	with	the	client	about	half-way	through	the	first	session.
THE	TWO	MOUNTAINS	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	You	know,	a	lot	of	people	come	to	therapy	believing	that	the
therapist	is	some	sort	of	enlightened	being,	that	he’s	resolved	all	his
issues,	he’s	got	it	all	together—but	actually,	that’s	not	the	way	it	is.
It’s	more	like	you’re	climbing	your	mountain	over	there,	and	I’m
climbing	my	mountain	over	here.	And	from	where	I	am	on	my
mountain,	I	can	see	things	on	your	mountain	that	you	can’t	see—
like	there’s	an	avalanche	about	to	happen,	or	there’s	an	alternative
pathway	you	could	take,	or	you’re	not	using	your	pickax	effectively.
But	I’d	hate	for	you	to	think	that	I’ve	reached	the	top	of	my
mountain,	and	I’m	sitting	back,	taking	it	easy.	Fact	is,	I’m	still
climbing,	still	making	mistakes,	and	still	learning	from	them.	And
basically,	we’re	all	the	same.	We’re	all	climbing	our	mountain	until
the	day	we	die.	But	here’s	the	thing:	you	can	get	better	and	better	at
climbing,	and	better	and	better	at	learning	to	appreciate	the	journey.
And	that’s	what	the	work	we	do	here	is	all	about.
Take	a	History
Gathering	a	client	history	can	take	anything	from	a	few	minutes	to	an	hour,
depending	upon	the	situation.	For	example,	the	excellent	textbook	
ACT	in
Practice
	(Bach	&	Moran,	2008)	recommends	an	entire	session	to	take	a
detailed	history	and	carefully	conceptualize	your	client’s	issues.	On	the	other
hand,	ACT	is	increasingly	used	in	primary	care	settings	where	the	therapist
may	have	only	two	or	three	sessions	of	fifteen	to	thirty	minutes	each,	and	this
obviously	necessitates	a	brief	history	(Robinson,	2008).
So	once	again,	the	message	is	this:	adapt	ACT	to	your	own	way	of
working,	your	own	style,	and	your	own	clientele.	And	as	part	of	taking	the
history,	you	can	use	whatever	standardized	assessment	tools	you	like.	A	word
of	caution	though:	many	popular	assessment	tools	measure	changes	in	the
number	or	severity	of	symptoms	(that	is,	changes	in	symptom	
form
)	but	fail	to
measure	changes	in	the	psychological	impact	or	influence	of	symptoms	(that
is,	changes	in	symptom	
function
).	However,	in	ACT,	our	interest	is	in
changing	symptom	
function
	rather	than	
form.
	So	while	there’s	no	absolute
necessity	for	you	to	use	ACT-specific	assessment	tools,	such	as	the	AAQ
(Acceptance	and	Action	Questionnaire),	they	can	be	very	helpful.	I	won’t
discuss	such	tools	in	this	book,	but	you	can	download	a	wide	variety	at
www.contextualpsychology.org/act-specific_measures.
Before	we	move	on	to	the	nuts	and	bolts	of	history	taking,	take	a	look	at
figure	5.1	below.	This	figure	summarizes	the	essence	of	most	clinical	issues
from	an	ACT	perspective.
This	figure	reminds	us	that	the	outcome	we	want	from	ACT	is	mindful,
valued	living.	In	other	words,	we	want	to	reduce	struggle	and	suffering	(via
defusion	and	acceptance)	and	create	a	rich,	full,	and	meaningful	life	(via
mindful,	values-guided	action).	When	we	take	a	history,	our	clients	generally
find	it	far	easier	to	describe	their	suffering	and	their	struggles	than	to	describe
what	a	rich,	full,	and	meaningful	life	would	look	like.	However,	we	need	to
know	both	sets	of	information.	Fortunately	there	are	all	sorts	of	tools	and
techniques	to	help	people	clarify	their	values,	as	we	shall	see	later.
CASE	CONCEPTUALIZATION:	TWO	KEY	QUESTIONS
With	regard	to	any	client’s	problem,	we	want	to	find	the	answers	to	two
key	questions:
1
.	
What	valued	direction	does	the	client	want	to	move	in?
2
.	
What	stands	in	the	client’s	way?
These	two	questions	allow	us	to	quickly	conceptualize	any	issue	from	an
ACT	perspective.	Let’s	look	at	them	in	more	detail.
What	valued	direction	does	the	client	want	to	move	in?	Here	we	seek	to
clarify	values:	How	does	the	client	want	to	grow	and	develop?	What	personal
strengths	or	qualities	does	he	want	to	cultivate?	How	does	she	want	to
behave?	How	does	he	want	to	treat	himself?	What	sorts	of	relationships	does
she	want	to	build?	How	does	he	want	to	treat	others	in	those	relationships?
What	does	she	want	to	stand	for	in	life?	What	does	he	want	to	stand	for	in	the
face	of	this	crisis	or	challenging	situation?	What	domains	of	life	are	most
important	to	her?	What	values-congruent	goals	does	he	currently	have?
Once	we	can	answer	the	question	“What	valued	direction	does	the	client
want	to	move	in?”	we	can	use	that	knowledge	to	set	valued	goals	and	to
guide,	inspire,	and	sustain	ongoing	valued	action.	And	if	we	
can’t
	answer	this
question,	that	tells	us	we’ll	need	to	do	some	values-clarification	work.
What	stands	in	the	client’s	way?	This	question	is	about	the	three	main	barriers
to	mindful,	valued	living:	fusion,	avoidance,	and	unworkable	action.	We	can
break	it	down	into	three	smaller	questions:
1
.	
What	unhelpful	thoughts	is	the	client	fusing	with?
2
.	
What	private	experiences—thoughts,	feelings,	memories,
urges,	and	so	on—is	the	client	trying	to	avoid	or	get	rid	of?
3
.	
What	is	the	client	doing	that	restricts	or	worsens	her	life	in
the	long	run?
Put	more	simply:
What	is	the	client	fused	with?
What	private	experiences	is	he	avoiding?
What	unworkable	action	is	she	taking?
These	three	questions	reveal	the	essence	of	any	clinical	problem:	fusion,
experiential	 avoidance,	 and	 unworkable	 action.	 (A	 quick	 reminder:
“unworkable”	means	it	doesn’t	work	to	make	life	rich,	full,	and	meaningful	in
the	long	run;	it	interferes	with	vital,	valued	living.	When	action	is	strongly
influenced	by	fusion	and	avoidance,	it’s	likely	to	be	unworkable.)
A	BASIC	GUIDE	TO	TAKING	A	HISTORY
For	many	of	us,	taking	a	history	is	not	a	neat,	orderly,	linear	process	(and
it’s	important	to	remember,	we	don’t	need	to	gather	all	our	information	in	one
session;	we	can	always	get	more	history	later,	as	needed).	Personally,	to	make
this	process	quicker	and	easier,	I	ask	my	clients	to	fill	out	a	couple	of
worksheets	before	the	first	session.	(I	either	mail	or	e-mail	the	forms	out,	or
ask	the	client	to	arrive	twenty	minutes	early	and	complete	them	in	the	waiting
room.)	I	give	them	Dissecting	the	Problem,	and	either	the	Bull’s	Eye	or	the
Life	Compass.	You’ll	find	these	worksheets	at	the	end	of	the	chapter.	Please
take	a	quick	look	at	them	now,	then	come	back	to	this	point.	If	we	want	to
broadly	assess	values	in	different	domains	of	life,	the	quickest	and	easiest
form	is	the	Bull’s	Eye,	which	divides	life	into	four	domains:	work/education,
health/personal	growth,	relationships,	and	leisure.	More	complex	but	still	very
user-friendly	is	the	Life	Compass,	which	divides	life	into	ten	domains.	You
might	like	to	experiment	with	both	and	see	which	works	best	in	your	practice.
I	personally	use	the	Bull’s	Eye	initially	with	lower-functioning	clients,	and	the
Life	Compass	initially	with	higher-functioning	clients.	The	Dissecting	the
Problem	worksheet	breaks	down	the	client’s	“struggle	and	suffering”	into	its
key	components:	fusion,	avoidance,	and	unworkable	action.	I	ask	my	clients
to	complete	these	worksheets	to	the	best	of	their	ability	and	bring	them	along
to	the	first	session.	I	explain	that	even	if	they	only	write	a	few	words,	that’s	a
good	start.	Alternatively,	you	can	fill	these	worksheets	in	during	the	session
or	give	them	as	“homework”	to	complete	after	the	session.
Now	let’s	go	on	to	the	history	itself.	What	follows	is	a	very	basic	guide	to
taking	a	history.	Each	of	the	numbered	sections	can	be	briefly	covered	in	a
few	minutes	or	explored	in	depth	over	a	much	longer	time	frame,	depending
on	your	needs.	There’s	no	need	to	ask	all	the	questions	in	each	section:	they
are	merely	guides.	(Note:	The	term	“thoughts	and	feelings”	is	short	for
“thoughts,	memories,	images,	emotions,	sensations,	and	urges.”)	You	can
download	 a	 simplified	 version	 of	 this	 history	 guide	 from
www.actmadesimple.com
.	Read	through	the	guide	now,	and	then	we’ll
explore	it	in	more	detail.
A	FEW	NOTES	ON	TAKING	A	HISTORY
Notes	on	section	1:	The	Presenting	Complaint	In	this	section,	you	may	also
include	a	question	such	as	this:	what	do	you	hope	to	get	from	therapy?	The
answer	will	usually	tell	you	a	lot	about	the	client’s	emotional	control	agenda.
She’s	likely	to	tell	you	how	she	wants	to	feel	(happy,	more	confident,	more
self-esteem,	and	so	on)	or	what	feelings	he	wants	to	get	rid	of	(anxiety,
depression,	bad	memories,	and	so	on).
The	questions	in	1b	are	very	useful:	How	does	this	issue	interfere	with	your
life?	What	does	it	stop	you	from	doing	or	being?	Clients’	answers	usually	fall
into	three	categories;	the	issue	is	problematic	because:
1
.	
“I	can’t	stand	feeling	this	way.”
	This	answer	points	to	the
experiential	avoidance	agenda.	You	may	follow	up	by
asking	which	thoughts/feelings/memories	and	so	on	are
hardest	to	feel,	or	most	unwanted,	or	have	the	greatest
impact.
2
.	
“I	just	want	to	be	normal.”
	This	answer	points	to	fusion
with	the	conceptualized	self.	The	client	is	likely	fused	with
“I	am	abnormal/weird/weak	[or	others].”	You	may	follow	up
by	asking,	“So	what	does	your	mind	say	this	problem	means
about	you?”
3
.	
“It	stops	me	from	being	or	doing	X,	Y,	Z.”
	This	answer	often
points	to	values	and	goals.	You	may	follow	up	by	asking	for
more	information	about	X,	Y,	Z.
Notes	on	section	2:	Initial	Values	Assessment	I’ve	included	lots	of	questions
in	this	section	to	give	you	a	variety	of	options	for	eliciting	values.	You
wouldn’t	ask	all	of	these	questions	of	one	client;	you	can	pick	and	choose
which	are	most	relevant	or	likely	to	be	useful	for	a	given	client.	(If	you	get
answers	like	“I	don’t	know”	to	every	single	question	you	ask,	and	your	client
is	unwilling	or	unable	to	fill	in	the	Bull’s	Eye	or	Life	Compass	worksheets,
that’s	useful	information;	it	tells	you	you’re	almost	certainly	dealing	with	a
client	at	the	upper	end	of	the	experiential	avoidance	spectrum,	and	you’ll
probably	need	to	develop	defusion	and	acceptance	skills	before	you	can	get	to
values	in	depth.)	The	Bull’s	Eye	is	a	simpler	assessment	tool	than	the	Life
Compass	and	is	a	better	initial	choice	if	you	suspect	your	client	is	highly
experientially	avoidant.
Notes	on	section	3:	The	Current	Life	Context,	Family	History,	Social	History,
Other	Assessment	Tools	Current	life	context	includes	health,	medications,
work,	finances,	relationships,	family,	culture,	and	so	on.	Also	look	for	factors
that	reinforce	the	problem—for	example,	getting	attention,	manipulating
others,	 obtaining	 disability	 benefits,	 avoiding	 fears	 of
rejection/intimacy/failure,	adhering	to	cultural	beliefs,	and	so	on.	Identify
these	factors	as	soon	as	possible	as	they	will	likely	provide	barriers	to	moving
forward.	Keep	your	eyes	and	ears	open	for	“secondary	gains.”	For	example,	if
Dad	only	helps	out	with	their	three	young	kids	when	Mom	is	in	bed	feeling
“too	depressed	to	do	anything,”	then	this	secondary	gain	could	act	as	a	barrier
to	Mom’s	recovery.
Family	history	and	social	history	also	includes	significant	relationships
from	the	past	and	present,	and	how	the	client	perceives	he	has	been	impacted
by	this	history.	Here	we’re	looking	at	the	broad	context	of	the	client’s	life	as	it
is	today,	as	well	as	key	events	from	the	past	that	have	shaped	the	client’s
current	behavior	and	contributed	to	the	problematic	thoughts,	feelings,
memories,	and	so	on	that	are	showing	up	in	her	life	today.	In	particular,	note
social	and	financial	factors	playing	a	role	in	the	client’s	current	problems.
Personally	I	tend	to	zip	through	this	quite	rapidly	with	most	clients,
knowing	I	can	gather	more	information	whenever	I	need	to.	However,	as	with
everything	in	ACT,	modify	this	to	your	own	preferences	and	needs.	Thus,	if
you	want	to	conceptualize	in	depth	how	current	behavior	has	been	shaped	by
past	experience,	then	you’ll	obviously	take	much	longer	to	explore	the	client’s
past	history.
Notes	on	section	4:	Psychological	Inflexibility	This	section	is	pretty	much
self-explanatory:	we	are	on	the	lookout	for	core	pathological	processes	that
we’ll	later	target	with	mindfulness	and	valued	action.
Notes	on	section	5:	Motivational	Factors	Hopefully	you	will	already	have
gathered	a	lot	of	this	information	via	sections	1,	2,	and	3.	Of	course,	with
some	clients	you’ll	initially	have	little	or	no	helpful	responses	to	questions
about	values	and	goals.	But	that’s	okay:	it	just	tells	you	this	client	is	likely	to
need	work	around	defusion	and	acceptance	before	he	can	readily	do	values
work.	The	very	fact	that	such	clients	have	come	to	therapy	points	in	the
direction	of	values.	For	example,	in	an	extreme	case	such	as	a	client	mandated
by	the	court	to	either	attend	therapy	or	go	to	prison,	the	very	fact	that	she	has
come	to	see	you	points	to	values	around	freedom.	(You	can	also	use	the
FEAR	acronym	to	identify	barriers	to	change:	see	chapter	12.)
Notes	on	section	6:	Psychological	Flexibility	and	Client	Strengths	Assess
areas	of	life	in	which	the	client	already	exhibits	psychological	flexibility
through	defusion,	acceptance,	a	sense	of	self-as-context,	contacting	the
present	moment,	connection	with	values,	and	taking	committed	action.	This	is
a	vitally	important	part	of	the	history.	If	we	imagine	psychological	flexibility
as	a	scale	of	0	to	100,	presumably	there	would	be	no	such	thing	as	a	client
who	rated	zero.	So	let’s	find	what	elements	of	psychological	flexibility	he	is
already	using,	in	what	contexts,	with	what	results.	You	may	want	to	ask	direct
questions,	such	as	these:
Do	you	ever	find	you’re	able	to	detach	from	your	thoughts
or	not	take	them	so	seriously?	Do	you	ever	find	your	mind
starts	criticizing	you,	but	you	don’t	buy	into	it?
Do	you	ever	find	you	can	tolerate	your	feelings	even	though
they’re	very	unpleasant?
Do	you	ever	get	a	sense	of	being	able	to	step	back	and
observe	painful	thoughts	and	feelings	rather	than	struggling
with	them?
Do	 you	 have	 any	 spiritual,	 religious,	 or	 meditative
practices?	(You	might	specifically	inquire	about	yoga,	tai
chi,	martial	arts,	meditation,	prayer,	and	so	on.)
When	do	you	feel	connected	with	life,	yourself,	or	the
world?	When	do	you	get	a	sense	of	meaning,	purpose,
vitality?	Doing	what	sorts	of	activities?	Where?	When?
With	whom?	When	do	you	get	a	sense	that	you’re	making
the	 most	 of	 your	 life,	 or	 contributing	 to	 something
important,	or	connecting	with	something	that	“pulls	you	out
of	yourself”?
When	do	you	push	on	and	do	what	you	need	to	do
regardless	of	how	you’re	feeling?
When	are	you	fully	present—that	is,	conscious,	aware,	and
engaged	in	what	you’re	doing	instead	of	being	“off	in	your
head”?	Doing	what	sorts	of	activities?	With	whom?	Where?
And	when?
Obtain	Informed	Consent
Ideally	informed	consent	includes	some	discussion	of
the	ACT	model:	what	ACT	is	and	what	it	involves;
the	importance	of	experiential	exercises	and	practicing
skills;	and
possible	adverse	experiences.
To	move	from	taking	a	history	to	informed	consent,	you	could	say
something	like,	“There’s	a	lot	more	I	could	ask	you	about	all	this,	but	you’ve
given	me	enough	for	us	to	make	a	start.	What	I’d	like	to	do	at	this	point	is	tell
you	a	bit	about	the	sort	of	therapy	I	do,	what	it	involves,	and	how	long	it
takes,	and	basically	make	sure	it’s	the	right	approach	for	you.	Is	that	okay?”
THE	ACT	MODEL:	WHAT	ACT	IS	AND	WHAT	IT	INVOLVES
Next	you	can	provide	a	brief	summary	of	the	ACT	approach,	as	detailed
below.	(I	suggest	you	take	this	“spiel,”	rewrite	it	or	modify	it	into	your	own
words,	and	then	practice	it	until	it	rolls	off	the	tip	of	your	tongue	so	that	you
can	quickly	summarize	ACT	to	colleagues,	allied	health	professionals,	clients,
friends,	relatives,	and	people	you	meet	at	dinner	parties.)
Therapist:
	Do	you	know	anything	at	all	about	the	model	I	work	with?
Client:
	No.
Therapist:
	Well,	it’s	a	scientifically	based	therapy	that	has	a	rather	unusual
name.	It’s	called	acceptance	and	commitment	therapy—or	ACT,	for
short.	And	it	gets	its	name	from	one	of	its	core	messages:	accept
what’s	out	of	your	personal	control	and	commit	to	taking	action	that
improves	your	life.	And	the	aim	of	ACT	is	basically	very	simple:	to
help	you	create	a	rich,	full,	and	meaningful	life	while	effectively
handling	the	pain	and	stress	that	goes	with	it.	And	ACT	achieves
this	in	two	main	ways.	First,	it	helps	you	develop	psychological
skills	to	
deal	 with	 your	 painful	 thoughts	 and	 feelings	 more
effectively,	in	 such	a	 way	that	 they	have	 much	less	 impact	and
influence	 over	 you
.	We	call	these	“mindfulness	skills.”	Second,
ACT	helps	you	to	clarify	what	is	truly	important	and	meaningful	to
you—what	we	call	your	“values”—and	then	use	that	knowledge	to
guide,	inspire,	and	motivate	you	when	making	changes	in	your	life.
Notice	the	italicized	phrase:	
deal	with	your	painful	thoughts	and	feelings
effectively,	in	such	a	way	that	they	have	much	less	impact	and	influence	over
you.
	This	wording	is	very	important.	ACT	is	not	about	trying	to	reduce,	avoid,
eliminate,	or	control	these	thoughts	and	feelings—it’s	about	reducing	their
impact	and	influence	over	behavior	(in	order	to	facilitate	valued	living).
Practical	Tip
	You	don’t	have	to	use	the	word	“mindfulness.”	Most
clients	 are	 fine	 with	 it,	 but	 some	 people	 associate	 mindfulness	 with
hypnosis,	religion,	or	the	New	Age	movement.	So	you	could	talk	instead
about	“psychological	skills”	or	“new	ways	to	handle	thoughts	and	feelings”;
and	 you	 could	 use	 alternative	 terms	 such	 as	 “noticing,”	 “observing,”
“opening	up,”	“centering,”	“being	present,”	“focusing,”	“paying	attention,”
“awareness,”	and	so	on.
THE	IMPORTANCE	OF	EXPERIENTIAL	EXERCISES	AND	PRACTICING	SKILLS
After	the	spiel	above,	you	could	say	something	like	this:
Therapist:
	As	I	just	mentioned,	ACT	is	a	scientifically	based	model.	It’s	been
proven	to	be	effective	with	a	wide	range	of	issues	from	depression,
anxiety,	and	work	stress	to	drug	addiction	and	schizophrenia.	And
it’s	a	very	active	model	of	therapy.	We	don’t	just	talk	in	these
sessions;	we	actually	practice	psychological	skills	so	you	can	learn
how	to	handle	all	those	difficult	thoughts	and	feelings	more
effectively.	And	like	any	skill,	the	more	you	practice,	the	better
you’ll	get.	So	what	we	do	during	these	sessions	will	be	useful,	but
what	really	makes	the	difference	is	practicing	these	new	skills	in
between	sessions.	After	all,	if	you	wanted	to	learn	the	guitar,	you
wouldn’t	expect	to	have	a	few	lessons	and	then	become	a	great
guitarist—you’d	expect	to	do	some	practice.
If	clients	want	more	detail	At	this	point,	some	clients	will	ask	for	more	detail
about	what’s	involved.	If	so,	you	could	say	something	like	the	following
(tailoring	your	response	to	specifically	address	the	client’s	issues):	“Well,
what	we	do	varies	enormously	from	session	to	session.	In	some	sessions,
we’ll	focus	on	how	you	can	let	go	of	painful	thoughts	or	memories	or	worries,
or	free	yourself	up	from	self-limiting	beliefs.	Sometimes	we’ll	look	at	new
ways	to	handle	strong	feelings	like	fear	or	anger	or	sadness	or	guilt.	At	times,
we’ll	focus	on	getting	in	touch	with	what’s	important	to	you,	setting	goals,	or
constructing	an	effective	plan	of	action.	It	varies	enormously,	depending	upon
what	the	issue	is,	and	how	you’re	going	along,	and	what	you’ve	found
helpful.”
A	small	number	of	clients	will	still	ask	you	for	more	information	at	this
point	about	what	sort	of	skills	they’ll	be	learning	or	what	exercises	they’ll	be
doing.	If	so,	you	could	answer,	“I	think	it’s	great	that	you’re	eager	to	know
more,	but	trying	to	describe	exactly	what	we	do	in	ACT	is	like	trying	to
describe	skiing	or	scuba	diving	or	horse	riding:	you	can	talk	about	those
things	until	the	cows	come	home,	but	you’ll	never	know	what	they’re	really
like	until	you	actually	start	doing	them.	In	the	same	way,	I	can’t	do	justice	to
ACT	in	words.	But	what	I’d	like	to	do	a	bit	later	is	take	you	through	a	short
exercise	to	give	you	a	taste	of	what’s	involved.	And	if	we	don’t	have	time
today,	then	we’ll	leave	it	for	next	session.	Would	that	be	okay?”
(Alternatively,	you	could	take	the	client	through	the	ACT	in	a	Nutshell
Metaphor	from	chapter	1.	However,	before	you	do	this,	there	are	several
things	you	need	to	consider.	First,	is	the	metaphor	appropriate	for	this	client	at
this	point	in	therapy?	I’m	wary	of	using	it	for	very	low-functioning	clients	or
those	that	I	suspect	are	extremely	experientially	avoidant	because	they	may
misinterpret	it,	criticize	it,	or	insist	it	won’t	work	for	them.	In	contrast,	high-
functioning	clients	typically	warm	to	it.	Second,	do	you	have	time	in	the
session?	You	should	allow	several	minutes	to	run	through	the	metaphor	and
also	ensure	you	have	at	least	another	five	minutes	to	address	any	questions	or
concerns.	And	last	but	not	least,	I	wouldn’t	advocate	the	use	of	this	metaphor
as	part	of	informed	consent	until	you	have	quite	a	bit	of	practice	at	ACT	and	a
sound	grasp	of	the	model	so	you	can	address	any	concerns	or	queries	that
arise	in	an	effective,	ACT-consistent	manner.)
If	the	client	is	doubtful	Suppose	your	client	says,	“I	don’t	think	this	will	work
for	me.”	Thoughts	like	this	are	perfectly	natural,	and	they’re	only	problematic
if	the	client	fuses	with	them.	So	here	you	have	a	perfect	opportunity	to
establish	a	context	of	acceptance	and	defusion.	For	example,	you	might	say,
“That’s	a	perfectly	natural	thought.	Many	people	feel	doubtful	at	first.	And
the	fact	is	there	is	no	known	treatment	that	is	guaranteed	to	work	for
everyone.	So	I	can’t	promise	that	this	
will
	work	for	you.	I	could	tell	you	it’s
worked	for	lots	of	other	people,	and	I	could	pull	out	all	the	published	studies
and	the	research	papers,	and	so	on,	but	that	still	wouldn’t	guarantee	it	will
work	for	you.	However,	here’s	something	I	can	guarantee:	if	we	stop	the
session	whenever	you	have	the	thought	
This	won’t	work
,	then	I	can	absolutely
guarantee	that	we	WON’T	get	anywhere.	So	even	though	you’re	having	the
thought	that	this	won’t	work,	are	you	willing	to	give	it	a	go	anyway?”
Notice	that	we’re	not	challenging	the	client’s	thought.	Rather	we’re
validating	it	as	natural	and	normal.	And	we’re	establishing	a	context	where
(a)	it’s	okay	for	the	client	to	have	that	thought	(acceptance),	and	(b)	the
thought	is	just	a	thought	and	doesn’t	control	the	client’s	actions	(defusion).
POSSIBLE	ADVERSE	EXPERIENCES
Next	we	move	on	to	discussing	possible	adverse	consequences	of	therapy.	I
like	to	use	a	roller-coaster	metaphor:	“There	are	a	couple	more	things	I	want
to	discuss	with	you.	One	thing	is,	in	order	to	learn	new	skills	for	handling
painful	thoughts	and	feelings,	we’re	going	to	have	to	bring	up	some	of	those
thoughts	and	feelings	in	session	so	that	you	have	something	to	practice	with.
This	means	that	at	times	therapy	might	seem	like	a	bit	of	a	roller-coaster	ride.
But	here’s	my	guarantee:	I	will	be	there	in	the	roller-coaster	car	alongside
you.”If	you	know	that	your	client	is	highly	experientially	avoidant	or	has	a
tendency	to	drop	out	of	therapy,	then	it’s	useful	to	say	something	like	this:
“You	may	find	that	at	times	you	feel	a	strong	urge	to	drop	out	of	therapy.	This
is	completely	normal	and	natural,	and	if	it	happens,	then	it’s	almost	always
when	you’re	facing	up	to	some	very	important	issue—usually	something	that
can	have	a	huge	impact	on	your	life.	So	if	you	ever	do	start	feeling	that	way,	I
hope	you’ll	be	willing	to	share	it	with	me	so	we	can	work	with	those	feelings
during	our	sessions.”
Agree	on	Treatment	Goals
Agreeing	on	goals	and	formulating	a	treatment	plan	may	not	come
naturally	to	you,	but	it	is	important;	otherwise	how	do	you	know	where	to	go
in	your	sessions?	Of	course,	while	obtaining	informed	consent,	you’ve
already	agreed	on	some	basic	treatment	goals:	that	during	sessions	the	client
will	learn	mindfulness	skills,	clarify	values,	and	use	values	to	guide
behavioral	change,	and	between	sessions,	she’ll	practice	and	apply	these	new
skills.	For	some	clients,	this	may	be	about	as	specific	as	you	can	get	during	a
first	session.
If	you’ve	had	your	client	fill	in	the	Bull’s	Eye	or	Life	Compass	worksheets,
you	can	ask	him,	“If	you	had	to	pick	just	one	of	these	life	domains	to	start
working	on,	which	one	would	it	be?	What	sort	of	changes	do	you	want	to
make	in	that	area	of	your	life?	How	do	you	want	to	improve	it?”	If	you’re
lucky,	this	will	give	you	some	useful	values-guided	goals	to	agree	on	as
treatment	goals.	However,	many	clients	will	initially	give	you	“emotional
goals,”	“dead	person’s	goals,”	or	“insight	goals.”	Let’s	take	a	quick	look	at
each	of	these.
EMOTIONAL	GOALS
“I	just	want	to	be	happy,”	“I	don’t	want	to	be	depressed,”	“I	want	to	stop
feeling	anxious,”	“I	want	more	self-confidence,”	“I	need	more	self-esteem,”
“I	want	to	move	on,”	“I	want	to	feel	calm,”	or	“I	want	to	stop	worrying.”	In
ACT,	we	call	these	“emotional	goals”	because	in	each	case,	the	goal	is	to
control	how	one	feels:	to	get	rid	of	“bad”	thoughts	and	feelings	and	replace
them	with	“good”	ones.
If	we	agree	to	these	goals,	we’ll	reinforce	experiential	avoidance,	a	core
pathological	process	that	is	the	very	opposite	of	mindfulness.	However,	if	we
bluntly	announce	this	to	the	client,	it	will	probably	be	counterproductive.	So
it’s	better	to	say	something	like,	“Okay.	So	can	I	put	it	this	way?	There	are
painful	thoughts	and	feelings	that	you’ve	been	struggling	with,	and	one	goal
of	therapy	is	to	learn	better	ways	of	handling	them.”
Having	said	all	that,	there	are	a	few	special	circumstances	in	which	it’s
probably	better	to	be	crystal	clear	from	the	outset	that	our	agenda	is	
not
	to
eliminate	unwanted	thoughts	and	feelings.	For	example,	suppose	you	have	a
client	with	PTSD	who	says,	“I	just	want	to	get	rid	of	these	memories.”	A
useful	response	to	this	might	include	the	Horror	Movie	Metaphor.
THE	HORROR	MOVIE	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	You	know,	there	are	quite	a	few	scientifically	proven	models	for
treating	PTSD—we	call	them	“empirically	supported”	treatments—
but	not	one	of	them	works	by	
eliminating
	bad	memories.	What	they
all	do	is	help	you	to	respond	to	your	memories	differently	so	they
have	less	impact	and	influence	over	you.	If	I	can	give	you	an
analogy:	right	now	when	these	memories	show	up,	it’s	like
watching	a	terrifying	horror	movie	late	at	night,	all	alone	by
yourself,	in	a	rickety	old	house,	with	all	the	lights	off.	Now	suppose
you	have	exactly	the	same	movie	playing,	but	this	time	the	TV’s	in
the	corner	of	the	room,	it’s	broad	daylight,	sunlight’s	streaming	in
through	the	windows,	your	house	is	full	of	friends	and	family,	and
you’re	all	interacting	together—talking,	laughing,	eating,	having
fun.	The	movie	hasn’t	changed	one	bit—it’s	still	playing	on	the	TV
in	the	corner	of	the	room—but	now	it’s	having	much	less	effect	on
you.	Mindfulness	skills	will	enable	you	to	do	this	sort	of	thing.	I
don’t	know	any	way	to	permanently	delete	these	memories,	but	we
can	change	your	relationship	with	them	so	you	can	get	on	with	your
life	and	do	the	things	you	really	want	to	do.
DEAD	PERSON’S	GOALS
Often	your	client’s	goals	will	be	to	stop	feeling	or	behaving	a	certain	way
—for	example,	“I	want	to	stop	using	drugs,”	“I	want	to	stop	yelling	at	my
kids,”	“I	don’t	want	to	have	any	more	panic	attacks,”	or	“I	don’t	want	to	feel
depressed.”	In	ACT,	these	are	called	a	“dead	person’s	goals”	(Lindsley,	1968).
A	dead	person’s	goal	is	anything	that	a	corpse	can	do	better	than	a	live	human
being.	For	example,	a	corpse	will	never	use	drugs,	never	yell	at	the	kids,
never	have	a	panic	attack,	and	never	feel	depressed.
In	ACT,	we	want	to	set	“living	person’s	goals”—things	that	a	live	human
being	can	do	better	than	a	corpse.	To	move	from	a	dead	person’s	goal	to	a
living	person’s	goal,	you	can	ask	simple	questions	like	these:
“So	let’s	suppose	that	happens.	Then	what	would	you	do
differently?	What	would	you	start	or	do	more	of?	And	how
would	you	behave	differently	with	friends	or	family?”
“If	you	weren’t	using	drugs,	what	
would
	you	be	doing
instead?”
“If	you	weren’t	yelling	at	your	kids,	how	
would
	you	be
interacting	with	them?”
“If	you	weren’t	having	panic	attacks	or	feeling	depressed,
what	would	you	be	doing	differently	with	your	life?”
Two	useful	questions	to	turn	emotional	goals	and	dead	person’s	goals	into
values-congruent	goals	are	the	magic	wand	question	and	the	seven-day
documentary	question.	Let’s	take	a	quick	look	at	each	of	these	now.
The	magic	wand	question	This	is	a	good	question	for	cutting	through	the
emotional	control	agenda.	Note	the	phrase	“are	no	longer	a	problem	for	you”;
this	is	very	different	to	saying	“have	all	disappeared.”
Therapist:
	Suppose	I	had	a	magic	wand	here.	I	wave	this	wand,	and	all	the
thoughts	and	feelings	you’ve	been	struggling	with	are	no	longer	a
problem	for	you.	What	would	you	then	do	differently?	What	sort	of
things	would	you	start	doing	or	perhaps	do	more	of?	How	would
you	 behave	 differently	 toward	 others?	 What	 would	 you	 do
differently	at	work,	at	home,	on	weekends?
The	Seven-Day	Documentary	Question	This	is	a	good	question	for	helping
the	client	become	more	specific	about	the	changes	she	wants	to	make	in	her
life.
Therapist:
	Suppose	we	followed	you	around	with	a	camera	crew	for	a	week,
filmed	everything	you	did,	and	edited	it	into	a	documentary.	And
then	suppose	we	did	the	same	at	some	point	in	the	future,	after	our
work	together	has	finished.	What	would	we	see	or	hear	on	the	new
video	that	would	show	that	therapy	had	been	helpful?	What	would
we	see	you	doing	or	hear	you	saying?	What	would	we	notice
differently	about	the	way	you	interact	with	other	people	or	the	way
you	spend	your	time?
INSIGHT	GOALS
“I	want	to	understand	why	I’m	like	this,”	“I	need	to	figure	out	why	I	keep
doing	this,”	or	“I	want	to	discover	who	I	really	am.”	Treatment	goals	like
these	easily	lead	to	“analysis	paralysis”—to	session	after	session	of
intellectual/theoretical/conceptual	discussions	and	endless	reflections	on	the
past	instead	of	to	the	development	of	new	skills	for	mindful,	valued	living.
As	it	happens	during	ACT,	clients	
will
	develop	a	lot	of	understanding	and
insight	into	their	own	behavior,	thoughts,	feelings,	personality,	and	identity.
They	will	generally	have	powerful	realizations	around	who	they	are,	how
their	mind	works,	what	they	really	want	in	life,	how	the	past	has	influenced
them,	and	why	they	do	the	things	they	do.	But	in	ACT,	they	develop	this
insight	via	experiential	work,	not	through	lengthy	analytical	discussions.
Furthermore,	this	insight	is	not	an	end	in	itself:	it’s	simply	something	that
happens	on	the	journey	toward	the	desired	outcome	of	mindful,	valued	living.
Thus	to	move	to	a	more	useful	treatment	goal,	I	say,	“As	part	of	the	work
we	do	together,	you’ll	certainly	get	a	lot	more	insight	into	who	you	are,	how
your	mind	works,	why	you	do	the	things	you	do,	and	what	you	really	want	in
life.	All	of	that	is	already	a	given;	it	happens	as	part	of	the	process	in	ACT.
When	I	ask	what	you	want	out	of	therapy,	what	I	mean	is,	once	you	have	that
insight	and	understanding,	what	do	you	want	to	do	differently?	If	you	had	that
knowledge,	what	would	you	do	that	you’re	not	doing	now?	How	would	you
behave	differently?	What	would	others	notice	that	was	different	about	you?”
TREATMENT	GOALS:	A	FEW	EXAMPLES
Here	are	some	examples	of	treatment	goals,	as	summarized	by	the
therapist.
Treatment	Goals	for	Depression	In	response	to	the	magic	wand	question,	this
client	replied	that	what	she’d	do	differently	is	get	back	to	work,	start
exercising	again,	and	spend	more	time	with	her	friends	and	family.
Therapist:
	So	can	we	say	it	like	this:	It	seems	that	what	you	mean	by
depression	is	partly	that	you’re	getting	caught	up	in	a	lot	of
unpleasant	 thoughts—negative	 self-judgments,	 a	 sense	 of
hopelessness,	and	thoughts	and	memories	about	painful	events	from
the	past.	And	another	part	of	it	is	that	you’re	struggling	with	some
really	painful	feelings	including	guilt,	sadness,	anxiety,	and	physical
tiredness.	And	a	third	part	of	it	is,	you’re	doing	things	that	make
your	life	worse,	such	as	spending	a	lot	of	time	in	bed,	socially
isolating	yourself,	staying	indoors,	giving	up	exercise,	avoiding
going	to	work,	and	so	on.	So	we	may	well	change	the	goals	as	we
go,	but	for	now	can	we	agree	that	what	we’re	aiming	for	is	(a)	to
learn	some	new	skills	to	handle	all	those	difficult	thoughts	and
feelings,	and	(b)	to	get	you	back	into	doing	things	that	used	to
matter	to	you,	such	as	socializing,	working,	exercising,	and
generally	doing	things	that	fulfill	you?	Is	that	about	right?
Notice	how	the	therapist	breaks	the	issue	down	into	three	elements:	(1)
getting	 caught	 up	 in	 thoughts,	 (2)	 struggling	 with	 feelings,	 and	 (3)
unworkable	actions.	This	is	intentional.	Right	from	the	word	“go,”	we	can
subtly	lay	the	groundwork	for	two	key	insights:
1
.	
Our	thoughts	and	feelings	are	not	the	main	problem;	it’s
getting	caught	up	in	them	(fusion)	and	struggling	with	them
(avoidance)	that	creates	our	problems.
2
.	
Our	thoughts	and	feelings	do	not	
control
	our	actions.
This	second	key	insight	often	takes	therapists	by	surprise,	so	let’s	take	a
moment	to	explore	it.	Our	thoughts	and	feelings	certainly	
influence
	our
actions,	but	they	don’t	
control
	our	actions.	Our	behavior	in	any	moment	is
under	the	influence	of	multiple	streams	of	stimuli,	coming	both	from	the
world	inside	our	skin	and	from	the	world	outside	us.	Think	back	to	the	Stage
Show	Metaphor:	our	actions	are	influenced	by	everything	on	the	stage—
whatever	we	can	see,	hear,	smell,	touch,	taste,	sense,	feel,	and	think.
So	when	do	thoughts	and	feelings	have	the	most	influence	over	our
actions?	You	guessed	it:	in	a	context	of	fusion	and	avoidance.	However,	in	a
context	of	defusion	and	acceptance	(that	is,	mindfulness),	those	same
thoughts	and	feelings	have	much	less	influence	over	our	behavior,	which	frees
us	up	to	act	on	our	values.	What	this	means	is	the	greater	our	psychological
flexibility,	the	greater	our	capacity	to	choose	the	actions	we	take	regardless	of
the	thoughts	and	feelings	we’re	having.	With	this	in	mind,	we	want	to
repeatedly	draw	a	distinction	between	(a)	the	client’s	thoughts	and	feelings,
and	(b)	the	actions	the	client	takes	when	those	thoughts	and	feelings	show	up.
Ultimately	we	want	to	shatter	the	illusion	that	the	former	
controls
	the	latter.
(And	this	approach	is	only	likely	to	succeed	when	we	do	it	experientially,	not
didactically.)
Treatment	goals	for	alcohol	addiction	This	client	wanted	to	quit	drinking
because	(a)	his	wife	was	threatening	to	leave	him,	and	(b)	at	a	recent	medical
checkup	his	liver	was	in	bad	shape.	In	response	to	the	magic	wand	question,
he	wanted	to	be	a	“better	husband”	and	“fix	up”	his	liver.
Therapist:
	So	to	summarize:	when	you’ve	tried	to	quit	drinking	in	the	past,	it
never	lasted	long	because	you’d	get	strong	cravings	or	you’d	have
feelings	of	anxiety	and	depression,	and	then	you’d	start	drinking	to
make	them	go	away.	So	our	goals	here	in	therapy	are	(a)	to	learn
some	new	skills	so	you	can	handle	these	cravings	and	feelings	more
effectively,	(b)	to	build	a	better	relationship	your	wife,	and	(c)	to
start	looking	after	your	liver	and	make	it	as	healthy	as	possible.	Is
that	about	right?
Notice	how	the	therapist	has	moved	from	a	dead	person’s	goal—stop
drinking—to	several	living	person’s	goals.
Practical	Tip
	Some	clients	have	so	many	issues,	they	don’t	know
where	 to	 start,	 or	 they	 feel	 overwhelmed.	 Here	 the	 Bull’s	 Eye	 or	 Life
Compass	worksheets	are	very	useful:	you	can	say,	“Just	pick	one	of	these
domains,	and	we’ll	start	there.	What	would	you	like	to	do	differently	in	this
area	of	your	life?”
Generic	treatment	goals	Sometimes,	despite	all	your	best	efforts,	your	client
will	be	unable	or	unwilling	to	give	you	any	specific	values-oriented	treatment
goals.	She	may	just	keep	answering,	“I	don’t	know,”	“Nothing	matters,”	or	“I
just	want	to	stop	feeling	like	this,”	or	“I	just	want	to	feel	happy.”	In	such
cases,	don’t	try	to	force	the	point;	just	accept	that	for	now	your	treatment
goals	will	be	vague	and	generic.	Below	are	two	alternatives	you	could	use	in
these	cases.
Therapist:
	So	how	about	we	agree	to	this?	The	work	we	do	here	will	be	about
two	things.	First,	learning	new	ways	to	handle	your	thoughts	and
feelings	more	effectively	so	they	can’t	hold	you	back	from	living
the	life	you	want.	Second,	even	though	right	now	you	have	no	idea
what	you	want	and	you	feel	like	nothing	matters,	let’s	make	this	a
place	where	you	get	to	discover	what	
does
	matter	to	you	and	what
sort	of	life	you	
do
	want	to	have.	And	once	we’ve	discovered	that,
let’s	set	about	making	it	happen.
***
Therapist:
	So	for	now,	let’s	just	say	that	the	work	we	do	here	will	be	about
giving	you	a	life	that	grabs	you,	a	life	that	you	feel	is	worth	living.
At	this	point,	you	don’t	know	what	that	life	looks	like,	but	that’s
okay.	We’ll	find	out	as	we	go	along.	So	one	aim	of	our	work	here
will	be	to	discover	what’s	important	to	you	and	what	sort	of	life	you
want	to	live.	And	another	aim	will	be	to	learn	better	ways	to	deal
with	the	pain	that	life	is	currently	giving	you.	And	both	of	those
aims	are	ultimately	to	serve	one	purpose:	creating	a	rich	and
meaningful	life.
Practical	Tip
	Notice	in	all	of	these	examples	how	the	therapist
uses	 terms	 like	 “handle”	 or	 “deal	 with”	 pain	 as	 opposed	 to	 “manage,”
“control,”	 “reduce,”	 or	 “eliminate.”	 Mindfulness	 is	 not	 a	 way	 to	 control,
manage,	reduce,	or	eliminate	thoughts	and	feelings;	it’s	a	way	of	“handling
them	 gently”	 or	 “dealing	 with	 them	 compassionately”	 or	 “holding	 them
lightly.”	Other	terms	you	could	use	include	“stepping	out	of	the	battle,”	or
“dropping	the	struggle,”	or	“changing	your	relationship”	with	your	thoughts
and	feelings.
Agree	on	the	Number	of	Sessions
How	many	sessions	of	ACT	does	a	client	need?	Well,	how	long	is	a	piece
of	string?	I’ve	seen	amazing	things	happen	from	a	single	session	of	ACT,	and
I’ve	also	had	clients	that	I	worked	with	on	a	regular	basis	for	three	or	four
years!	As	a	general	rule,	the	greater	your	clients’	problems	in	number,
duration,	severity,	and	impact	on	their	quality	of	life,	the	longer	the	duration
of	therapy.	However	this	is	not	
necessarily
	so;	ACT	can	be	delivered	in	many
different	formats,	including	these:
Long-term	therapy:
	for	example,	one	protocol	for	ACT
with	borderline	personality	disorder	goes	for	forty	group
sessions,	each	two-hours	long	(Brann,	Gopold,	Guymer,
Morton,	&	Snowdon,	2007).
Brief	therapy:
	for	example,	a	popular	protocol	for	ACT
with	anxiety	disorders	is	based	on	twelve	one-hour	sessions
(Eifert	&	Forsyth,	2005)	and	one	published	study	for	ACT
with	chronic	stress	and	pain	is	based	on	an	eight-hour
protocol	(Dahl	et	al.,	2004).
Very	brief	therapy:
	for	example,	one	published	study	on
ACT	for	chronic	schizophrenia	consisted	of	only	three	or
four	one-hour	sessions.	That	very	brief	intervention	lead	to
an	almost	50	percent	reduction	in	hospital	readmission	rates
(Bach	&	Hayes,	2002).
(Obviously	with	these	very	brief	ACT	interventions,	it’s	not	as	if	the	client
fully	and	completely	embraces	mindful,	valued	living	and	never	has	any
issues	ever	again.	It’s	more	the	case	that	we	can	deliver	the	core	elements	of
ACT—be	present,	open	up,	do	what	matters—quite	quickly	and	with
significant	benefits.	The	client	then	becomes	his	own	ACT	therapist,	and	life
throws	up	all	sorts	of	problems	and	challenges,	which	provide	opportunities
to	further	develop	his	skills.)
Quite	a	few	ACT	textbooks	suggest	you	agree	to	twelve	sessions	initially,
but	there	is	nothing	magical	about	this	number,	so	you	can	adjust	it	to	suit
your	clientele.	For	example,	in	Australia,	the	country	where	I	live	and
practice,	there’s	not	the	same	degree	of	openness	to	therapy	as	there	is	in	the
United	States;	therefore	I	typically	contract	for	only	six	sessions	initially.
At	this	juncture,	we	tell	the	client	that	therapy	isn’t	a	smooth	journey	but
involves	ups	and	downs.	For	example,	you	might	say,	“One	thing	I	should
mention	is	that	therapy	doesn’t	always	progress	smoothly.	Sometimes	you
make	a	huge	leap	forward;	and	sometimes	you	take	a	big	step	backward.	So
because	it	can	be	a	bit	up	and	down,	I	wonder	if	you	would	commit	to	six
sessions	initially—and	at	the	end	of	that	time,	we’ll	assess	how	it’s	going	and
see	if	you	need	more.	And	you’ll	be	the	one	who	makes	the	call	on	that,	not
me.	You’ll	judge	whether	we’re	making	progress	or	not.	Now	obviously,
some	people	don’t	need	a	full	six	sessions,	and	others	end	up	needing	more
than	that.	At	this	point,	it’s	hard	for	me	to	predict	how	many	you’ll	need,	so
would	you	be	willing	to	initially	commit	to	six?”
Do	a	Brief	Experiential	Exercise
If	time	permits,	I	like	to	do	a	brief	experiential	exercise	during	the	first
session.	Any	mindfulness	exercise	will	suffice—ideally	one	that	goes	for
about	five	minutes.	For	example,	you	might	run	through	a	chunk	of	the
Hexaflexercise	(see	chapter	4),	or	exercises	such	as	Dropping	an	Anchor	or
Ten	Mindful	Breaths	(see	chapter	9).	Then	once	you’ve	done	this	exercise	at
the	first	session,	you	could	ask	permission	to	start	each	session	with	a	similar
one.
Give	Homework
Ask	your	clients	to	do	a	little	bit	of	homework	between	this	session	and	the
next.	This	reinforces	the	notion	that	ACT	involves	active	work	both	in	session
and	between	sessions.	For	example,	if	you	took	your	client	through	a	simple
mindfulness	exercise,	then	for	homework	you	could	ask	her	to	practice	it	once
a	day.	Alternatively	you	might	ask	her	to	keep	a	diary	or	fill	in	a	worksheet,
such	as	those	at	the	end	of	this	chapter.
Practical	Tip
	Many	people	don’t	like	the	sound	of	“homework.”	It
carries	all	sorts	of	negative	connotations.	I	prefer	the	term	“practice”	or
“experiment.”	 For	 example,	 you	 might	 say,	 “Would	 you	 be	 willing	 to
practice	something	between	now	and	next	session?”	or	“Would	you	be
willing	to	experiment	with	doing	this	and	see	what	happens?”
WORKSHEETS
This	book	contains	a	lot	of	client	worksheets.	They’re	often	helpful
because	they	act	as	a	reminder	of	the	session,	increase	the	chance	that	your
client	will	follow	through,	and	provide	good	material	for	the	next	session.
(But	they	aren’t	essential,	and	you	can	certainly	do	ACT	effectively	without
using	worksheets,	if	you	prefer	not	to.)
At	the	end	of	the	first	session,	if	you	didn’t	get	much	information	about
values,	and	you	didn’t	get	the	client	to	fill	out	a	Life	Compass	or	Bull’s	Eye
worksheet,	then	you	could	now	ask	them	to	do	so	for	homework.	For
example,	you	might	say,	“We’ve	talked	quite	a	lot	about	your	problems	today
—the	thoughts	and	feelings	you	struggle	with,	and	the	things	you	do	that
make	your	life	worse—but	we	haven’t	talked	much	about	what	sort	of	life
you	want	to	live,	what	really	matters	to	you	in	the	big	picture.	So	I’m
wondering,	between	now	and	next	session,	would	you	be	willing	to	fill	in	this
worksheet,	which	asks	you	to	think	about	these	things?”	Other	worksheets
you	might	give	out	are	the	Vitality	vs.	Suffering	Diary	or	the	Problems	and
Values	Worksheet.	You	can	explain	that	these	worksheets	help	gather	more
information	to	guide	therapy.	(Worksheets	are	located	at	the	end	of	the
chapter,	 or	 they	 can	 be	 downloaded	 at	 no	 cost	 from
www.actmadesimple.com
.)
ALTERNATIVES	TO	WORKSHEETS
Some	clients—and	some	therapists—don’t	like	using	worksheets	and
forms.	This	is	not	too	surprising.	Try	filling	in	a	few	yourself,	especially	those
that	require	daily	completion,	and	you’ll	soon	see	how	challenging	it	is.	If
clients	strongly	oppose	filling	in	forms,	or	if	you	as	a	therapist	intensely
dislike	using	them,	then	you	don’t	have	to	use	them.	They	are	simply	aids	to
ACT,	not	essentials.
So	instead	of	giving	her	a	worksheet,	you	could	ask	your	client	simply	to
notice	over	the	next	week	(a)	what	she	does	that	drains	or	restricts	her	life,
and	(b)	what	she	does	that	enriches	and	expands	her	life.
Alternatively	you	could	ask	your	client	to	think	a	bit	more	about	his	values
or	practice	a	simple	mindfulness	technique	such	as	mindful	breathing.	You
might	even	ask	him	to	notice	some	of	the	most	distressing	thoughts	that	he
has,	and	to	notice	what	happens	when	he	gets	caught	up	in	them.
Homework	for	You
If	you’re	anything	like	me,	you	have	a	tendency	to	read	textbooks	and	hope
everything	“sinks	in”	so	you	can	readily	trot	it	out	in	the	therapy	room.	If
only!!	There’s	no	two	ways	about	it:	you	won’t	learn	ACT	simply	by	reading
a	book.	So	from	now	on	at	the	end	of	each	chapter,	you’ll	find	a	homework
section.	If	you	do	these	exercises,	they’ll	help	you	to	learn	ACT	in	a	way	that
far	surpasses	mere	reading.	And	because	you’re	the	best	person	to	practice	on,
many	of	these	exercises	ask	you	to	work	on	your	own	issues.
So	here	are	a	few	things	I	recommend:
1
.	
Read	out	loud	and	paraphrase	all	of	the	therapist’s	“spiels”
in	the	transcripts	above—especially	on	informed	consent—
to	get	yourself	used	to	ACT-speak.
2
.	
Do	a	couple	of	quick	case	conceptualizations.	Pick	two
clients	and	write	brief	answers	to	these	four	questions:	What
valued	direction	does	the	client	want	to	move	in?	What	is
she	fused	with?	What	is	he	avoiding?	What	unworkable
action	is	she	taking?
3
.	
Practice	summarizing	treatment	goals.	Pick	two	clients	and
imagine	how	you	would	summarize	the	treatment	goals,
using	the	suggestions	in	this	chapter.
As	you	do	these	exercises,	and	all	the	other	ones	in	this	book,	please	give
yourself	permission	to	do	them	poorly.	You’re	learning	a	new	model	of
therapy,	so	allow	yourself	to	be	a	beginner,	a	novice,	a	learner.	Beginners
make	mistakes	(and	so	do	experts).	It’s	an	essential	part	of	the	learning
process.	And	if	your	mind	starts	beating	you	up,	then	make	a	note	of	what	it
says,	so	you	can	work	with	those	thoughts	in	chapter	7.
Subsequent	Sessions
One	of	the	hardest	decisions	for	new	ACT	practitioners	is	this:	after	session	1,
where	on	the	hexaflex	do	I	start?	There	is	no	“correct”	answer	to	this
question.	There’s	really	no	such	thing	as	the	“right”	or	“wrong”	starting	point,
as	all	six	core	processes	are	interconnected	and	overlapping.	(If	you’re	brand-
new	to	ACT,	this	interconnectedness	may	not	become	clear	until	the	end	of
this	book.)	Indeed,	as	you	become	more	familiar	with	ACT,	you’ll	typically
find	yourself	covering	most	or	all	points	on	the	hexaflex	in	most	or	all
sessions.	As	you	do	this,	some	processes	will	be	explicit—that	is,	you	directly
focus	on	them	in	the	session—while	the	others	remain	implicit—that	is,
present	but	“in	the	background.”
In	terms	of	subsequent	sessions,	traditional	ACT	protocols	follow	a
particular	sequence:
1
.	
Defusion	and	acceptance
2
.	
Contacting	the	present	moment
3
.	
Self-as-context
4
.	
Values	and	committed	action
A	less	common	sequence	but	one	that	I	recommend	for	coaching,	couples
work,	high-functioning	clients,	mandated	clients,	or	clients	lacking	in
motivation	is	this:
1
.	
Values	and	committed	action
2
.	
Defusion	and	acceptance
3
.	
Contacting	the	present	moment
4
.	
Self-as-context
There	is	also	an	optional	component	of	ACT	called	
creative	hopelessness
,
which	means	getting	in	touch	with	the	costs	and	futility	of	experiential
avoidance.	Creative	hopelessness	is	only	
essential
	if	and	when	clients	are	so
deeply	attached	to	the	agenda	of	emotional	control	that	they	aren’t	open	to
mindfulness	and	acceptance.	You	can	bring	creative	hopelessness	in	at	any
point	in	therapy	where	it	becomes	necessary—however,	traditional	ACT
protocols	start	with	it	in	order	to	lay	the	foundation	for	acceptance.
As	I’m	a	traditional	kind	of	guy	(did	you	notice	my	conceptualized	self
there?),	in	the	next	seven	chapters,	I’m	going	to	take	you	through	the
traditional	sequence,	starting	with	creative	hopelessness.	However,	please
keep	in	mind	there	are	no	clean-cut	divisions	between	different	components
of	the	model:	when	we	talk	about	the	“sequence	of	components,”	it’s	a
convenient	way	of	describing	the	major	emphasis	in	each	of	those	sessions.
For	example,	it’s	hard	to	imagine	a	session	focused	purely	on	acceptance
without	an	element	of	values	or	a	session	purely	on	values	without	some
defusion.
Also	remember	that	once	you	know	what	you’re	doing,	you	can	dance
around	the	hexaflex	in	any	sequence	that’s	likely	to	be	clinically	effective.	For
example,	if	you	have	a	client	who	dissociates	easily,	you	might	start	active
therapy	with	contacting	the	present	moment:	teaching	him	simple	mindfulness
exercises	for	grounding	and	centering	himself.
What	Do	We	Do	in	Each	Session?
Recall	that	the	aim	of	ACT	is	to	cultivate	psychological	flexibility:	the
ability	to	be	fully	conscious	and	open	to	your	experience	while	acting	on	your
values—or,	said	more	simply,	the	ability	to	“be	present,	open	up,	and	do	what
matters.”	The	outcome	we’re	looking	for	is	mindful,	valued	living,	which
means	doing	what	is	meaningful	while	embracing	each	moment	of	life.
As	figure	5.2	(below)	illustrates,	we	aim	to	help	clients	move	from
mindless,	fused,	avoidant,	ineffective	action—which	leads	to	suffering—to
mindful,	valued,	willing,	effective	action—which	leads	to	vitality.	And	when
we	use	the	term	
vitality
	in	ACT,	we’re	not	referring	to	a	feeling	or	an
emotion;	we	mean	a	sense	of	being	fully	alive	and	embracing	each	moment
even	if	it’s	painful.
In	each	session,	we	aim	to	increase	psychological	flexibility:	that	is,	to	help
the	client	move	from	the	left	(suffering)	to	the	right	(vitality).	Behavior	that
takes	the	client	from	left	to	right	is	“workable”—and	behavior	that	takes	her
in	the	opposite	direction	is	“unworkable.”	Whether	the	session	is	fifteen
minutes	long	or	an	hour	long,	we	aim	to	make	a	shift	in	any	or	all	of	the
dimensions	in	this	diagram:
Where	unworkable	behavior	is	mindless	(that	is,	done
impulsively	or	on	autopilot),	we	can	work	on	mindfulness:
helping	the	client	become	fully	conscious	of	and	engaged	in
what	he	is	doing.
Where	unworkable	behavior	is	heavily	influenced	by	fusion
with	unhelpful	beliefs,	we	can	work	on	both	defusion	from
those	beliefs	and	values	clarification	as	an	alternative	source
of	motivation.
Where	 unworkable	 behavior	 is	 heavily	 influenced	 by
avoidance	of	unwanted	private	experiences,	we	can	work	on
willingness	to	have	those	private	experiences.
Where	unworkable	behavior	is	due	to	ineffectiveness—that
is,	due	to	deficits	in	skills	or	failure	to	use	appropriate	skills
—we	can	work	on	building	and	applying	necessary	skills.
What	Interventions	Do	We	Use?
Any	intervention	that	helps	the	client	to	move	from	the	left	to	the	right	in
the	figure	above	is	useful.	No	matter	how	tiny	the	move	is,	if	the	client	moves
in	the	direction	of	“workability,”	the	intervention	can	be	said	to	be
“effective.”	Of	course	this	isn’t	always	a	smooth	linear	process.	Often	your
clients	will	get	stuck	or	“backslide,”	and	will	start	moving	in	the	opposite
direction.	Your	aim	is	then	to	compassionately	and	nonjudgmentally	help	the
client	connect	with	the	costs	of	doing	so	and	to	help	her	get	back	“on	track”
as	fast	as	possible.
Structuring	Your	Sessions
Here’s	a	good	general	structure	for	your	sessions:
1
.	
Mindfulness	exercise
2
.	
Review	of	previous	session
3
.	
Main	interventions
4
.	
Homework
Let’s	take	a	quick	look	at	each	of	these	now.
Mindfulness	exercise	It’s	often	helpful	to	start	each	session	with	a	brief
mindfulness	exercise	such	as	mindful	breathing.	(This	is	not	essential,	just
often	helpful!)
Review	of	previous	session	Review	the	previous	session,	including	key
content	covered,	exercises	practiced,	and	any	thoughts	or	reactions	the	client
has	had	since.	If	your	client	followed	through	on	his	homework,	what
happened,	and	what	difference	did	it	make?	And	if	not,	what	got	in	the	way?
In	later	sessions,	once	values	work	has	been	done,	specifically	ask	about
valued	living.	For	example,	“So	how	have	you	done	living	by	your	values	this
week?”	or	“What	valued	actions	have	you	been	taking?”
Main	interventions.	If	you’re	following	a	protocol,	you’ll	have	a	good	idea	in
advance	of	what	you	wish	to	cover	in	session.	It’s	important	though	to	be
flexible—to	respond	to	what’s	happening	in	session.	Be	willing	to	let	go	of
everything	you	had	preplanned,	if	needs	be.	(You	can	always	come	back	to	it
in	a	later	session.)	If	you’re	not	following	a	protocol,	you	will	either	pick	up
from	wherever	you	left	off	in	the	previous	session	or	address	a	new	issue	that
has	just	arisen.
Homework	It’s	important	to	repeatedly	emphasize	to	clients	that	what	they	do
in	between	sessions	is	what	will	really	make	all	the	difference	in	their	lives.
Mindfulness	skills	require	practice.	Valued	action	requires	effort.	You	need	to
collaboratively	agree	before	the	end	of	each	session	what	the	client	is	going	to
practice,	do,	or	experiment	with	in	between	sessions.	(But	be	careful—don’t
get	too	pushy	or	use	values	coercively.)
Summary
To	sum	it	all	up,	the	main	tasks	for	a	first	session	are	to	build	rapport,	obtain
informed	consent,	and	make	a	basic	assessment.	When	assessing	the	current
problems,	look	for	fusion,	avoidance,	and	unworkable	action.	And	when
assessing	desired	outcomes	of	therapy,	look	for	values	and	values-congruent
goals.	And	that’s	basically	it;	that’s	the	main	information	you’ll	need	to	help
your	client	move	from	suffering	to	vitality.
Of	course,	it’s	not	as	easy	as	it	sounds	in	a	four-sentence	summary.	To	do
ACT	effectively	requires	practice—and	plenty	of	it.	And	the	fact	is,	there’s	a
lot	of	information	in	this	chapter;	most	readers	will	not	take	it	all	in	the	first
time	around.	So	I	strongly	suggest	that	as	soon	as	you’ve	finished	the	book,
come	back	and	read	through	this	chapter	again.	And	I	guarantee	it’ll	all	seem
much	simpler	then.
The	worksheets	for	clients	mentioned	in	this	chapter	are	presented	below	in
alphabetical	order:
The	Bull’s	Eye
Dissecting	the	Problem
The	Life	Compass
The	Problems	and	Values	Worksheet
Vitality	vs.	Suffering	Diary
Chapter	6.	Creative	What??!!
Creative	Hopelessness	in	a	Nutshell
In	Plain	Language:
	
Creative	hopelessness
	means	fully	opening	to	the	reality
that	trying	too	hard	to	control	how	we	feel	gets	in	the	way	of	living	a	rich,	full
life.
Aim:
	To	increase	awareness	of	the	emotional	control	agenda;	to	experience
that	it’s	basically	unworkable,	and	discover	why	this	is	so.
Synonym:
	Confronting	the	agenda.
Method:
	Look	at	what	the	client	has	done	to	try	to	control	how	he	feels,
examine	whether	it’s	made	his	life	better	or	worse,	and	get	him	in	touch	with
the	unworkability	of	his	actions.	This	creates	openness	to	an	alternative	way
of	handling	thoughts	and	feelings.
When	to	Use:
	When	the	client	is	strongly	attached	to	an	agenda	of	emotional
control.	In	many	ACT	protocols,	it’s	a	precursor	to	the	rest	of	the	work.
Confronting	the	Agenda
Creative	hopelessness	(which	is	not	a	term	we	use	with	clients)	or	“CH”	is
also	known	as	“confronting	the	agenda,”	which	is	short	for	“confronting	the
agenda	of	emotional	control.”	The	emotional	control	agenda	is	based	on	this
idea:	the	more	you	can	control	how	you	feel,	the	better	your	life	will	be.	In
any	session	we	may,	at	times,	need	to	confront	the	control	agenda	of	our
client.
What	Do	We	Mean	by	“Control”?
When	clients	come	in	to	therapy,	they	usually	want	to	feel	better.	This	isn’t
surprising.	Everyone	likes	to	feel	good.	No	one	likes	to	feel	bad.	So	quite
naturally	we	try	hard	to	avoid	or	get	rid	of	“bad”	or	“negative”	thoughts	and
feelings.	This	is	the	agenda	of	emotional	control.
Our	culture	strongly	reinforces	this	agenda	with	the	popular	notion	that
happiness	is	the	same	as	feeling	good.	If	you	buy	into	that	notion,	then	you’re
going	to	invest	a	lot	of	time	and	energy	in	emotional	control	strategies—that
is,	trying	to	reduce	the	“bad”	feelings	and	increase	the	“good”	ones.	(In	ACT,
we	stay	away	from	the	word	“happiness”	as	it	is	such	a	loaded	term.	But	if	we
were
	to	define	it,	we’d	say,	“Happiness	means	living	a	rich,	full,	and
meaningful	life	in	which	you	willingly	feel	the	full	range	of	human
emotions.”	This	is	very	different	than	Happiness	=	Feeling	Good.	Indeed,	we
often	say	to	clients,	“It’s	not	about	feeling	good;	it’s	about	feeling	what	you
feel	without	a	struggle”	or	“It’s	not	about	feeling	good;	it’s	about	feeling
alive.”)
A	
control	strategy
	therefore	means	anything	we	do	primarily	to	try	to	get
rid	of	“bad”	thoughts	and	feelings:	it	is	action	motivated	primarily	by
experiential	avoidance.	Control	strategies	can	include	everything	from
exercise,	prayer,	and	meditation	to	alcohol,	heroin,	and	suicide	attempts.	In
creative	 hopelessness	 work,	 we	 ask	 the	 client	 to	 look	 openly	 and
nonjudgmentally	at	all	the	control	strategies	she’s	using.	But	we	don’t	judge
these	strategies	as	good	or	bad,	right	or	wrong,	positive	or	negative;	our	aim
is	purely	and	simply	to	see	how	these	strategies	are	working	in	terms	of
creating	a	better	life.
Does	ACT	Target	All	Control	Strategies?
In	a	word:	no!	Recall	that	the	whole	ACT	model	rests	on	the	concept	of
workability:	is	this	behavior	working	to	improve	quality	of	life?	So	if	control
strategies	
are
	working	to	enrich	and	enhance	life,	it	makes	sense	to	keep
doing	them!	However,	the	reality	is	most,	if	not	all,	human	beings	over-rely
on	control	strategies;	and	when	we	use	them	excessively	or	inappropriately,
our	quality	of	life	suffers.
Take	eating	chocolate,	for	example.	When	we	eat	a	piece	of	good-quality
chocolate,	we	feel	good	(assuming	we	like	chocolate,	that	is).	Use	this	simple
control	strategy	in	moderation,	and	it	enriches	our	life:	it’s	workable.	But	do	it
excessively,	and	it	may	well	start	to	have	costs	to	our	health,	such	as	weight
gain.
Exercise	is	another	example.	When	we	exercise,	we	often	feel	better	(at
least,	afterward,	if	not	at	the	time).	And	exercise	also	improves	our	quality	of
life.	Therefore,	as	a	control	strategy,	it’s	generally	workable.	But	if	it	becomes
excessive—
like	the	anorexic	client	who	spends	three	hours	in	the	gym	each
day	to	keep	her	body	in	a	state	of	wasted	thinness—then	even	something	as
positive	as	exercise	can	have	costs.
Furthermore,	ACT	postulates	that	even	life-enhancing	activities	(such	as
exercise,	prayer,	meditation,	healthy	eating)	will	be	more	satisfying	and
rewarding	when	they’re	motivated	by	values	(such	as	looking	after	health	and
well-being	 and	 building	 rich	 relationships)	 rather	 than	 motivated	 by
experiential	avoidance.
For	example,	have	you	ever	eaten	food	primarily	to	push	away	“bad”
feelings	such	as	boredom,	stress,	or	anxiety?	Was	it	a	deeply	satisfying
experience?	Contrast	that	with	occasions	when	your	eating	was	motivated	by
values	around	savoring	your	food,	or	sharing	with	friends,	or	trying	out	a	new
recipe.	Which	was	more	rewarding?
Similarly,	if	you	do	charity	work	motivated	by	values	around	sharing,
giving,	and	contributing	to	the	community,	you’ll	likely	find	that	far	more
rewarding	than	if	you’re	mainly	motivated	by	trying	to	avoid	feelings	of	guilt
or	worthlessness.
Therefore	we	aim	to	help	clients	take	action	guided	by	their	values	rather
than	by	experiential	avoidance:	we	want	to	get	them	consciously	moving
toward	what	is	meaningful	rather	than	simply	running	from	what	is	unwanted.
To	really	hammer	this	point	home:	Suppose	you	exercise	primarily
motivated	by	values	such	as	looking	after	health	and	fitness,	or	you	pray
motivated	by	values	around	connecting	with	God.	We	wouldn’t	class	those	as
control
	strategies	because	your	primary	aim	isn’t	to	control	how	you	feel.	We
would	only	call	them	control	strategies	if	your	main	purpose	in	doing	them	is
to	get	rid	of	unwanted	thoughts	and	feelings.
Creative	hopelessness	is	an	intervention	based	on	workability.	We	ask	the
client	to	take	a	good,	long,	honest,	and	mindful	look	at	what	he’s	doing	to
avoid	or	get	rid	of	unwanted	thoughts	and	feelings,	and	to	see	what	that	is
costing	him.	We	want	him	to	connect	with	the	reality	that	what	he’s	doing
often	works	in	the	short	run	to	make	him	feel	better,	but	it	does	
not
	work	in
the	long	run	to	make	his	life	rich,	full,	and	meaningful.
Is	CH	Necessary	for	Everyone?
Again,	the	answer	is	no.	Our	aim	is	to	loosen	the	client’s	attachment	to	the
agenda	of	emotional	control	(that	is,	trying	to	get	rid	of	“bad”	thoughts	and
feelings).	We	hope	thereby	to	open	her	to	an	alternative	agenda	of	acceptance
or	willingness.	However,	if	she’s	highly	motivated	to	change	and	not	deeply
attached	to	an	agenda	of	emotional	control,	or	if	she’s	already	familiar	with
mindfulness	or	ACT	and	open	to	the	approach,	then	there’s	no	need	for	CH,
and	we	can	therefore	skip	it.	However,	if	we	do	skip	it,	we	may	still	use	some
of	the	exercises	and	metaphors	that	traditionally	follow	immediately	after	CH,
especially	those	about	the	illusion	of	control.
How	Long	Does	It	Take?
CH	interventions	vary	enormously	in	length.	In	Zettle’s	sample	protocol	for
depression	(Zettle,	2007),	CH	lasts	for	20	minutes.	In	Walser’s	protocol	for
PTSD,	it	lasts	for	one	to	two	sessions	(Walser	&	Westrup,	2007).	We	can	also
do	CH	very	quickly,	in	the	space	of	a	few	minutes	(Strosahl,	2005).
Ideally	we’ll	“titrate”	the	intervention	to	suit	our	client’s	issues.	A	high-
functioning	client	with	plenty	of	self-awareness	and	openness	to	new	ideas	is
a	very	different	story	than	the	client	with	a	lifelong	history	of	substance	abuse
who	clings	desperately	to	the	control	agenda.	The	latter	will	likely	need	a	far
more	extensive	CH	intervention	than	the	former.
THREE	SIMPLE	QUESTIONS
Creative	hopelessness	interventions	are	constructed	around	three	simple
questions:
1
.	
What	have	you	tried?
2
.	
How	has	it	worked?
3
.	
What	has	it	cost?
First	we	ask,	“What	have	you	tried	doing	to	get	rid	of	these	difficult
thoughts	and	feelings?”	We	ask	the	client	to	come	up	with	every	single
control	strategy	he	has	ever	used.
Next	we	ask,	“How	has	it	worked	in	the	long	run?”	We	ask	the	client	to
assess	whether	in	the	long	run	it	has	actually	worked:	Has	it	reduced	her	pain?
Has	it	enriched	his	life?
Finally	we	ask,	“What	has	it	cost	you	when	you	have	over-relied	on	these
methods?”	We	ask	the	client	to	notice	the	costs—when	these	methods	are
used	 excessively	 or	 inappropriately—in	 terms	 of	 health,	 well-being,
relationships,	work,	leisure,	energy,	money,	and	wasted	time.
Join	the	DOTS
The	Join	the	DOTS	worksheet	given	below	simplifies	CH.	It	is	self-
explanatory.	You	can	fill	this	in	with	the	client	in	session,	prompting	her	and
giving	feedback.	Or	you	can	draw	it	up	on	a	whiteboard	(especially	useful
with	groups).	Or	you	can	simply	talk	through	it	with	the	client	without	using
the	worksheet.
Alternatively,	you	might	just	use	the	DOTS	acronym	as	a	memory	aid	for
yourself.	Because	most	clients	can’t	readily	reel	off	a	list	of	control	strategies,
you’ll	generally	need	to	prompt	them.	DOTS	helps	you	remember	the	most
common	strategies	used:
D	–	Distraction
O	–	Opting	out
T	–	Thinking	strategies
S	–	Substances,	self-harm,	other	strategies
There’s	considerable	overlap	between	these	elements:	eating	junk	food	and
drinking	wine	could	come	under	distraction	or	substances.	Under	“other
strategies,”	you	can	put	anything	from	sleeping	all	day	long	to	punching	the
wall	to	yoga	or	therapy.	With	this	acronym	in	the	back	of	your	mind,	you	can
keep	asking	the	client,	“Have	you	ever	tried	doing	this?”	Make	sure	to	ask
about	previous	therapies	tried.
As	an	alternative	to	Join	the	DOTS,	you	might	prefer	the	worksheet
Attempted	Solutions	and	Their	Long-Term	Effects	(adapted	from	Hayes	et	al.,
1999;	see	below).	You	can	download	free	copies	of	both	of	these	forms	from
www.actmadesimple.com
.
Question	1:	What	have	you	tried?
Here	the	therapist	helps	the	client	identify	control	strategies,	using	the
DOTS	acronym.
Therapist:
	So	far,	we’ve	identified	quite	a	few	thoughts	and	feelings	that	are
problematic	for	you.	Now,	by	the	time	most	folks	get	to	therapy,
they’ve	already	tried	doing	a	lot	of	different	things	to	feel	better	or
not	feel	so	bad.	And	one	of	the	things	I	want	to	ensure	is	that	we
don’t	do	more	of	what	doesn’t	work.	So	I’d	like	to	spend	a	bit	of
time	recapping	all	the	things	you’ve	tried	to	avoid	or	get	rid	of	these
painful	thoughts	and	feelings.	Is	that	okay?
Client:
	To	be	honest,	I	can’t	really	think	of	anything.
Therapist:
	Well,	let	me	help	you	out	here.	One	of	the	most	common	things
people	do	is	try	to	distract	themselves	to	take	their	mind	off	it.	What
sort	of	things	do	you	do	to	distract	yourself	from	how	you’re
feeling?
Client:
	I	watch	TV.	Listen	to	music.	Read.	Smoke	dope.
Therapist:
	Computers?
Client:
	Yeah—computer	games,	surfing	the	Net,	a	lot	of	time	on	YouTube,
just	watching	crap.
Therapist:
	What	else?
Client:
	(
pauses,	shakes	his	head
)
Therapist:
	Well,	another	thing	people	often	do	is	they	start	opting	out	of
things	that	bring	up	painful	feelings.	Are	there	any	people,	places,
situations,	activities	that	you’ve	withdrawn	from	or	are	staying
away	from?
The	 therapist	 continues	 in	 this	 manner,	 working	 through	 the	 DOTS
acronym.	Once	complete,	she	moves	to	the	next	question.
Question	2:	How	Has	It	Worked?
We	now	aim	to	validate	that	the	client	has	invested	a	lot	of	time	and	effort
in	the	control	agenda—and	clearly	it	has	not	worked.
Therapist:
	So	you’ve	put	a	lot	of	time	and	effort	into	trying	to	get	rid	of	these
thoughts	and	feelings.	No	one	can	call	you	lazy.	And	most	of	those
strategies	are	things	that	all	of	us	commonly	do.	We	all	avoid
uncomfortable	situations,	put	stuff	into	our	bodies,	or	use	all	sorts
of	different	ways	to	distract	ourselves.	And	in	the	short	run,	these
things	often	make	us	feel	better	for	a	little	while.	But	let	me	ask	you
this:	in	the	long	run,	did	these	things	get	rid	of	your	painful
thoughts	and	feelings	so	that	they	never	came	back	again?
Client:
	(
hesitates
)	No.	That’s	why	I’m	here.
Therapist:
	Right.	You’ve	come	here	to	try	and	get	rid	of	them	once	and	for
all.
Client:
	Yeah.	I	hate	feeling	this	way.
Therapist:
	Okay,	so	can	I	add	that	to	the	list—thinking	about	how	much	you
hate	these	feelings?
Client:
	Well,	wouldn’t	you?
Therapist:
	I	have	to	say,	I	don’t	know	anyone	who	likes	painful	feelings.	The
question	we’re	interested	in	here	is	this:	what’s	the	best	way	of
dealing	with	them?	Have	your	efforts	to	get	rid	of	these	feelings
taken	you	in	the	direction	of	a	rich,	full,	and	meaningful	life,	or
have	they	taken	you	in	the	direction	of	struggle	and	suffering?
Question	3:	What	Has	It	Cost?
We	now	move	on	to	asking	what	all	the	costs	have	been,	and	we’ll	often
have	to	prompt	our	client	to	think	about	different	areas	of	life:	health,	well-
being,	relationships,	work,	money,	wasted	time,	missed	opportunities,	and	so
on.	You	can	do	this	through	conversation	alone—but	if	you’re	up	for
something	more	adventurous,	you	can	do	this	using	the	interactive	physical
metaphor	of	Pushing	Against	the	Clipboard.	Note:	the	clipboard	metaphor	is
very	effective,	but	don’t	ever	use	it	with	people	who	have	neck/shoulder/arm
issues,	and	always	be	careful	you	don’t	push	too	hard!
PUSHING	AGAINST	THE	CLIPBOARD:	AN	INTERACTIVE	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	Can	I	stand	up	and	demonstrate	something	to	you?	(
Client	nods.
Therapist	picks	up	a	clipboard,	stands	up,	and	walks	over	to	the
client.
)	You	don’t	have	shoulder	or	neck	problems?	Good,	because	I
want	you	to	imagine	that	this	clipboard	is	all	those	painful	thoughts
and	feelings	you’ve	been	trying	to	get	rid	of	for	so	long,	and	I	want
you	to	place	both	your	hands	flat	on	this	clipboard	and	push	against
it,	trying	to	get	rid	of	it.	Don’t	push	so	hard	that	you	knock	me	over,
but	do	push	firmly.	(
Client	pushes;	therapist	pushes	back
.)	That’s	it
—keep	pushing.	You	hate	this	stuff.	You	want	it	to	go	away.	(
As	the
client	tries	hard	to	push	the	clipboard	away,	the	therapist	pushes
back.	The	harder	the	client	pushes,	the	more	the	therapist	leans	into
it
.)	Notice	how	much	effort	and	energy	it	requires—trying	to	make
them	go	away.	(
The	therapist	eases	off	on	the	pushing,	but	retains
enough	gentle	counterpressure	to	keep	the	clipboard	suspended	in
midair,	resting	between	the	client’s	hands	and	the	therapist’s	hands.
)
So	here	you	are,	trying	very	hard	to	push	away	all	these	painful
thoughts	and	feelings.	You’ve	tried	distracting	yourself	with	TV,
music,	computers,	books,	avoiding	friends	and	family,	staying	home
all	by	yourself,	avoiding	work,	beating	yourself	up,	analyzing	why
you’re	like	this,	telling	yourself	life	sucks,	smoking	dope,	drinking
beer,	punching	the	wall,	jogging,	reading	self-help	books—the	list
goes	on	and	on.	You’ve	been	doing	this	for	years:	pushing	and
pushing	and	pushing.	And	are	those	painful	thoughts	and	feelings
going	anywhere?	Sure,	you’re	keeping	them	at	arm’s	length,	but
what’s	the	cost	to	you?	How	does	it	feel	in	your	shoulders?
(
Therapist	pushes	a	bit	harder.
)	We’ve	only	been	doing	this	for	a
minute	or	two,	but	you’ve	been	doing	this	for	over	twenty	years.
This	is	tiring,	isn’t	it?
Client:
	Yes.	I’m	tired.
Therapist:
	(
easing	off	the	pressure
)	Okay,	well	I’m	easing	off	the	pressure
here,	but	just	for	a	while	longer,	would	you	be	willing	to	keep
gently	pressing?	(
Client	 presses	 very	 gently	 against	 the	 board.
)
Now	I	want	you	to	notice—while	you’re	doing	this—if	I	asked	you
to	do	your	job	effectively,	or	socialize	with	your	friends,	or	cook
dinner,	could	you	do	it?
Client:
	No	way.
Therapist:
	And	what’s	it	like	trying	to	have	a	conversation	with	me	while
you’re	doing	this?
Client:
	Annoying.
Therapist:
	Annoying.	Frustrating.	Exhausting.	Right?	And	do	you	feel	a	bit
closed	in	or	cut	off	from	the	world	around	you?
Client:
	Yes.
Therapist:
	So	trying	to	push	all	these	feelings	away	is	eating	up	a	lot	of	effort
and	energy.	Now	let	me	take	the	clipboard	back	for	a	moment.
(
Therapist	takes	the	clipboard	back	and	sits	down.)
	So	this	is	what
you’ve	been	doing	for	soooo	long	now—trying	to	get	rid	of	these
thoughts	and	feelings.	And	yet,	they’re	still	showing	up,	still
pushing	you	around,	still	having	an	impact	on	your	life.
Client:
	Yes.	I	know	that.	So	how	do	I	get	rid	of	them?
Therapist:
	Well,	we’re	going	come	to	that	shortly.	But	first	let’s	take	a	look	at
what	it’s	cost	you,	trying	so	hard	to	get	rid	of	this	stuff.	What	has	it
cost	you	in	terms	of	health,	relationships,	money,	wasted	time?	(
The
therapist	now	prompts	the	client	through	all	the	different	costs	of	his
control	strategies.
)
Therapist:
	So	trying	to	get	rid	of	all	this	stuff	(
holds	the	clipboard	at	the
edges	and	pushes	it	out	in	front	of	her	as	far	away	as	she	can
possibly	stretch
)	is	not	only	tiring,	not	only	costly,	but	it	doesn’t
even	work.	These	thoughts	and	feelings	are	still	showing	up!	And
each	time	you	ask	me	how	to	get	rid	of	it,	you’re	asking	me	to	help
you	do	more	of	this.	Do	you	really	want	to	do	more	of	what	doesn’t
work?
Client:
	No.	But	then—what	are	you	saying?	I	just	have	to	put	up	with	it?
Therapist:
	Not	at	all.	Putting	up	with	it	is	doing	more	of	the	same.	It’s	like
you’re	still	trying	to	push	it	away,	but	you’re	so	tired,	you	stop
pushing	so	hard.	Putting	up	with	it	is	like	doing	this.	(
Therapist
again	pushes	the	clipboard
	
out	in	front	of	her,	but	this	time	her	arms
are	 half	 bent	 instead	 of	 fully	 outstretched.)
	It’s	still	tiring,	still
costing	you,	still	getting	in	the	way	of	your	life.
Client:
	So	what	do	I	do	then?
Therapist:
	Good	question.	I’ll	come	back	to	that.	But	let’s	just	acknowledge
you	have	already	tried	very	hard	to	sort	this	out.	You	certainly
haven’t	been	lazy.	And	you	haven’t	been	stupid	either;	most	of	the
things	 you’ve	 tried	 are	 commonsense	 strategies	 that	 almost
everyone	uses.	And	some	of	them,	such	as	distraction	techniques,
are	frequently	recommended	by	doctors	and	psychologists.	And	yet
it	doesn’t	seem	to	be	working.	You’re	trying	very	hard,	but	it’s	not
having	the	effect	that	you	want.
Practical	Tip
	For	this	work	to	be	effective,	we	need	to	come	from	a
space	of	compassion,	equality,	and	respect.	We	aim	to	validate	the	client’s
experience—that	she’s	trying	very	hard,	but	what	she’s	doing	isn’t	working.
If	we	come	from	a	space	of	one-upmanship	or	arrogance,	if	we	come
across	as	critical	or	judgmental,	if	we	adopt	the	role	of	the	expert	with	“all
the	answers,”	then	our	client	will	feel	irritated,	demeaned,	or	belittled.
PLEASE,	TELL	ME	WHAT	TO	DO!
At	some	point	toward	the	end	of	CH,	your	client	is	likely	to	say	something
like,	“Are	you	saying	I	should	just	put	up	with	it?”	As	in	the	transcript	above,
we’d	reply,	“Putting	up	with	it/tolerating	it/giving	up/resignation	is	just	doing
more	of	the	same.	Your	agenda	is	still	to	get	rid	of	it—you’re	just	putting	less
effort	into	it.	It’s	still	tiring,	still	draining	away	your	health	and	vitality.”	Your
client	is	likely	to	then	ask	you	for	a	solution:	“So	what	do	I	do?”
At	that	point,	you	have	to	make	a	judgment	call.	Has	the	client	really
acknowledged	the	unworkability	of	the	control	agenda?	If	so,	you	could	go
straight	into	active	work	on	the	hexaflex,	typically	moving	on	to	defusion	and
acceptance.	(In	chapter	8,	we’ll	look	at	how	you	can	revisit	the	clipboard
metaphor	and	use	it	to	illustrate	the	move	from	avoidance	to	acceptance.)
More	commonly	at	this	point,	you’d	move	on	to	identifying	that	control	is	the
problem,	not	the	solution,	and	then	go	on	to	two	psychoeducational
components:	normalizing	control	and	the	illusion	of	control.
Here’s	an	example	of	how	that	might	go:
Client:
	So	what	do	I	do	then?
Therapist:
	Good	question.	You	already	know	we’re	going	to	be	learning	some
new	skills	here	for	handling	thoughts	and	feelings.	But	this
approach	is	so	different	from	everything	else	you’ve	tried,	from
everything	our	society	tells	us,	from	almost	everything	you	read	in
pop	psychology,	it	would	probably	backfire	if	we	just	leaped
straight	into	it.	So	if	you’re	willing	to	bear	with	me	a	little	longer,
what	I’d	like	to	do	is	lay	a	bit	of	groundwork	for	what	comes	next.
Perhaps	you	could	think	about	it	this	way…	(
The	therapist	now	uses
metaphor	of	choice	to	convey	that	control	is	the	problem
.)
Control	Is	the	Problem,	Not	the	Solution
In	this	phase,	we	use	a	metaphor	to	increase	our	client’s	awareness	that
emotional	control	strategies	are	largely	responsible	for	her	problems;	that	as
long	as	she’s	fixated	on	trying	to	control	how	she	feels,	she’s	trapped	in	a
vicious	cycle	of	increasing	suffering.	Two	popular	metaphors	are	the	Tug	of
War	with	a	Monster	and	Struggling	in	Quicksand	(Hayes	et	al.,	1999).
STRUGGLING	IN	QUICKSAND	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	Remember	those	old	movies	where	the	bad	guy	falls	into	a	pool	of
quicksand,	and	the	more	he	struggles,	the	faster	it	sucks	him	under?
In	quicksand,	the	worst	thing	you	can	possibly	do	is	struggle.	The
way	to	survive	is	to	lie	back,	spread	out	your	arms	and	legs,	and
float	on	the	surface.	This	is	very	tricky,	because	every	instinct	in
your	body	tells	you	to	struggle,	but	if	you	do	what	comes	naturally
and	instinctively,	you’ll	drown.	And	notice,	lying	back	and	floating
is	psychologically	tricky—it	doesn’t	come	naturally—but	it’s	a	lot
less	physical	effort	than	struggling.”
TUG	OF	WAR	WITH	A	MONSTER	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	Imagine	you’re	in	a	tug-of-war	with	some	huge	anxiety	monster.
(
Alter	 the	 name	 the	 monster	 to	 suit	 the	 issue,	 for	 example,	 the
depression	 monster.
)	You’ve	got	one	end	of	the	rope,	and	the
monster	has	the	other	end.	And	in	between	you,	there’s	a	huge
bottomless	pit.	And	you’re	pulling	backward	as	hard	as	you	can,	but
the	monster	keeps	on	pulling	you	ever	closer	to	the	pit.	What’s	the
best	thing	to	do	in	that	situation?
Client:
	Pull	harder.
Therapist:
	Well,	that’s	what	comes	naturally,	but	the	harder	you	pull,	the
harder	the	monster	pulls.	You’re	stuck.	What	do	you	need	to	do?
Client:
	Drop	the	rope?
Therapist:
	That’s	it.	When	you	drop	the	rope,	the	monster’s	still	there,	but
now	you’re	no	longer	tied	up	in	a	struggle	with	it.	Now	you	can	do
something	more	useful.
Practical	Tip
	It’s	effective—and	fun—to	act	this	metaphor	out	with
the	client,	using	a	belt	or	a	rope.	(The	therapist	should	play	the	monster
and	hold	one	end	of	the	belt	tightly,	while	the	client	tugs	on	the	other	end.)
OTHER	METAPHORS
There	are	numerous	other	metaphors	you	could	use.	Basically	you	can	use
anything	that	conveys	this	message:	the	more	you	do	what	comes	naturally
and	instinctively	in	this	problematic	situation,	the	worse	the	situation	gets.
Well-known	examples	include	slamming	on	the	brakes	when	your	car	skids,
swimming	against	a	rip	tide,	trying	to	dig	your	way	out	of	a	hole,	and
scratching	a	nasty	rash.
IS	THIS	THE	END	OF	THE	SESSION?
In	more	traditional	protocols,	you	end	the	session	at	this	point,	and	for
homework	you	ask	the	client	to	notice	(a)	all	the	different	ways	he	tries	to
avoid	or	get	rid	of	unwanted	feelings,	(b)	how	that	works,	and	(c)	what	it
costs.	Of	course,	as	with	anything	in	ACT,	you	don’t	have	to	do	it	the
traditional	way,	so	if	you	have	time	in	the	session,	you	may	prefer	to	move
straight	on	to	the	next	two	components—the	normality	of	control	and	the
illusion	of	control.	(And	even	if	you	skip	CH	altogether,	these	components	are
often	useful	to	bring	into	later	sessions.)
The	Normality	of	Control
In	this	component,	we	address	why	control	comes	naturally.
Therapist:
	I’d	hate	for	you	to	get	the	wrong	impression	here—that	I’m
criticizing	you	in	any	way	for	what	you’ve	been	doing.	If	that’s	how
I’ve	come	across,	I	sincerely	apologize	because	the	truth	is	we’re	all
in	the	same	boat.	Most	of	the	things	on	your	list	are	things	that	I	do
at	times;	almost	everyone	does.	We	all	get	caught	up	in	the	same
agenda.	We	live	in	a	feel-good	society:	everyone	likes	to	feel	good,
no	one	likes	to	feel	bad.	So	we	try	hard	to	get	rid	of	unpleasant
feelings.	And	we	all	keep	on	doing	it—doing	whatever	we	can	to
avoid	or	get	rid	of	unpleasant	thoughts	and	feelings—even	though	it
doesn’t	work	in	the	long	run	and	we	often	end	up	suffering	as	a
result.	And	there	are	at	least	four	reasons	why	we	do	that.	One,
because	we’ve	all	fallen	into	“the	happiness	trap”;	we’ve	bought
into	the	myth	that	humans	are	naturally	happy,	and	we	should	feel
good	most	of	the	time.	Two,	because	the	things	we	do	to	control	our
feelings	often	
do
	work	quite	well	in	the	short	run.	Three,	because
we	believe	these	methods	work	for	other	people.	And	four—and
this	is	the	one	reason	above	and	beyond	all	the	others:	it’s	the	way
our	mind	has	evolved	to	solve	problems.	(
At	this	point,	the	therapist
launches	into	the	Problem-Solving	Machine	Metaphor	from	chapter
1.
)
The	Illusion	of	Control
In	this	component,	we	shatter	the	myth	or	illusion	that	humans	can	control
how	they	feel.	You	could	lead	into	it	like	this:	“So	we’re	all	walking	around,
trying	to	control	how	we	feel,	and	it	just	doesn’t	work.	It’s	not	that	we’ve	got
no
	control	at	all,	but	we’ve	got	a	lot	less	than	we’d	like	to	have.	And	what	I’d
like	to	do,	if	you’re	okay	with	it,	is	just	take	you	through	a	few	little	exercises
so	you	can	check	this	out	for	yourself	and	see	how	much	control	you	actually
have.”	You	could	then	take	the	client	through	any	or	all	of	the	following
exercises,	in	any	combination	or	order.	(Except	for	the	first	two,	they	all	come
from	Hayes	et	al.,	1999.)
DELETE	A	MEMORY
Therapist:
	Just	take	a	moment	to	remember	how	you	got	here	today.	Done
that?	Okay,	now	delete	that	memory.	Just	get	rid	of	it.	(
pause
)
How’d	you	do?
NUMB	YOUR	LEG
Therapist:
	Now	make	your	left	leg	go	completely	numb.	So	numb,	that	I
could	cut	it	off	with	a	hacksaw	and	you	wouldn’t	feel	a	thing.
(
pause
)	How’d	you	do?
DON’T	THINK	ABOUT	…
Therapist:
	For	the	next	exercise,	you	must	not	think	about	what	I	say.	Not
even	for	one	microsecond.	Don’t	think	about	…	ice	cream.	Don’t
think	about	your	favorite	flavor.	Don’t	think	about	how	it	melts	in
your	mouth	on	a	warm	hot	summer’s	day.	(
pause
)	How’re	you
doing?
THE	POLYGRAPH	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	Imagine	I’m	a	mad	scientist	and	I’ve	kidnapped	you	for	an
experiment.	And	I’ve	wired	you	up	to	a	supersensitive	polygraph,
or	lie	detector.	This	machine	will	detect	the	tiniest	bit	of	anxiety	in
your	body.	You	can’t	kid	it.	Even	the	tiniest	hint	of	anxiety	and	all
the	alarm	bells	will	ring.	And	in	this	experiment	I’m	about	to	do	on
you,	you	must	not	feel	any	anxiety	at	all.	And	if	you	do,	then	I’ll
pull	this	lever,	which	will	electrocute	you.	(
Pause.
)	What	would
happen?
Client:
	I’d	be	fried.
Therapist:
	Right.	Even	though	your	life	depends	on	it,	you	can’t	control	the
anxiety.
FALLING	IN	LOVE
Therapist:
	Now	suppose	I	were	to	offer	you	one	billion	dollars—one	billion
—if	you	can	do	what	I	ask.	I’m	going	to	bring	someone	into	this
room—someone	you’ve	never	met	before—and	if	you	can	instantly
fall	head	over	heels	in	love	with	that	person,	then	I’ll	give	you	the
money.	Could	you	do	it?
Client:
	If	it	were	Brad	Pitt,	I	could.
Therapist:
	It’s	a	little	old	man	in	a	wheelchair,	and	he	hasn’t	had	a	bath	for
three	months.
Client:
	No.
Therapist:
	Not	even	for	one	billion	dollars?
Client:
	I	could	try.
Therapist:
	Sure.	You	could	put	on	an	act.	Hug	him	and	kiss	him	and	say,	“I
love	you,	I	love	you!”	Because	you’ve	got	a	lot	of	control	over	your
actions,	but	could	you	control	your	feelings?
Client:
	No.
Brief	Creative	Hopelessness
As	mentioned	earlier,	we	don’t	have	to	do	CH	with	all	clients.	With
motivated	high-functioning	clients	who	are	not	overly	attached	to	control,	we
may	well	skip	it	or	do	a	brief	version.	In	the	brief	version,	we	ask,	“So	all
these	painful	feelings	are	showing	up.	What	have	you	tried	doing	to	get	rid	of
them?”	Next	we	elicit	a	few	of	the	main	control	strategies.	Then	we	say,
“Okay,	so	seems	like	you’ve	tried	quite	a	few	things	to	get	rid	of	these
thoughts	and	feelings,	and	that’s	not	working	too	well,	so	how	about	we	try
something	different?”
And	if	we	take	this	approach	initially,	but	down	the	line	it	turns	out	our
client	is	more	attached	to	the	control	agenda	than	we	thought—no	problem:
we	can	simply	return	to	CH	and	do	a	more	extensive	intervention.
Homework	and	the	Next	Session
At	this	point,	your	client	will	hopefully	be	curious	about	the	alternative	you’re
offering.	She	may	even	ask	again,	“So	what	do	I	do?”	If	you	have	time
remaining	in	this	session,	you	can	then	move	on	to	the	next	phase.	If	not,
explain	that	you’ll	move	on	to	it	in	the	next	session.	Traditionally,	after
creative	hopelessness	and	naming	control	as	the	problem,	you	would	move	on
to	defusion	and	acceptance.
As	mentioned	before,	for	homework	you	could	ask	the	client	to	notice	all
the	different	ways	he	tries	to	avoid	or	get	rid	of	unwanted	feelings,	and	how
that	works,	and	what	it	costs.	Either	of	the	worksheets	above—Join	the	Dots
or	Attempted	Solutions	and	Their	Long-Term	Effects—can	facilitate	this.
Alternatively,	depending	on	the	metaphor	you’ve	used,	you	may	ask	your
client	to	notice	when	she’s	“tugging	on	the	rope”	or	“struggling	in	the
quicksand”	and	when,	if	ever,	she	stops	tugging	or	struggling.
Better	still,	if	she’s	willing,	have	her	keep	a	daily	journal:	When	does	the
struggle	happen?	What	triggers	it?	What	are	the	consequences?
And	if	you	started	this	session	with	a	simple	mindfulness	exercise,	you	can
also	ask	your	client	to	practice	it	on	a	daily	basis.
Homework	for	You
Pick	some	thoughts	and	feelings	you’ve	been	struggling
with	and	complete	both	the	worksheets	on	your	own	issues.
Read	through	all	the	exercises	and	metaphors	out	aloud,	as	if
taking	a	client	through	them.
Reflect	on	your	current	client	caseload.	Do	you	have	any
clients	who	are	clinging	to	the	control	agenda?	Mentally
rehearse	running	through	a	CH	intervention	with	them.
Summary
Creative	hopelessness	is	an	optional	component	of	ACT	that	we	use	when	a
client	seems	overly	attached	to	the	emotional	control	agenda.	We	basically
want	the	client	to	take	a	good	honest	look	at	how	the	control	agenda	is
working:	is	it	taking	her	in	the	direction	of	a	rich,	full,	and	meaningful	life,	or
is	it	taking	her	in	the	direction	of	struggle	and	suffering?	We	can	do	this	as	an
extensive	intervention	taking	up	a	whole	session,	or	as	a	brief	intervention
taking	only	a	few	minutes.	It	boils	down	to	asking	three	simple	questions:
What	have	you	tried?	How	has	it	worked?	What	has	it	cost?
And	please	keep	in	mind:	in	all	creative	hopelessness	work,	brief	or	long,
we	do	not	try	to	convince	the	client	of	unworkability.	Ultimately	it	is	up	to
him	to	judge	for	himself,	based	on	his	own	experience,	whether	or	not	control
is	enriching	his	life.
Chapter	7.	Watch	Your	Thinking
Defusion	in	a	Nutshell
In	Plain	Language:
	
Fusion
	means	getting	caught	up	in	our	thoughts	and
allowing	them	to	dominate	our	behavior.	
Defusion
	means	separating	or
distancing	from	our	thoughts,	letting	them	come	and	go	instead	of	being
caught	up	in	them.	In	other	words,	defusion	means
looking	
at
	thoughts	rather	than	
from
	thoughts;
noticing	thoughts	rather	than	being	caught	up	in	thoughts;
and
letting	thoughts	come	and	go	rather	than	holding	on	to	them.
Synonym:
	Deliteralization	(this	term	is	rarely	used	nowadays).
Aim:
	To	see	the	true	nature	of	thoughts:	they	are	nothing	more	or	less	than
words	and	pictures;	and	to	respond	to	thoughts	in	terms	of	workability	rather
than	literality	(that	is,	in	terms	of	how	helpful	they	are	rather	than	how	true
they	are).
Method:
	Notice	the	process	of	thinking;	learn	experientially	that	our	thoughts
do	not	control	our	actions.
When	to	Use:
	When	thoughts	function	as	barriers	to	valued	living.
Getting	to	Defusion
We	facilitate	defusion	throughout	every	single	session	in	ACT.	In	some
sessions,	defusion	is	the	central	focus,	and	we	formally	take	our	clients
through	a	variety	of	metaphors	and	experiential	exercises	to	help	them
develop	defusion	skills.	Most	of	this	chapter	focuses	on	such	interventions.
However,	we	also	facilitate	defusion	informally	in	every	session,	even	when
the	session	is	predominantly	focused	on	other	core	processes	such	as	values
clarification.	We	do	this	in	three	main	ways:
1
.	
We	ask	clients	to	notice	their	thoughts:
1
.	
“So	what’s	your	mind	telling	you	now?”
“And	what	does	your	thinking	self
have	to	say	about	that?”
“Can	you	notice	what	you’re	thinking
right	now?”
2
.	
“Notice	what	your	mind	is	doing.”
2
.	
We	ask	clients	to	look	at	the	workability	of	their	thoughts:
1
.	
“So	is	that	a	helpful	thought?	If	you	hold
on	tightly	to	it,	does	it	help	you	deal	with
the	situation	effectively?”
“If	you	let	that	thought	tell	you	what
to	do,	will	it	take	you	in	the	direction
of	a	rich,	full,	and	meaningful	life,	or
in	the	direction	of	being	stuck	and
suffering?”
“If	we	stop	the	session	just	because
your	mind	says	
This	won’t	work
	or	
I
can’t	do	it
,	will	that	help	you	change
your	life—or	will	it	just	keep	you
stuck?”
2
.	
We	ask	clients	to	notice	when	they	are
fused	with	or	defused	from	their	thoughts:
1
.	
“So	right	now,	how	caught	up	are	you	in
that	thought?”
2
.	
“Did	you	notice	how	your	mind	just
hooked	you	then?”
If	we	want	to	make	defusion	the	main	focus	of	a	session,	we	can	lead	into	it
in	many	ways.	For	example,	if	we’ve	started	therapy	by	identifying	values
and	setting	specific	goals,	then	we	could	ask	questions	such	as	these:	“So
what’s	getting	in	the	way	of	you	taking	action?”	“What’s	stopping	you	from
acting	on	these	values/achieving	these	goals/being	the	person	you	want	to
be/building	the	relationships	you	want?”	“What’s	your	mind	telling	you	that
holds	you	back/keeps	you	stuck/makes	life	difficult	for	you?”
Alternatively,	if	we	find	in	the	first	session	that	every	attempt	to	clarify
values	meets	with	a	block,	then	defusion	is	a	good	choice	for	the	first	step	in
active	therapy.	(Once	our	client	has	developed	good	defusion	and	acceptance
skills,	we	can	then	return	to	work	on	values	and	goals.)
Yet	another	option,	if	we	suspect	or	know	that	our	client	is	deeply	attached
to	the	control	agenda,	is	to	do	creative	hopelessness	before	actively	focusing
on	defusion.	In	this	case,	after	a	creative	hopelessness	intervention,	we	could
say	something	like	this:	“So	you’re	probably	wondering	if	trying	to	get	rid	of
these	thoughts	doesn’t	work,	what’s	the	alternative?”
Identifying	Fusion
When	we	take	a	history,	we	watch	for	fusion	in	six	key	areas:	rules,
reasons,	judgments,	past,	future,	and	self.	Let’s	take	a	quick	look	at	each	of
these	areas	now.
Rules	What	sort	of	rigid	rules	does	the	client	have	about	life,	work,
relationships,	and	so	on?	In	particular,	look	for	rules	about	how	someone
needs	to	feel	before	she	can	take	action.	Watch	for	key	words	like	should,
must,	have	to,	ought,	right,	wrong,	can’t,	don’t,	and	key	phrases	such	as
shouldn’t	have	to;	if	I	feel	X,	then	I	can’t	do	Y;	if	I	do	A,	then	you	should	do
B.	These	words	and	phrases	often	alert	you	to	rigid	ideas	about	how	life
should	operate	or	what’s	necessary	before	change	can	happen.	These	rules
usually	create	a	lot	of	suffering	if	the	client	fuses	with	them.	Here	are	some
common	examples:	“I	shouldn’t	be	feeling	this	way,”	“I	can’t	go	the	party
when	I	feel	anxious,”	“If	I	can’t	do	it	perfectly,	there’s	no	point	in	trying,”
“This	shouldn’t	be	so	difficult,”	“My	kids	should	do	what	I	tell	them,”	and
“Normal	people	don’t	feel	this	way.”
Reasons	What	reasons	does	the	client	give	you	for	why	change	is	impossible,
undesirable,	or	impractical?	Humans	are	excellent	at	coming	up	with	reasons
why	they	can’t	or	shouldn’t	change:	“I’m	too	busy/tired/anxious/depressed,”
“I	might	fail,”	“I	shouldn’t	have	to,”	“It’s	too	hard,”	“It’s	genetic,”	“We’re	all
alcoholics	in	my	family,”	“It’s	a	chemical	imbalance,”	“I’ll	get	hurt,”	“I’ve
always	been	like	this,”	“I	can’t	cope	with	loneliness,”	“It’ll	all	go	wrong,”
“I’ll	do	it	when	I	have	more	time/energy/money,”	and	so	on.	If	we	or	our
clients	fuse	with	these	thoughts,	they	often	hold	us	back	from	making
changes.
Judgments	Humans	judge.	And	many	of	the	judgments	we	make	are	useful
and	important:	Is	this	person	trustworthy	or	untrustworthy?	Is	this	car	good
value	for	money?	Is	this	fruit	ripe	or	not?	Unfortunately,	though,	many	of	our
judgments	are	unhelpful.	Of	course,	if	we	hold	our	judgments	lightly,	they
present	no	problem.	But	if	we	fuse	with	those	judgments—“I’m	bad,”
“You’re	mean,”	“Anxiety	is	awful,”	“I’m	too	fat,”	“Being	rejected	is
unbearable,”	“He’s	so	selfish,”	“Life	sucks,”	“Men	are	liars”—we	readily	end
up	struggling	and	suffering.	What	sort	of	judgmental	or	evaluative	thinking	is
your	client	fusing	with?
PastHow	is	your	client	fusing	with	the	past?	Ruminating	on	old	hurts,
failures,	mistakes,	missed	opportunities?	Reliving	the	“good	old	days”	before
life	turned	bad?	Having	flashbacks?	(A	flashback	is	extreme	fusion	with	a
memory.)
Future	How	is	your	client	fusing	with	the	future?	Worrying?	Fantasizing
about	a	better	life?	Constantly	caught	up	in	thinking	about	all	the	things	he
has	to	do	later?
Self	What	sort	of	self-description	is	your	client	fusing	with?	Here	are	some
common	ones:	“I	am	weak/useless/unlovable,”	“I	don’t	need	help,”	“I	am
nothing	without	my	job,”	“I	can’t	cope,”	“I	don’t	tolerate	fools	gladly,”	“I
don’t	need	help,”	“I’m	right	and	they	are	wrong,”	and	so	on.	Is	she	fusing
with	her	diagnosis	or	her	body	image—“I	am	bipolar,”	“I	am	fat”?	Is	he
perhaps	fusing	with	his	job	title	or	his	role	in	the	family?
Obviously	we	could	describe	many	different	categories	of	thinking—black-
and-white	thinking,	catastrophizing,	overgeneralization,	and	so	on—but	the
above	six	help	to	keep	it	simple.	(We’ll	look	in	detail	at	fusion	with	past	and
future	in	chapter	9,	fusion	with	self-description	in	chapter	10,	and	fusion	with
reason-giving	in	chapter	13.)
“Setting	the	Mood”
To	“set	the	mood”	for	defusion,	I	initially	recap	some	of	the	painful
thoughts	or	memories	the	client	has	been	getting	caught	up	in	or	struggling
with,	and	I	compassionately	acknowledge	how	difficult	this	has	been	for	her,
and	how	much	pain	and	suffering	she	has	experienced.	Then	I	say	something
like	this:	“As	you	know,	one	of	our	aims	in	this	work	is	to	develop
psychological	skills	that	will	help	you	to	handle	your	mind	more	effectively
when	it	starts	doing	things	that	hold	you	back	from	living	a	full	life.	And
that’s	what	I’d	like	to	focus	on	today.	Would	that	be	okay	with	you?”
At	this	point,	it’s	useful	to	do	some	psychoeducation	about	the	nature	of	the
mind.	Typically	I	start	with	a	brief	discussion	of	the	two	parts	of	the	mind:	the
thinking	self	and	the	observing	self,	as	described	in	chapter	4.	Upon
conclusion,	I	say	something	like,	“So	in	the	work	we	do	here,	whenever	I	use
the	word	“mind,”	I’m	talking	about	“the	thinking	self”—the	part	of	you	that
chatters	away	inside	your	head,	never	shuts	up,	and	always	has	something	to
say.	Can	you	notice	it	chattering	away,	right	now?”	The	client	usually	says
yes,	and	I	then	ask,	“So	what’s	your	mind	saying	to	you?”	Whatever	the
answer,	I	reply,	“See	what	I	mean?	It’s	always	got	something	to	say.
Sometimes	it’s	helpful	to	imagine	that	there	are	four	of	us	in	the	room	here:
there’s	you	and	me,	and	your	mind	and	my	mind.	My	mind’s	going	to	chatter
away	to	me,	and	your	mind’s	going	to	chatter	away	to	you.	What’s	really
important	here	is	what	happens	between	you	and	me	rather	than	what	our
minds	have	to	say.”
Typically	we	next	do	a	bit	of	psychoeducation	about	how	our	minds	have
evolved	to	think	negatively,	as	in	the	transcript	below.	This	sets	the	scene	for
active	defusion	interventions.
Many	 ACT	 therapists	 don’t	 introduce	 the	 observing	 self	 until	 later	 in
therapy,	following	work	on	defusion	and	acceptance,	but	some	therapists
prefer	to	introduce	it	up	front.	I	prefer	the	latter	approach,	but	if	you	prefer
the	former,	then	simply	skip	introducing	the	observing	self	for	now	and
bring	it	in	later	in	therapy.
HOW	OUR	MINDS	HAVE	EVOLVED	TO	THINK	NEGATIVELY
Therapist:
	So	you’ve	told	me	some	of	the	painful	or	unhelpful	thoughts	that
hold	you	back	or	make	your	life	harder.	And	I’m	willing	to	bet
we’ve	only	just	scratched	the	surface—because	if	your	mind	is
anything	like	my	mind,	then	it’s	got	no	shortage	of	negative
thoughts.	And	there’s	actually	a	very	good	reason	for	that,	and	I’d
like	to	take	a	few	minutes	to	explain	it.	Would	that	be	okay	with
you?	(
Wait	for	client’s	response.
)	You	see,	the	human	mind	has
evolved	to	think	negatively.	Our	primitive	ancestors	lived	in	a	world
of	constant	danger—big	animals	with	big	teeth	lurked	around	every
corner.	So	back	then,	your	mind	had	to	constantly	be	on	the	lookout
for	danger,	anticipating	anything	that	could	hurt	you	or	harm	you	in
any	way:	“Watch	out.	There	could	be	a	bear	in	that	cave.	There
could	be	a	wolf	in	those	bushes.	Is	that	person	in	the	distance	a
friend	or	an	enemy?”	If	you	were	a	caveman	and	your	mind	didn’t
do	this	job	well,	you’d	soon	be	dead.	And	that’s	what	we’ve
inherited	from	our	ancestors:	our	modern	mind	is	basically	a	“don’t
get	killed”	machine.	It’s	constantly	trying	to	warn	you	of	anything
that	could	possibly	go	wrong:	“You’ll	get	fat,”	“You’ll	screw	up	the
exam,”	“He	might	reject	you.”	This	is	normal.	Everyone’s	mind
does	this.	Our	mind	has	evolved	to	think	negatively.	It’s	just	trying
to	do	its	number	one	job,	which	is	to	protect	us	and	keep	us	alive.
There’s	no	absolute	necessity	to	use	the	above	spiel	(or	any	other
metaphor/exercise	in	this	book),	but	it	does	makes	a	good	transition	into
learning	defusion	skills.	The	next	step	is	to	recap	some	of	the	client’s
problematic	thoughts,	clarify	what	it	costs	him	when	he	gets	entangled	in	or
pushed	around	by	these	thoughts,	and	then	invite	him	to	learn	a	new	way	of
handling	them.	The	transcript	that	follows	illustrates	only	one	way	of	many
that	you	can	do	this;	when	you	read	other	ACT	textbooks,	you’ll	discover
many	other	methods.
Introducing	Defusion:	Part	1
The	client	in	this	transcript	is	a	twenty-four-year-old	single,	female
chiropractor.	We	are	about	fifteen	minutes	into	session	2,	following	(1)	a	brief
mindful	breathing	exercise	(see	chapter	9),	(2)	a	quick	review	of	the	previous
session,	and	(3)	a	quick	discussion	of	the	two	parts	of	the	mind	and	how	the
mind	evolved	to	think	negatively.
Therapist:
	So	one	thing	we	identified	last	week,	a	big	part	of	the	problem,	is
that	you	have	a	lot	of	thoughts	about	being	worthless	or	useless.
Client:
	Yeah,	I	do.	I	feel	like	I’m	a	waste	of	space.	I	don’t	even	know	why
you’re	wasting	your	time	with	me.
Therapist:
	And	I	notice	that	as	you’re	saying	that,	you’re	slumping	down—
almost	as	if	you’re	sinking	into	the	chair.	I’m	getting	a	sense	that
these	thoughts	really	drag	you	down.	(
Client	nods.
)	That	must	hurt.
(
The	client	nods	again,	and	her	eyes	tear	up
.)	What’re	you	feeling
right	now?
Client:
	(
shaking	her	head
)	It’s	silly.
Therapist:
	What’s	silly?
Client:
	I	am.	This	is.	(
wiping	her	eyes
)	I	don’t	think	you	can	help	me.
Therapist:
	Well,	that’s	a	perfectly	natural	thought	to	have.	Lots	of	people	have
thoughts	like	that,	especially	at	the	start	of	therapy.	And	the	truth	is
I	can’t	actually	guarantee	that	it	will	help.	But	I	can	guarantee	that
I’ll	do	my	very	best	to	help	you	create	a	better	life.	So,	how	about
we	give	it	a	go,	even	though	you’re	having	the	thought	that	it’s
hopeless,	and	let’s	see	what	happens?
Client:
	Okay.
Therapist:
	Okay,	well,	we	agreed	last	session	that	one	of	your	goals	here	is	to
learn	new	ways	to	handle	difficult	thoughts	and	feelings.	Is	that	still
important	to	you?
Client:
	Yeah.
At	this	point,	the	therapist	could	move	on	to	pretty	much	any	defusion
intervention	he	prefers.
Therapist:
	Okay.	(
He	pulls	out	a	white	index	card
.)	Well,	what	I’d	like	to	do,
if	it’s	okay	with	you,	is	jot	down	some	of	your	thoughts	on	this	card
so	we’ve	got	something	to	work	with.	Would	that	be	okay	with
you?
Client:
	Sure.
Therapist:
	Thanks.	So,	when	your	mind	is	really	beating	you	up,	really
getting	stuck	into	you	about	what’s	wrong	with	you,	and	what’s
wrong	with	your	life—if	I	could	listen	in	at	those	times,	sort	of	plug
into	your	mind	and	listen	in	to	what	it’s	saying,	what	it’s	telling	you,
what	would	I	hear?
Client:
	Oh.	Um.	Just	really	negative	stuff,	like,	um,	you’re	stupid,	you’re	lazy,
nobody	likes	you.
Therapist:
	Okay.	So	let	me	get	this	down.	(
He	starts	writing	the	thoughts
down	on	the	index	card
.)	Your	mind	says,	“I’m	stupid	…	I’m	lazy
…	Nobody	likes	me.”	What	else?
Client:
	I	don’t	know.
Therapist:
	Well,	you	mentioned	“silly”	and	“waste	of	space”	today,	and
“worthless”	and	“useless”	last	week.	Are	those	names	your	mind
often	calls	you?
Client:
	Yeah.
Therapist:
	(
writing	them	down
)	Okay.	So	your	mind	tells	you	“I’m	silly	…
I’m	worthless	…	I’m	useless	…	I’m	a	waste	of	space.”	What	else?
Client:
	(
chuckles
)	Isn’t	that	enough?
Therapist:
	Yes,	it	is—but	I	was	just	wondering	if	your	mind	tells	you	any
really	dark	or	scary	stories	about	the	future?	You	know,	when	it
really	wants	to	make	you	feel	hopeless,	what	are	the	scariest	things
it	says	to	you?
Client:
	Um.	Just	that	I’m	f****ed.	There	is	no	future.	Life	is	f****ed	and
then	you	die.
Therapist:
	Okay,	so	your	mind	likes	to	swear	a	bit.	Let’s	get	that	down.	“I’m
f****ed	…	There	is	no	future	…	Life	is	f****ed	and	then	you	die!”
Now	Let’s	Unpack	That:	Part	1
Before	continuing	this	chapter,	read	through	the	above	transcript	again	and
identify	the	various	ways	the	therapist	subtly	establishes	a	context	of
defusion,	includingnormalizing	and	allowing	thoughts,	treating	the	mind	as	an
“entity,”	listening	to	the	mind,	writing	thoughts	down,	and	describing
thoughts	as	“stories.”	Let’s	take	a	quick	look	at	each	of	these.
NORMALIZING	AND	ALLOWING	THOUGHTS
Notice	how	the	therapist	responds	to	“I	don’t	think	you	can	help	me”	by
saying	“Well,	that’s	a	perfectly	natural	thought.”	We	facilitate	defusion	when
we	describe	a	thought	as	normal,	natural,	typical,	or	common,	and	make	no
attempt	to	judge	it,	challenge	it,	or	get	rid	of	it.
TREATING	THE	MIND	AS	AN	“ENTITY”
Defusion	involves	separating	from	your	thoughts,	so	we	often	find	it	useful
in	ACT	to	talk,	playfully	and	metaphorically,	about	the	mind	as	if	it’s	a
separate	entity.	For	example,	we	may	ask	questions	like,	“What	does	your
mind	tell	you	about	that?”	or	“Who’s	talking	here—you	or	your	mind?”
(Hayes	et	al.,	1999).	In	the	transcript	above,	the	therapist	also	talks	about	the
mind	“getting	stuck	into	you,”	“beating	you	up,”	“calling	you	names,”	and
also	notes	that	it	“likes	to	swear.”
LISTENING	TO	THE	MIND
Many	defusion	techniques	involve	noticing	or	playing	with	the	auditory
properties	of	thoughts.	Here	the	therapist	talks	about	“listening	in	to	the
mind,”	“hearing	what	it	is	saying,”	and	“what	it	sounds	like.”
WRITING	THOUGHTS	DOWN
One	of	the	simplest	ways	of	separating	from	thoughts	is	to	write	them
down.	This	helps	you	to	take	a	step	back	and	see	the	thoughts	for	what	they
are:	strings	of	words.	The	therapist	can	do	the	writing	and	then	pass	it	on	to
the	client,	or	the	client	can	write	the	thoughts	down.
THOUGHTS	AS	STORIES
In	ACT,	we	often	talk	about	thoughts	as	“stories.”	This	ties	in	nicely	to
metaphors	about	the	mind	as	a	storyteller	(more	on	this	below)	and	getting
absorbed	or	lost	in	the	story.	The	therapist	specifically	asks	about	any	“dark
or	scary	stories”	about	the	future.
Practical	Tip
	Once	in	a	blue	moon,	a	client	will	object	to	the	term
“stories.”	If	so,	immediately	apologize	and	explain,	“No	offense	intended.
All	I	meant	by	the	term	“story”	is	that	it’s	a	bunch	of	words	that	conveys
information.	If	the	term	bothers	you,	I’m	more	than	happy	to	call	these
words	‘thoughts,’	‘beliefs,’	or	‘cognitions.’”
Now	before	reading	part	2,	I	encourage	you	to	go	back	to	chapter	1	and
reread	the	ACT	in	a	Nutshell	Metaphor.	In	the	transcript	below,	the	therapist
adapts	sections	1	and	3	of	that	metaphor.
Introducing	Defusion:	Part	2
The	transcript	below	continues	immediately	from	where	part	1	left	off.
Therapist:
	(
handing	the	card	to	the	client
)	So	this	is	the	sort	of	stuff	your
mind	says	to	you	when	it’s	beating	you	up?
Client:
	(
looking	down	at	the	card
)	Yeah.
Therapist:
	I’m	going	to	ask	you	to	do	a	couple	of	things	with	this	card.	They
may	seem	a	bit	odd,	but	I	think	you’ll	get	a	lot	out	of	them.	Is	that
okay?
Client:
	What	sort	of	things?
Therapist:
	Well,	first	I’d	like	you	to	hold	it	tightly,	with	both	hands,	and	hold
it	right	up	in	front	of	your	face	like	this	so	you	can’t	see	me,	so	all
you	can	see	are	those	thoughts	on	the	card.	(
Client	holds	the	card	in
front	of	her	face.
)	That’s	right—and	hold	it	up	so	close	that	it’s
almost	touching	your	nose.	(
The	client	does	so.
)	Now	what’s	it	like
trying	to	have	a	conversation	with	me	while	you’re	all	caught	up	in
those	thoughts?
The	therapist	is	now	doing	section	1	of	the	ACT	in	a	Nutshell	Metaphor.
Client:
	Bloody	hard.
Therapist:
	Do	you	feel	connected	with	me?
Client:
	I	can	hear	you	okay.
Therapist:
	Sure,	but	can	you	read	the	expressions	on	my	face?	Do	you	feel
truly	engaged	with	me?	If	I	was	juggling	balls	right	now,	or	doing	a
mime	act,	would	you	be	able	to	see	what	I	was	doing?
Client:
	I	guess	not.
Therapist:
	And	what’s	your	view	of	the	room	like	while	you’re	all	wrapped
up	in	those	thoughts?”
Client:
	(
grinning
)	What	room?
Therapist:
	So	notice	what’s	going	on	here.	Here’s	your	mind	telling	you	all
these	nasty	stories,	and	the	more	absorbed	you	become,	the	more
you’re	missing	out	on.	You’re	cut	off	from	the	world	around	you;
you’re	cut	off	from	me;	you’re	cut	off	from	everything	except	these
thoughts.
Client:
	Yeah.	That’s	what	it’s	like.
Therapist:
	Notice,	too,	that	while	you’re	clutching	this	stuff,	it’s	hard	to	do
anything	that	enriches	your	life.	Check	it	out:	hold	the	card	as
tightly	as	you	possibly	can	with	both	hands	so	I	can’t	pull	it	from
you.	(
The	client	holds	the	card	tightly	with	both	hands.
)	Now	if	I
asked	you	to	take	an	exam	or	go	for	an	interview,	or	go	for	a	swim
or	hug	someone	you	love,	or	ride	a	bike,	engage	with	your	friends
and	family,	or	have	a	deep	and	meaningful	conversation	with	a
close	friend	while	you’re	holding	on	tightly	to	this,	could	you	do
it?”
Client:
	I	could	give	it	a	shot.
Therapist:
	Okay,	you	could	try.	And	would	doing	it	this	way—all	caught	up
in	those	thoughts—make	it	easier	or	harder	for	you?
Client:
	Yeah,	it’d	be	bloody	difficult.
Therapist:
	Right.	So	when	your	mind	hooks	you	with	these	thoughts,	not	only
do	you	get	cut	off	from	the	world	around	you	and	disconnected
from	other	people,	but	it’s	also	much,	much	harder	to	do	the	things
that	make	your	life	work.
Client:
	(
nodding
)	I	get	the	point.
Therapist:
	Okay,	now	let’s	try	something	else.	Can	I	take	the	card	back?
(
Client	hands	it	over.
)	Now,	is	it	okay	if	I	just	place	this	card	on
your	lap?	(
Client	nods.	The	therapist	leans	forward	and	places	the
card	on	the	client’s	lap.
)	And	can	you	just	let	it	sit	there	for	a
moment?
The	therapist	is	now	doing	section	3	of	the	ACT	in	a	Nutshell	Metaphor.
Therapist:
	Now	how’s	that,	compared	to	having	it	right	in	front	of	your	face?
Do	you	feel	more	connected	with	me?	More	engaged	in	the	world
around	you?
Client:
	Yes.
Therapist:
	Now	notice	those	thoughts	haven’t	gone	anyway.	They’re	still
there.	And	if	you	want	to,	you	can	still	get	all	absorbed	in	them.
Check	it	out	for	yourself.	Look	down	at	the	card	and	give	it	all	your
attention.	(
Client	looks	down	at	the	card	in	her	lap.
)	Notice	how	as
you	get	absorbed	in	those	thoughts,	you	get	cut	off	from	me—and
you	lose	touch	with	the	world	around	you.	(
Client	nods.
)	Now	look
back	at	me.	(
Client	looks	up	at	the	therapist.
)	And	notice	the	room
around	you.	(
Client	looks	around	the	room.
)	Now	which	do	you
prefer—to	get	sucked	into	your	thoughts	down	there	or	to	be	out
here	in	the	world	interacting	with	me?
Client:
	(
smiling
)	I	prefer	this.
Therapist:
Me	too.
Client:
	But	I	keep	wanting	to	look	at	it.
Therapist:
	Of	course	you	do.	Our	minds	train	us	to	believe	that	everything
they	say	to	us	is	
very
	important	and	we	
must
	pay	attention.	The
thing	is	there’s	nothing	written	on	that	card	that’s	new,	is	there?	I
mean	you’ve	had	those	thoughts,	what	hundreds,	thousands	of
times?
Client:
	Try	millions.
Therapist:
	So	notice,	you	have	a	choice	here.	You	can	either	look	down	and
get	all	absorbed	in	this	stuff,	in	all	these	thoughts	that	you’ve	had
zillions	of	times,	or	you	can	just	let	it	sit	there	and	you	can	engage
with	the	world.	The	choice	is	yours.	Which	do	you	choose?
Client:
	Um	…	(
She	seems	unsure.	She	glances	down	at	the	card.
)
Therapist:
	(
warmly,	humorously
)	Oh,	I’ve	lost	you.	(
Client	looks	up	again	at
the	 therapist.
)	Ahh,	you’re	back	again.	See	how	easily	those
thoughts	hook	you?
Client:
	Yeah.	I	know.	That	happens	all	the	time.
Therapist:
	Yeah—to	you,	me,	and	everyone	else	on	the	planet.	That’s	what
we’re	up	against.	That’s	what	minds	do.	They	hook	you.	But	notice
how	different	it	is	when	you	unhook	yourself.	Notice	that	if	now	I
asked	you	to	take	an	exam,	or	go	for	an	interview,	or	go	for	a	swim,
or	hug	someone	you	love—now	you	could	do	it	so	much	more
easily.	And	now	you	can	also	take	in	the	room	and	appreciate	all
this	fantastic	furniture	and	wonderful	decor	from	IKEA.	And	if	I
start	juggling	balls	or	doing	a	mime	show—now	you’ll	be	able	to
see	it.
Client:
	Well,	that	sounds	good,	but	I—I	don’t	know	if	I	could	do	that.
Therapist:
	Well,	there’s	really	only	one	way	to	find	out,	and	that’s	to	give	it	a
go.	We	have	a	fancy	name	for	this	process.	We	call	it	“defusion.”
And	what	I’d	like	to	do,	if	you’re	willing,	is	take	you	through	a
couple	of	simple	defusion	techniques,	and	let’s	just	see	what
happens.	Would	you	be	willing	to	do	that?	Just	give	it	a	go?
Client:
	Okay.
Now	Let’s	Unpack	That:	Part	2
When	we	write	thoughts	down	on	a	card	and	then	turn	the	card	into	a
physical	metaphor,	that	is	a	defusion	technique	in	itself:	the	client	is	probably
already	starting	to	defuse	a	little	from	some	of	the	thoughts	on	that	card.
There	is	some	psychoeducation	here	too:	the	metaphor	illustrates	the
difference	between	fusion	and	defusion,	and	shows	how	fusion	hinders
effective	action.	It	also	draws	out	the	connection	between	defusion	and
contacting	the	present	moment:	defusion	enables	the	client	to	contact	and
engage	with	the	therapist	and	the	room,	whereas	fusion	interferes	with	this.
At	the	end	of	the	transcript,	the	therapist	asks,	“Would	you	be	willing	to	do
that?”	and	the	client	answers,	“Okay.”	The	therapist	can	now	take	the	client
through	any	defusion	technique(s)	he	prefers.	As	a	general	rule,	it’s	best	to
start	with	some	quick	and	easy	techniques	rather	than	the	longer,	more
meditative	ones.
But	suppose	the	client	is	not	so	willing.	Suppose	she	says	she	doesn’t	want
to	let	the	thoughts	just	sit	there—she	wants	to	get	rid	of	them!	Or	suppose	she
says	okay,	but	her	tone	of	voice	and	body	language	suggest	that	she’s	really
not	keen	on	the	idea.	What	could	do	we	do	then?
You	got	it.	In	both	cases,	we	would	confront	the	agenda:	run	through
everything	she’s	tried	to	get	rid	of	these	thoughts,	assess	how	well	it	worked,
and	look	at	what	it	cost.	Then	we’d	come	back	and	ask	something	like,	“So
given	that	you’ve	been	trying	for	years	to	get	rid	of	these	thoughts,	and
clearly	it	hasn’t	worked,	are	you	open	to	exploring	a	different	approach?”
Please	keep	in	mind,	you	don’t	have	to	use	the	thoughts-on-cards	technique
above.	I’ve	used	it	purely	as	an	example	because	I	find	it	so	effective.
However,	we	could	run	through	the	process	conversationally.	First,	we’d	ask
our	client	to	identify	the	thoughts	she	fuses	with.	Then	we’d	clarify	what
happens	when	she	gets	caught	up	in	those	thoughts.	Finally	we’d	ask	about
how	her	life	would	be	different	if	those	thoughts	lost	all	their	impact;	if	she
could	let	them	come	and	go	without	getting	caught	up	in	them.
DEFUSION	IN	EVERYDAY	LANGUAGE
In	the	transcript	above,	the	therapist	uses	the	term	“defusion.”	However,
should	you	for	any	reason	prefer	not	to	use	the	technical	term,	there	are	many
ways	to	talk	about	fusion	and	defusion	in	everyday	language.	To	convey	the
concept	of	fusion,	you	might	talk	about	being	hooked	or	reeled	in	by
thoughts,	getting	entangled	or	caught	up	in	thoughts,	or	getting	lost	or	swept
away	by	them.	Or	you	might	talk	about	holding	on	tightly	to	your	thoughts,
refusing	to	let	them	go,	dwelling	on	them,	stewing	on	them,	buying	into	them,
or	being	absorbed	by	them.	Or	you	could	speak	of	struggling	with	thoughts,
getting	bogged	down	in	them,	or	allowing	them	to	push	you	around.	And	the
list	goes	on.	These	metaphorical	ways	of	speaking	all	convey	the	same	theme:
that	our	thoughts	have	a	major	impact	on	us,	and	we	invest	a	lot	of	time,
energy,	and	effort	in	responding	to	them.
To	convey	the	concept	of	defusion,	you	could	talk	about	noticing	thoughts,
observing	thoughts,	taking	a	step	back	and	watching	your	thoughts;	or	letting
thoughts	come	and	go,	holding	them	lightly,	or	loosening	your	grip	on	them;
or	unhooking	yourself,	disentangling	yourself,	dropping	the	story,	and	so	on.
These	all	convey	the	idea	of	separating	from	your	thoughts	and	allowing	them
to	do	their	own	thing	instead	of	investing	your	time	and	energy	and	effort	in
responding	to	them.
The	Defusion	Smorgasbord
Once	you	have	permission	from	the	client	to	do	an	experiential	exercise,
there’s	a	smorgasbord	of	options	available	to	you.	However,	as	you	read	on,
there	are	two	things	to	keep	in	mind:
1.	Defusion	is	not	a	technique.	There	are	well	over	a	hundred	defusion
techniques	transcribed	in	ACT	textbooks	and	articles,	and	scores	of	others
that	have	never	been	written	up.	But	remember:	defusion	is	a	process,	not	a
technique.	All	those	differing	techniques	are	there	to	help	learn	the	process.
2.	Be	wary	of	invalidation.	When	we	do	work	around	defusion,	we	need	to
stay	in	touch	with	our	compassion	and	respect	for	the	client,	and	to	ensure
that	we	don’t	get	into	a	position	of	one-upmanship.	When	a	client	shares
painful	thoughts	with	us,	there’s	a	potential	danger	in	referring	to	them	as
“stories”	or	doing	some	of	the	more	zany	defusion	techniques	(such	as	saying
thoughts	in	silly	voices	or	singing	them—more	on	this	below).	If	we	do	this
work	carelessly,	it	can	come	across	as	invalidating,	uncaring,	trivializing,	or
demeaning.
So	it’s	important	that	we	compassionately	join	with	the	client:	we	connect
with	his	suffering,	and	we	validate	how	much	pain	he’s	experienced.	From	a
stance	of	compassion,	equality,	and	respect,	we	form	an	alliance	with	the
client.	We	work	together	as	a	team	to	find	a	new	way	of	responding	to	these
thoughts	and	to	develop	a	new	attitude	that	enables	mindful,	valued	living.
When	we	do	our	work	with	this	attitude,	the	risk	of	invalidating	a	client	is
low.	But	without	this	attitude,	the	risk	is	high—especially	with	the	zanier
techniques.	Compassionate,	respectful	playfulness	is	the	quality	we	aim	for	in
all	these	exchanges.
A	Taste	of	Defusion
I’m	now	going	to	take	you	through	several	defusion	techniques	as	if	you
were	a	client	so	you	can	get	a	taste	of	them.	So	pull	out	a	scrap	of	paper,	and
write	down	two	or	three	negative,	self-judgmental	thoughts	your	mind	throws
up	from	time	to	time	to	give	you	a	good	thrashing.	You’ll	need	these	to	work
with	during	the	exercises.	(If	you	need	any	help	coming	up	with	some,
consider	these	questions:	What	does	your	mind	say	about	your	body	when
you	see	yourself	naked	in	the	mirror?	What	does	your	mind	tell	you	about
your	abilities	as	a	therapist	when	you’ve	just	had	a	really	challenging	session
where	nothing	went	right?	What	does	your	mind	tell	you	when	it	really	wants
to	beat	you	up	and	tell	you	you’re	not	good	enough?)
Have	you	done	that?	Okay,	now	pick	the	thought	that	bothers	you	the	most
and	use	it	to	work	through	the	following	exercises.	(At	the	start	of	each
exercise,	I’ll	ask	you	to	fuse	with	your	thought	for	ten	seconds.	You	generally
won’t	need	to	ask	your	clients	to	do	that	as	they’ll	already	be	fused!)
I’M	HAVING	THE	THOUGHT	THAT	…
Put	your	negative	self-judgment	into	a	short	sentence—in
the	form	“I	am	X.”	For	example,	
I’m	a	loser
	or	
I’m	not
smart	enough
Now	fuse	with	this	thought	for	ten	seconds.	In	other	words,
get	all	caught	up	in	it	and	believe	it	as	much	as	you	possibly
can.
Now	silently	replay	the	thought	with	this	phrase	in	front	of
it:	“	I’m	having	the	thought	that	…”	For	example,	
I’m
having	the	thought	that	I’m	a	loser.
Now	replay	it	one	more	time,	but	this	time	add	this	phrase	“I
notice	I’m	having	the	thought	that	…”	For	example,	
I	notice
I’m	having	the	thought	that	I’m	a	loser.
What	happened?	Did	you	notice	a	sense	of	separation	or	distance	from	the
thought?	If	not,	run	through	the	exercise	again	with	a	different	thought.	This
is	a	nice	simple	exercise	(adapted	from	Hayes	et	al.,	1999)	that	gives	an
experience	of	defusion	to	almost	everyone.
In	a	therapy	session,	you	could	follow	up	as	below:
Therapist:
	So	what	happened	to	the	thought?
Client:
	It	sort	of	lost	some	of	its	sting.
Therapist:
	Did	you	get	some	sense	of	separation	or	distance	from	it?
Client:
	Yeah.	It	sort	of	backed	off	a	bit.
Therapist:
	Could	you	just	show	me	with	your	hands	and	your	arms	where	the
thought	seemed	to	move	to?
Client:
	Out	here.	(
The	client	stretches	his	arms	out	in	front	of	his	chest.
)
Therapist:
	So	that’s	part	of	what	we	mean	by	defusion:	you	start	to	separate
from	your	thoughts	and	give	them	some	space	to	move	around	in.
You	could	follow	up	in	other	ways	too.	For	example,	you	could	ask	the
client,	“I	wonder	if	you’d	be	willing	to	try	talking	this	way	in	our	sessions.
Suppose	you	have	some	sort	of	distressing,	painful,	or	unhelpful	thought	like
This	is	all	too	hard.
	When	you	have	a	thought	like	that,	could	you	say	to	me,
“I’m	having	the	thought	that	this	is	all	too	hard?”
Once	this	convention	is	established,	you	can	come	back	to	it	again	and
again	and	play	with	it	as	a	brief	intervention.	Here	are	two	examples:
Client:
	I	can’t	handle	this.
Therapist:
	So	you’re	having	the	thought	that	you	can’t	handle	this.
***
Therapist:
	Could	you	say	that	again,	but	this	time,	preface	it	with	“I’m	having
the	thought	that	…”
Client:
	I’m	having	the	thought	that	I’m	a	stupid	idiot.
Therapist:
	Did	you	notice	any	difference?
Client:
	Yes,	it	didn’t	bother	me	so	much	the	second	time.
Of	course,	you	can	use	this	technique	with	feelings	and	urges	too:	“I’m
having	a	feeling	of	anxiety”	or	“I’m	having	the	urge	to	run	away.”
SINGING	AND	SILLY	VOICES
For	these	two	exercises	(taken	from	Hayes	et	al.,	1999),	use	the	same
negative	self-judgment	as	you	used	above,	or	try	a	new	one	if	the	old	one	has
lost	its	impact:
Put	your	negative	self-judgment	into	a	short	sentence—in
the	form	“I	am	X”—and	fuse	with	it	for	ten	seconds.
Now,	inside	your	head,	silently	sing	the	thought	to	the	tune
“Happy	Birthday.”
Now,	inside	your	head,	hear	it	in	the	voice	of	a	cartoon
character,	movie	character,	or	sports	commentator.
What	happened	that	time?	Did	you	notice	a	sense	of	separation	or	distance
from	the	thought?	If	not,	run	through	the	exercise	again	with	a	different
thought.
Variations	on	the	theme	include	singing	the	thoughts	out	loud,	saying	them
out	loud	in	a	silly	voice,	or	saying	them	in	exaggerated	slow	motion	(for
example,	“I’mmmmmm	stuuuuuuupiiiddddddddd”).	Keep	in	mind	that	in	the
right	context,	zany	techniques	like	these	can	be	very	powerful,	but	in	the
wrong	context,	they	can	be	invalidating	or	demeaning.	For	example,	you
probably	wouldn’t	ask	a	client	with	terminal	cancer	to	sing	her	thoughts	about
dying	to	the	tune	“Happy	Birthday.”
Practical	Tip
	Often	with	these	zany	defusion	techniques	your	client
will	chuckle	or	laugh.	We’re	not	specifically	aiming	for	that	outcome,	but
when	it	happens,	it’s	usually	a	sign	of	significant	defusion,	and	it’s	often
useful	to	highlight	it:	“You’re	smiling.	What’s	going	on?	This	is	a	really	nasty
negative	thought,	isn’t	it?	How	come	you’re	laughing?”	However,	if	your
client	starts	judging	the	thought	harshly—“It	seems	so	silly”	or	“It’s	stupid,
isn’t	it?”—then	we	want	to	defuse	those	judgments	too.For	example,	we
may	say,	“Well,	the	point	is	to	notice	it’s	just	a	bunch	of	words.	We	don’t
need	to	judge	it.	Let’s	just	see	it	for	what	it	is:	a	bunch	of	words	that
popped	into	your	head.”
TITCHENER’S	REPETITION:	LEMONS,	LEMONS,	LEMONS
This	exercise	(Titchener,	1916)	involves	three	steps:
1
.	
Pick	a	simple	noun,	such	as	“lemon.”	Say	it	out	loud	once	or
twice,	and	notice	what	shows	up	psychologically—what
thoughts,	images,	smells,	tastes,	or	memories	come	to	mind.
2
.	
Now	repeat	the	word	over	and	over	out	loud	as	fast	as
possible	for	thirty	seconds—	until	it	becomes	just	a
meaningless	sound.	Please	try	this	now	with	the	word
“lemon,”	before	reading	on.	You	must	do	it	out	loud	for	it	to
be	effective.
3
.	
Now	run	through	the	exercise	again	with	an	evocative
judgmental	word—a	word	that	you	tend	to	use	when	you
judge	yourself	harshly,	for	example,	“bad,”	“fat,”	“idiot,”
“selfish,”	“loser,”	“incompetent,”—or	a	two-word	phrase
such	as	“bad	mother.”
Please	try	this	now	and	notice	what	happens.	Most	people	find	the	word	or
phrase	becomes	meaningless	within	about	thirty	seconds.	Then	we	see	it	for
what	it	truly	is:	an	odd	sound,	a	vibration,	a	movement	of	mouth	and	tongue.
But	when	that	very	same	word	pops	into	our	head	and	we	fuse	with	it,	it	has	a
lot	of	impact	on	us.
COMPUTER	SCREEN
This	exercise	(Harris,	2006)	is	particularly	useful	for	people	who	are	good
at	visualizing.	You	can	also	convert	it	into	a	written	exercise,	using	sheets	of
paper	and	different	colored	pens:
Fuse	with	your	negative	self-judgment	for	ten	seconds.
Now	imagine	a	computer	screen	and	imagine	your	thought
written	up	there	as	plain	black	text.
Now	in	your	mind’s	eye,	play	around	with	the	color.	See	it
written	in	green,	then	blue,	then	yellow.
Now	in	your	imagination,	play	around	with	the	font.	See	it
written	in	italics,	then	in	stylish	graphics,	then	in	one	of
those	big	playful	fonts	you	see	in	children’s	books.
Now	put	it	back	as	plain	black	text,	and	this	time	play
around	with	the	format.	Run	the	words	together.	Then	space
them	out	far	apart.	Then	run	them	vertically	down	the
screen.
Now	put	it	back	as	plain	black	text,	and	this	time,	in	your
mind’s	eye,	animate	the	words	like	those	cartoons	on
Sesame	 Street
.	Have	the	words	jump	up	and	down,	or
wriggle	like	a	caterpillar,	or	spin	in	a	circle.
Now	put	it	back	as	plain	black	text,	and	this	time	imagine	a
karaoke	ball	bouncing	from	word	to	word.	(And	if	you	like,
at	the	same	time,	hear	it	sung	to	“Happy	Birthday.”)
“Meditative”	Techniques
You’ll	notice	in	this	book	I	talk	about	mindfulness	
skills
,	not	mindfulness
meditation.
	That’s	because,	from	an	ACT	perspective,	formal	meditation	is
only	one	way	among	hundreds	of	learning	the	basic	mindfulness	skills	of
defusion,	acceptance,	and	contact	with	the	present	moment.	If	clients	want	to
take	up	meditation	or	other	formal	mindfulness	practices	such	as	yoga	or	tai
chi,	that’s	great—when	it	comes	to	learning	new	skills,	the	more	practice	the
better—but	it’s	definitely	not	something	we	expect	or	ask	for.
Having	said	that,	some	defusion	techniques,	such	as	the	two	that	follow—
Leaves	on	a	Stream	(Hayes	et	al.,	1999)	and	Watch	Your	Thinking—do	have
a	meditative	feel	to	them.	In	these	exercises,	we	observe	our	thoughts	with
openness	and	curiosity;	we	watch	them	come	and	go	without	reacting	to	them
—without	judging	them,	holding	on	to	them,	or	pushing	them	away.
LEAVES	ON	A	STREAM
1
.	
Find	a	comfortable	position,	and	either	close	your	eyes	or
fix	your	eyes	on	a	spot,	whichever	you	prefer.
2
.	
Imagine	you’re	sitting	by	the	side	of	a	gently	flowing
stream,	and	there	are	leaves	flowing	past	on	the	surface	of
the	 stream.	 Imagine	 it	 however	 you	 like—it’s	 your
imagination.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)
3
.	
Now,	for	the	next	few	minutes,	take	every	thought	that	pops
into	your	head,	place	it	on	a	leaf,	and	let	it	float	on	by.	Do
this	regardless	of	whether	the	thoughts	are	positive	or
negative,	pleasurable	or	painful.	Even	if	they’re	the	most
wonderful	thoughts,	place	them	on	the	leaf	and	let	them
float	on	by.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)
4
.	
If	your	thoughts	stop,	just	watch	the	stream.	Sooner	or	later
your	thoughts	will	start	up	again.	(
Pause	20	seconds.
)
5
.	
Allow	the	stream	to	flow	at	its	own	rate.	Don’t	speed	it	up.
You’re	not	trying	to	wash	the	leaves	away—you’re	allowing
them	to	come	and	go	in	their	own	good	time.	(
Pause	20
seconds.
)
6
.	
If	your	mind	says,	
This	is	stupid
	or	
I	can’t	do	it,
	place	those
thoughts	on	a	leaf.	(
Pause	20	seconds.
)
7
.	
If	a	leaf	gets	stuck,	let	it	hang	around.	Don’t	force	it	to	float
away.	(
Pause	20	seconds.
)
8
.	
If	a	difficult	feeling	arises,	such	as	boredom	or	impatience,
simply	acknowledge	it.	Say	to	yourself,	“Here’s	a	feeling	of
boredom”	or	“Here’s	a	feeling	of	impatience.”	Then	place
those	words	on	a	leaf,	and	let	the	leaf	float	on	by.
9
.	
From	time	to	time,	your	thoughts	will	hook	you,	and	you’ll
lose	track	of	the	exercise.	This	is	normal	and	natural,	and	it
will	keep	happening.	As	soon	as	you	realize	it’s	happened,
gently	acknowledge	it	and	then	start	the	exercise	again.
After	instruction	9,	continue	the	exercise	for	several	minutes	or	so,
periodically	punctuating	the	silence	with	this	reminder:	“Again	and	again,
your	thoughts	will	hook	you.	This	is	normal.	As	soon	as	you	realize	it,	start
the	exercise	again	from	the	beginning.”
Afterward	debrief	the	exercise	with	the	client:	What	sort	of	thoughts
hooked	her?	What	was	it	like	to	let	thoughts	come	and	go	without	holding	on?
Was	it	hard	to	let	go	of	any	thoughts	in	particular?	(Clients	often	want	to	hold
on	to	positive	thoughts,	but	that	defeats	the	purpose	of	the	exercise;	the	aim	is
to	learn	how	to	let	thoughts	come	and	go.)	What	feelings	showed	up?	Was
acknowledging	the	feeling	(as	in	instruction	8)	useful?	(This	is	an	acceptance
technique.)
Did	she	speed	up	the	stream,	trying	to	wash	the	thoughts	away?	If	so,	she’s
probably	turning	it	into	a	control	technique,	trying	to	get	rid	of	thoughts.	This
is	not	the	aim.	The	aim	is	to	observe	the	natural	“flow	of	thoughts,”	allowing
them	to	come	and	go	in	their	own	good	time.	That’s	why	I’ve	put	instruction
5	in	there.
You	can	end	the	exercise	with	a	simple	instruction	such	as	this:	“And	now,
bring	the	exercise	to	an	end	…	and	sit	up	in	your	chair	….	and	open	your
eyes.	Look	around	the	room	…	and	notice	what	you	can	see	and	hear	…	and
take	a	stretch.	Welcome	back!”
Practical	Tip
	Some	people	find	visualization	very	hard.	I’m	one	of
them.	So	it’s	a	good	idea	at	the	start	of	any	exercise	requiring	imagination
to	say,	“Different	people	imagine	in	different	ways.	Some	see	very	vivid
pictures	as	on	a	TV	screen.	Other	people	imagine	with	words,	sounds,
feelings,	or	ideas.	However	you	imagine	is	absolutely	fine.”For	the	Leaves
on	a	Stream	exercise,	I	always	offer	the	alternative	of	imagining	a	“moving
blackness”	or	a	“moving	black	strip”—just	a	sense	of	something	black	and
expansive	that	just	keeps	on	rolling	gently	by.	You	place	your	thoughts	on
the	moving	blackness	rather	than	on	the	leaves.
WATCH	YOUR	THINKING
1
.	
I	invite	you	now	to	sit	up	straight,	and	let	your	shoulders
drop.	Gently	push	your	feet	into	the	floor	and	get	a	sense	of
the	ground	beneath	you.	You	can	either	fix	your	eyes	on	a
spot	or	close	them.
2
.	
Now	just	take	a	moment	to	notice	how	you’re	sitting.	(
Pause
5	 seconds.
)	And	notice	how	you’re	breathing.	(
Pause	 5
seconds.
)	And	for	the	next	few	breaths,	really	observe	the
breath—study	it—notice	it	flowing	in	and	out.	(
Pause	10
seconds.
)	Observe	it	as	if	you’re	a	curious	scientist	who	has
never	encountered	breathing	before.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)
3
.	
Now	shift	your	attention	from	your	breathing	to	your
thoughts,	and	see	if	you	can	notice	your	thoughts:	Where	are
your	thoughts?	Where	do	they	seem	to	be	located	in	space?
(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	If	your	thoughts	are	like	a	voice,	where
is	that	voice	located?	Is	it	in	the	center	of	your	head	or	to
one	side?	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)
4
.	
Notice	the	form	of	your	thoughts:	Are	they	more	like
pictures,	words,	or	sounds?	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)
5
.	
Are	your	thoughts	moving	or	still?	If	moving,	at	what	speed
and	in	what	direction?	If	still,	where	are	they	hovering?
6
.	
What	is	above	and	below	your	thoughts?	Are	there	any	gaps
in	between	them?
7
.	
For	the	next	few	minutes,	observe	your	thoughts	coming	and
going	as	if	you’re	a	curious	scientist	who	has	never
encountered	anything	like	this	before.
8
.	
From	time	to	time,	you’ll	get	caught	up	in	your	thoughts,
and	you’ll	lose	track	of	the	exercise.	This	is	normal	and
natural,	and	it	will	keep	happening.	As	soon	as	you	realize
it’s	happened,	gently	acknowledge	it,	then	start	the	exercise
again.
You	could	continue	this	for	several	minutes,	with	periodic	reminders	of	the
last	instruction—or	if	you	only	want	to	do	a	quick	exercise,	you	could	bring	it
to	an	end	at	this	point,	as	suggested	in	the	last	exercise.	Debrief	the	exercise
afterward,	as	with	Leaves	on	a	Stream.
Accentuating	Defusion:	“Letting	Go”	Metaphors
Defusion	is	implicit	in	any	mindfulness	exercise	or	practice:	the	more	we
enter	into	the	world	of	direct	experience,	the	more	we	leave	behind	the	world
of	language.	However,	as	you’ll	see	in	the	next	three	chapters,	some
mindfulness	exercises	are	more	heavily	geared	toward	acceptance,	contacting
the	present	moment,	or	the	observing	self.	We	can	accentuate	defusion	in	any
mindfulness	exercise	by	adding	a	metaphor	or	two	about	“letting	go.”	A	few
examples	follow.
Allow	your	thoughts	to	come	and	go	like
passing	cars,	driving	past	outside	your	house;
clouds	drifting	across	the	sky;
people	walking	by	on	the	other	side	of	the	street;
suitcases	on	a	conveyor	belt;
bubbles	rising	to	the	surface	of	a	pond;
waves	washing	gently	onto	the	beach;
birds	flying	across	the	sky;
trains	pulling	in	and	out	of	the	station;	or
leaves	blowing	gently	in	the	wind.
Common	Client	Misconceptions
Clients	often	have	misconceptions	about	defusion	(as	do	many	new
therapists).	They	may	think	the	point	of	defusion	is	to	get	rid	of	painful
thoughts,	images,	or	memories,	or	to	reduce	the	painful	feelings	associated
with	them.	But	it	is	not.	Please	remember:
The	aim	of	defusion	is	
NOT
	to	feel	better	or	to	get	rid	of
unwanted	thoughts.
The	aim	of	defusion	
IS
	to	reduce	the	influence	of	unhelpful
cognitive	processes	upon	behavior	and	to	facilitate	being
psychologically	present	and	engaged	in	experience.
In	other	words,	the	aim	of	defusion	is	to	enable	mindful,
valued	living.
Clients	often	find	that	when	they	defuse	from	a	painful	thought,	it
disappears,	or	they	feel	better,	or	both.	When	this	happens,	the	therapist	needs
to	clarify	that	(1)	this	is	merely	a	bonus,	not	the	primary	purpose,	and	(2)	it
won’t	always	happen,	so	don’t	expect	it.	If	the	therapist	doesn’t	do	this,
clients	will	start	using	defusion	to	try	to	control	their	thoughts	and	feelings.
And	then,	of	course,	it	no	longer	functions	as	a	mindfulness	technique	but	as	a
control	technique.	And	then	it’s	only	a	matter	of	time	before	the	client
becomes	frustrated	or	disappointed.	Here	are	two	examples	of	how	the
therapist	may	handle	this:
Client:
	That	was	great.	The	thought	just	went	away.
Therapist:
	 Well,	 sometimes	 that	 happens,	 and	 sometimes	 it	 doesn’t.
Sometimes	a	thought	just	keeps	on	hanging	around.	Our	aim	is	not
to	try	and	make	it	go	away;	our	aim	is	to	stop	getting	caught	up	in
it,	make	some	room	for	it,	allow	it	to	be	there	without	struggling—
so	that	if	and	when	it	does	hang	around	for	a	while,	it	doesn’t	stop
you	from	doing	what	matters	and	engaging	fully	in	your	life.
***
Client:
	That’s	good.	I	feel	less	anxious	now.
Therapist:
	Yes,	well	that	quite	often	happens	with	defusion,	but	certainly	not
all	the	time.	Defusion	is	not	some	magical	way	to	control	your
feelings.	The	aim	of	is	to	disentangle	yourself	from	your	thoughts
so	that	you	can	be	in	the	present	moment	and	do	the	things	you
consider	important.	So	if	you	feel	better,	by	all	means	enjoy	it.	But
please,	consider	it	a	bonus,	not	the	main	intention.	If	you	start	using
these	techniques	to	control	how	you	feel,	I	guarantee	you’ll	soon	be
disappointed.
If	your	client	seems	disappointed	or	surprised	when	you	say	this,	it	means
she	has	misunderstood	the	purpose	of	defusion,	in	which	case	you’ll	need	to
recap	it—and	you	may	need	to	visit	(or	revisit)	creative	hopelessness.	One
way	to	do	a	quick	recap	is	to	“replay”	the	ACT	in	a	Nutshell	Metaphor	from
chapter	1	or	the	Hands	As	Thoughts	Metaphor	from	chapter	2.
IT’S	NOT	WORKING!
Sometimes	you	won’t	realize	that	your	client	has	missed	the	point	of
defusion.	That’s	okay;	he’ll	soon	come	back	and	tell	you.	He’ll	say	something
like,	“It’s	not	working!”	In	which	case,	we	ask,	“What	do	you	mean	it’s	not
working?”	He	says,	“Well,	I	tried	all	those	defusion	techniques,	but	I	still	felt
really	anxious.”	And	hey,	presto!	There	we	have	the	control	agenda.	We	can
now	recap	the	purpose	of	defusion	and	clarify	that	it	is	not	a	tool	to	control
our	feelings.	The	fact	is	our	emotions	may	or	may	not	change	when	we	defuse
from	painful	thoughts.	(If	this	seems	odd	to	you,	keep	in	mind	that	it’s	a	myth
that	our	thoughts	create	our	emotions.	Our	emotions	are	under	multiple
sources	of	influence	at	any	time,	and	our	thoughts	are	only	one	influence
among	many,	so	defusing	from	them	may	have	little	or	no	impact	on	our
emotional	state.)
BUT	IT’S	TRUE!
From	time	to	time,	a	client	will	resist	or	criticize	a	defusion	technique	on
the	grounds	that	the	thought	is	true.	It’s	generally	easiest	to	respond	to	this	in
terms	of	workability:	“The	thing	is,	in	ACT,	we’re	not	so	much	interested	in
whether	your	thoughts	are	true	or	false,	but	whether	they’re	helpful.	If	you
hold	this	thought	tightly,	will	it	help	you	to	live	the	life	you	want?	Will	it	help
you	achieve	your	goals,	improve	your	relationships,	or	act	like	the	person	you
want	to	be?”
Below	is	an	example	from	a	therapy	session:
Client:
	But	it’s	true.	I	am	a	bad	mother.
Therapist:
	Well,	one	thing	I	never	intend	to	do	here	is	debate	with	you	about
what’s	true	and	what’s	false.	What	we’re	interested	in	is,	is	this
thought	helpful?	When	you	get	all	caught	up	in	it,	does	it	help	you
to	be	the	sort	of	mother	you’d	like	to	be?
Client:
	Sometimes	it	kicks	my	butt	into	action.
Therapist:
	Sometimes,	yes.	But	most	of	the	time	it	just	drags	you	down,
doesn’t	it?
Client:
	Yes.
Therapist:
	And	once	it’s	dragged	you	down	into	the	depths,	that’s	when
you’re	most	likely	to	neglect	the	kids,	right?	So	most	of	the	time,
getting	caught	up	in	this	thought	doesn’t	help	you	to	be	the	mother
you	want	to	be.
Client:
	No.
Therapist:
	Suppose	you’re	in	the	middle	of	the	sea,	your	boat’s	capsized,	and
you’re	holding	on	tightly	to	a	heavy	suitcase.	You	don’t	want	to	let
go	because	it’s	full	of	precious	belongings.	But	it’s	dragging	you
down,	pulling	you	under	the	water.	What	would	you	do?
Client:
	Let	go	of	it.
Therapist:
	Right.	And	once	you	let	go,	you	could	put	your	energy	into	doing
something	useful—like	swimming	toward	the	shore.	So	how	about
doing	the	same	for	the	“bad	mother”	story?	Regardless	of	whether
it’s	true	or	false,	let	go	of	it	so	you	can	put	your	energy	into	being
the	sort	of	mother	you	really	want	to	be.
At	this	point,	the	therapist	might	well	choose	to	change	tack	and	explore
values	a	little:	to	find	out	what	sort	of	mother	the	client	would	like	to	be
.
The	Suitcase	in	the	Sea	Metaphor,	as	given	in	the	transcript	above,	is
useful	for	both	defusion	and	acceptance.
When	Defusion	Backfires
Occasionally	you’ll	take	a	client	through	a	defusion	technique,	and	it’ll
have	the	opposite	effect	to	what	you	intended:	your	client	will	become	even
more	fused	than	before.	Luckily	this	won’t	happen	often,	but	if	and	when	it
does,	it’s	really	not	a	problem.	Simply	turn	it	into	an	opportunity	to	help	your
client	discriminate	between	fusion	and	defusion—for	example:
Therapist:
	Oh,	I’m	sorry.	That	didn’t	turn	out	the	way	I	expected.	Usually	that
exercise	helps	people	step	back	and	get	some	distance	from	their
thoughts,	but	in	this	case	it	seems	to	have	had	the	opposite	effect.
So	given	that	this	has	happened,	let’s	learn	from	it.	Notice	how
you’re	even	more	caught	up	in	that	thought	than	before.	Notice	the
impact	it’s	having	on	you.	This	is	what	we	mean	by	“fusion.”
Then,	after	debriefing,	you	can	suggest	a	different	defusion	exercise.
Techniques	Galore
There	are	currently	well	over	a	hundred	defusion	techniques	documented	in
ACT	textbooks	and	self-help	books,	and	many	more	that	have	never	been
written	up.	And	there’s	plenty	of	opportunity	for	you	or	your	clients	to	modify
old	techniques	or	create	new	ones.	You	can	do	anything	that	puts	the	thought
into	a	new	context,	where	you	can	see	it	for	what	it	is:	nothing	more	or	less
than	words	or	pictures;	nothing	you	need	to	fight	with,	cling	to,	or	run	from.
For	example,	you	might	visualize	the	thought	as	a	caption	on	a	greeting
card,	written	in	frosting	on	a	birthday	cake,	or	popping	up	inside	the	speech
bubble	of	a	comic	book	character.	Or	you	might	imagine	the	thought	coming
from	a	radio,	or	hear	it	in	the	voice	of	a	well-known	politician	or	sports
commentator.	Or	you	might	imagine	yourself	dancing	with	the	thought,
walking	hand-in-hand	with	it	down	the	street,	or	bouncing	it	up	and	down	like
a	ball.	You	might	draw	or	paint	the	thought,	write	it	out	in	different	colors,	or
sculpt	it	in	clay.	You	might	visualize	it	on	the	T-shirt	of	a	jogger,	imagine	it	as
a	text	message	on	your	cell	phone,	or	see	it	as	a	pop-up	on	your	computer.
You	might	sing	it	in	different	musical	styles	(for	example,	opera,	jazz,	rock	’n’
roll),	say	it	in	an	outrageous	foreign	accent,	or	have	a	hand	puppet	say	it	out
loud.	The	options	are	endless.	So	before	reading	on,	see	if	you	can	think	up	a
few	techniques	of	your	own.	And	have	some	fun	with	it.	(How	often	do	you
hear	that	in	a	textbook?!)
Metaphors	Galore
You	can	also	use	all	sorts	of	metaphors	to	help	with	defusion.	One	of	the
most	useful	is	comparing	the	mind	to	“a	master	storyteller”	because	this	ties
in	very	nicely	with	talking	of	thoughts	as	“stories.”
THE	MASTER	STORYTELLER	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	Our	mind	is	like	the	world’s	greatest	storyteller.	It	never	shuts	up.
It’s	always	got	a	story	to	tell	and	guess	what	it	wants	more	than
anything	else?
Client:
	(
shrugs,	then	shakes	his	head
)
Therapist:
	It	wants	what	any	good	storyteller	wants.	It	wants	us	to	listen.	It
wants	our	full	attention.	And	it’ll	say	whatever	it	can	to	get	our
attention.	Even	if	it’s	painful	or	nasty	or	scary.	And	some	of	the
stories	it	tells	us	are	true.	We	call	those	“facts.”	But	most	of	the
stories	it	tells	us,	we	can’t	really	call	“facts.”	They’re	more	like
opinions,	 beliefs,	 ideas,	 attitudes,	 assumptions,	 judgments,
predictions,	and	so	forth.	They’re	stories	about	how	we	see	the
world,	and	what	we	want	to	do,	and	what	we	think	is	right	and
wrong	or	fair	and	unfair,	and	so	on.	And	one	of	the	things	we	want
to	do	here	is	learn	how	to	recognize	when	a	story	is	helpful,	and
when	it	isn’t.	So	if	you’re	willing	to	do	an	exercise	here,	I’d	like
you	to	just	close	your	eyes—don’t	say	anything	for	about	thirty
seconds—and	just	listen	to	the	story	your	mind	is	telling	you	right
now.
OTHER	METAPHORS
You	can	also	usefully	compare	the	mind	to
a	word	machine:	it	manufactures	a	never-ending	stream	of
words;
radio	“doom	and	gloom”:	it	likes	to	broadcast	a	lot	of	gloom
about	the	past,	a	lot	of	doom	about	the	future,	and	a	lot	of
dissatisfaction	with	the	present;
a	spoiled	brat:	it	makes	all	sorts	of	demands	and	throws	a
tantrum	if	it	doesn’t	get	its	way;
a	reason-giving	machine:	it	churns	out	a	never-ending	list	of
reasons	why	you	can’t	or	shouldn’t	change;
a	fascist	dictator:	it	constantly	orders	you	about	and	tells	you
what	you	can	and	can’t	do;	or
a	 judgment	 factory:	 it	 spends	 all	 day	 long	 making
judgments.
And	so	on	and	so	forth.	Once	you’ve	used	these	metaphors	with	a	client—
and	assuming	the	client	has	embraced	them—you	can	come	back	to	them
again	and	again	in	subsequent	sessions	as	brief	defusion	interventions.	For
example,	in	response	to	a	client	who	comes	out	with	a	whole	stream	of
negative	self-judgments	you	might	say,	“There	goes	the	judgment	factory
again;	it’s	really	pumping	them	out	today.”	Or	in	response	to	a	client	who
keeps	saying,	“I	should	do	X,	I	have	to	do	Y!”	you	might	say,	“Wow!	Seems
like	that	little	fascist	dictator	inside	your	head	is	really	laying	down	the	law
today.”
You	probably	already	know	quite	a	few	metaphors	for	the	mind:	for
example,	the	“chatterbox”	and	the	“inner	critic”	are	both	in	common	usage.
Before	reading	on,	why	not	take	a	few	moments	to	see	if	you	can	come	up
with	a	metaphor	or	two	of	your	own.
Don’t	Forget	About	the	Client
When	I	was	new	to	ACT,	there	were	times	when	I	got	so	caught	up	in
playing	around	with	all	these	wonderful	new	defusion	techniques	that	I	forgot
about	the	human	being	in	front	of	me.	So	we	need	to	remember:	we	do
techniques	
with
	clients,	not	
on
	clients.	And	ACT	is	not	about	delivering
techniques:	it’s	about	building	a	vital,	valued	life.
So	a	mindful,	attuned	connection	with	the	client	is	essential	in	all	this	work.
We	need	to	be	watchful	of	our	clients,	respectful	of	where	they	are	at,	and
open	to	their	responses.	And	if	we	get	so	caught	up	in	delivering	techniques
that	we	neglect	the	relationship,	then	as	soon	as	we	notice	it,	we	should
apologize:	“Whoa!	I’m	so	sorry.	I	just	realized	what	I’ve	been	doing	here.	I
got	so	caught	up	in	my	own	enthusiasm,	I	lost	touch	with	you.	Can	we	just
pause	and	rewind	a	little,	back	to	before	I	started	bombarding	you	with	all	this
stuff?”
These	sorts	of	interactions	not	only	build	a	trusting	and	open	relationship;
they	also	allow	us	to	model	self-awareness	and	self-acceptance.	And	they
demonstrate	that	we’re	in	the	same	boat	as	our	clients:	that	we	too	can	get
caught	up	in	our	heads	and	lose	touch	with	the	present	moment—
and
	we	can
bring	ourselves	back	to	the	present	and	act	effectively!
Psychoeducation
Many	ACT	protocols	include	significant	amounts	of	psychoeducation.
Wherever	possible,	this	is	done	via	experiential	exercises	or	metaphors	rather
than	didactically.	Metaphors	are	particularly	useful	for	teaching	because	(a)
they	convey	a	lot	of	information	in	a	short	space	of	time;	(b)	clients	tend	to
accept	them	because	they	are	truisms;	and	(c)	clients	tend	to	remember	them.
Two	psychoeducational	components	commonly	linked	to	defusion	were
covered	in	the	last	chapter:	“the	illusion	of	control”	and	“the	normality	of
control.”	Two	other	components	often	used	are	“the	normality	of	negative
thinking”	and	“the	illusion	that	thoughts	control	actions.”
The	Normality	of	Negative	Thinking
Normalizing	negative	thinking	often	facilitates	acceptance	and	defusion.
Clients	become	more	willing	to	have	their	thoughts	and	less	intent	on	getting
rid	of	them.	As	a	bonus,	clients	often	feel	a	sense	of	relief	to	know	that
they’re	“normal.”	We’re	sending	them	a	powerful	message:	“Your	mind’s	not
dysfunctional;	it’s	just	doing	what	all	minds	do.	Our	minds	evolved	to	judge,
compare,	and	predict	the	worst.	Your	mind’s	just	doing	its	job.”	The	transcript
that	follows,	on	the	inevitability	of	comparison,	can	also	usefully	be	tagged
on	to	a	creative	hopelessness	intervention.	It	is	written	below	as	we	might
deliver	it	to	clients,	except	in	real	life	we	would	pause	from	time	to	time	and
check	in	with	the	client:	“Does	this	sound	a	bit	like	your	mind?”
THE	INEVITABILITY	OF	COMPARISON
Therapist:
	We’ve	already	talked	a	bit	about	how	our	mind	has	evolved	to
think	negatively,	but	there’s	more	to	it.	You	see,	in	prehistoric	times,
one	absolute	essential	for	survival	was	belonging	to	the	group.	If
the	group	kicked	you	out,	it	wouldn’t	be	long	before	the	wolves	ate
you.	So	how	does	the	mind	prevent	that	happening?	It	compares
you	to	every	member	of	the	tribe:	“Am	I	fitting	in?	Am	I	doing	the
right	thing?	Am	I	doing	it	well	enough?	Am	I	doing	anything	that
could	get	me	thrown	out?”	As	a	result,	our	modern-day	mind
always	compares	us	to	others.	But	now,	there’s	not	just	a	small
group	or	tribe.	Now	we	can	compare	ourselves	to	everyone	on	the
planet—the	rich,	famous,	and	beautiful,	movie	stars,	top	athletes,
even	fictitious	superheroes.	And	we	don’t	have	to	look	far	before
we	find	someone	who	is	“better”	than	us	in	some	way—richer,
taller,	older,	younger,	more	hair,	better	skin,	more	status,	smarter
clothes,	bigger	car,	and	so	on.	As	a	result	of	all	this	comparing,
we’re	all	walking	around	with	some	version	of	the	“I’m	not	good
enough”	story.	For	most	of	us,	it	starts	in	childhood;	for	a	few
people,	it	doesn’t	start	until	the	teenage	years.	And	it’s	the	best-kept
secret	on	the	planet.	Everyone’s	got	multiple	versions	of	this	story
—“I’m	too	old/fat/stupid/boring/fake/unlikeable/lazy/incompetent,
blah,	blah,	blah”	or	“I’m	not	smart	enough/rich	enough/slim
enough,	and	so	on.”	We’ve	all	got	this	story,	but	almost	no	one	talks
about	it.
The	Illusion	That	Our	Thoughts	Control	Our	Actions
One	 of	 the	 key	 insights	 that	 we	 want	 our	 clients	 to	 understand
experientially	is	that	our	thoughts	do	not	control	our	actions.	Thoughts	have	a
lot	of	influence	on	our	actions	when	we	fuse	with	them;	they	have	much	less
influence	when	we	defuse.	Once	clients	understand	this,	it	enables	us	to	do
brief	interventions	such	as	these:
Client:
	I	don’t	think	I	can	do	it.
Therapist:
	Can	you	have	that	thought	and	do	it	anyway?
***
Client:
	I	just	know	this	is	going	to	turn	out	badly.
Therapist:
	Well,	that’s	what	your	mind’s	going	to	tell	you.	Can	you	let	your
mind	tell	you	that,	and	still	go	ahead	with	it?
The	transcripts	that	follow	highlight	a	more	realistic	view	of	the
relationship	among	thoughts,	feelings,	and	actions.	They’re	written	as	we
might	deliver	them	to	our	clients.
IF	OUR	THOUGHTS	AND	FEELINGS	CONTROLLED	OUR	ACTIONS
Therapist:
	If	our	thoughts	and	feelings	really	controlled	our	actions,	where
would	we	be?	Think	of	all	those	angry,	resentful,	vengeful	thoughts
and	feelings	you’ve	had.	Remember	all	those	nasty	things	you
thought	about	saying	or	doing	to	the	people	you	were	angry	with.
Imagine	if	those	thoughts	and	feelings	had	controlled	your	actions
—if	you	had	actually	gone	and	done	all	those	things.	Where	would
we	all	be	if	our	thoughts	and	feelings	controlled	our	actions?	(
Wait
for	the	client	to	answer.	She	will	usually	say	“in	prison,”	“in	the
hospital,”	or	“dead.”	If	she	doesn’t,	you	can	supply	these	answers
for	her.
)
HAVE	YOU	EVER	HAD	THOUGHTS	AND	FEELINGS	YOU	DIDN’T	ACT	ON?
Therapist:
	Have	you	ever	had	thoughts	and	feelings	you	didn’t	act	on?	For
example,	did	you	ever	have	the	thought	“I	can’t	do	this,”	but	you
went	ahead	and	did	it	anyway?	(
After	this	and	each	subsequent
question,	try	to	elicit	answers	from	the	client.
)	Did	you	ever	have
thoughts	about	yelling	at	someone	or	leaving	your	partner	or
quitting	your	job	or	calling	in	sick,	but	you	didn’t	act	on	them?	Did
you	ever	feel	angry	but	act	calmly?	Did	you	ever	feel	frightened	but
act	confidently?	Did	you	ever	feel	sad	but	act	as	if	you	were	happy?
Did	you	ever	feel	like	running	away	from	an	awkward	or	stressful
situation,	but	you	stayed?	What	does	this	show	you?	Do	your
thoughts	and	feelings	truly	control	your	actions,	or	do	you	have
some	choice	in	how	you	act?
I	CAN’T	LIFT	MY	ARM
Therapist:
	I’d	like	you	to	silently	repeat	to	yourself,	
I	can’t	lift	my	arm.
	Say	it
over	and	over	in	your	head	and	as	you’re	saying	it,	lift	your	arm	up.
(
Wait	until	the	client	lifts	his	arm	up.	Usually	there	will	be	a	pause
of	a	second	or	two.
)	So	you	can	lift	your	arm	up	even	though	your
mind	says	you	can’t.	Did	you	notice	how	you	hesitated	though?
We’re	so	used	to	believing	whatever	our	minds	tell	us,	for	a
moment	there	you	actually	believed	it.	Now	repeat	to	yourself,	“I
have	to	stand	up,”	and,	as	you	say	it,	remain	seated.
Summary	of	Defusion	Techniques
The	diagram	below	(see	figure	7.1)	encapsulates	many	common	defusion
techniques	(but	not	even	close	to	all	of	them).	The	box	at	the	very	bottom	is
entitled	“The	Classics”	because	these	all	come	from	the	very	first	ACT
textbook	ever	written,	
Acceptance	and	Commitment	Therapy:	An	Experiential
Approach	to	Behavior	Change
	(Hayes	et	al.,	1999),	and	they	represent	some
of	the	oldest	ACT	techniques	in	use.	Most	of	the	boxes	are	self-explanatory,
but	I’d	like	to	quickly	touch	on	a	few	of	them.
Problem	Solving
A	client	will	often	feel	very	guilty	if	she	has	thoughts	about	killing	herself,
or	wishing	she	were	dead,	or	leaving	her	partner,	or	running	away	from	her
kids.	These	are	common	thoughts	that	many	people	have	when	under	stress,
and	we	can	normalize,	validate,	and	reframe	them	by	pointing	out,	“This	is
just	your	mind	problem	solving.	This	is	what	it	evolved	to	do.”	Defusion
happens	when	the	client	can	recognize	the	thought	as	merely	an	automatic
product	of	that	amazing	“problem-solving	machine”	we	call	the	mind.	(You
can	link	this	to	the	Problem-Solving	Machine	Metaphor	in	chapter	2.)
Workability/Pragmatism
The	questions	in	these	boxes	look	at	the	
function
	of	thoughts	as	opposed	to
the	
content
.	They	all	ask	the	same	question:	how	does	it	work	for	you,	in
terms	of	living	a	rich	and	full	life,	if	you	fuse	with	a	thought—that	is,	if	you
allow	it	to	have	a	major	influence	over	your	actions?	This	neatly	sidesteps	the
issue	of	whether	thoughts	are	true	or	false.	Below	are	a	few	more	useful
questions	for	clients	to	ask	themselves.
Helpful	Questions	for	Unhelpful	Thoughts
Is	this	thought	in	any	way	useful	or	helpful?
Is	this	an	old	story?	Have	I	heard	this	one	before?
What	would	I	get	for	buying	into	this	story?
Could	this	be	helpful,	or	is	my	mind	just	babbling	on?
Does	this	thought	help	me	take	effective	action?
If	I	let	this	thought	guide	my	actions,	which	direction	will	it
take	me?	Towards	vital,	valued	living,	or	struggle	and
suffering?
Does	this	thought	help	me	to	be	who	I	want	to	be?
Insight/Secondary	Gains
The	questions	in	these	boxes	also	look	at	the	function	of	thoughts.	The
client	develops	insight	into	how	her	behavior	changes	when	she	fuses	with
thoughts	and	becomes	aware	of	the	costs	and	benefits	of	allowing	this	to
happen.	This	approach	to	thoughtsalso	sidesteps	the	true/false	issue.
The	Observing	Self
Although	we’ve	already	touched	on	self-as-context,	commonly	known	as
the	“observing	self,”	several	times	in	previous	chapters,	we	won’t	cover	it	in
depth	until	chapter	10.	I	just	want	to	mention	here	that	once	we’ve	introduced
the	observing	self	and	run	through	some	of	the	brief	exercises	in	chapter	10,
we	have	a	way	of	instantly	facilitating	defusion:	“Can	you	look	at	this	thought
from	the	perspective	of	the	observing	self?”	“Take	a	step	back	and	see	if	you
can	look	at	your	thoughts	from	the	viewpoint	of	your	observing	self,”
“Notice,	this	is	your	mind	in	full	flight—it	desperately	wants	you	to	get	all
caught	up	in	what	it’s	telling	you.	See	if	you	can	go	into	the	psychological
space	of	your	observing	self	and,	from	that	space,	notice	what	your	thoughts
are	doing.”	Or	simplest	of	all:	“Let’s	look	at	that	thought	from	the	observing
self.”
Keeping	Defusion	Simple
As	we’ve	seen,	there	are	all	sorts	of	defusion	techniques	and	you	can
certainly	have	a	lot	of	fun	inventing	your	own,	and/or	getting	your	clients	to
do	so.	However,	I	find	there	are	plenty	of	times	where,	for	one	reason	or
another,	I	just	like	to	keep	it	all	very	simple.	So	here	are	a	few	of	the	simplest
defusion	interventions	I	know:
“Notice	what	your	mind	is	telling	you	right	now.”	This	simple	phrase—or	the
shorter	version,	“Notice	that	thought”—is	usually	instantly	defusing.	It
instantly	gets	your	client	to	notice	his	thoughts	rather	than	being	caught	up	in
them.	Sure,	it	may	not	give	him	a	huge	degree	of	defusion,	but	it	rapidly
creates	a	little	distance	from	his	thoughts.	This	can	then	be	increased	by
adding	in	any	number	of	brief	defusion	techniques.	For	example,	you	can	ask
questions	like	these:	“Is	this	a	helpful	thought?”	“How	old	is	this	story?”
“What	would	happen	if	you	allowed	yourself	to	get	all	caught	up	in	this?
Would	it	be	a	good	use	of	your	time	and	energy?”	Alternatively	you	might	go
for	responses	in	which	the	client	notices	the	form	(see	below).
Notice	the	form.	You	can	ask	your	client	to	notice	the	form	of	the	thought:	“Is
it	made	up	of	words,	sounds,	or	pictures?	Do	you	see	it	or	hear	it	or	just	sense
it?”	You	may	choose	to	focus	on	the	sound:	“What	does	that	thought	sound
like	in	your	head?	Is	it	your	own	voice	or	somebody	else’s?	Is	it	loud	or	soft?
What	emotion	can	you	hear	in	that	voice?”	Or	you	may	focus	on	location	and
movement:	“Just	close	your	eyes	for	a	moment	and	notice	where	that	thought
seems	to	be:	Is	it	in	front	of	you,	above	you,	behind	you,	inside	your	head,
inside	your	body?	Is	it	moving	or	still?	If	moving,	in	what	direction	and	at
what	speed	is	it	moving?”
Hands	As	Thoughts	Metaphor.	You’ll	find	this	little	exercise	in	chapter	2.	It’s
a	simple	metaphor	for	fusion	and	defusion,	and,	once	established,	you	can	use
it	to	help	clients	gage	how	fused	they	are,	as	in	this	transcript:
Client:
	I	don’t	deserve	any	better.
Therapist:
	So	your	mind’s	telling	you	don’t	deserve	any	better.	Right	now,
how	caught	up	in	that	thought	are	you?	Are	you	like	this	(
holds	her
hands	over	her	eyes)
	or	like	this	(
rests	her	hands	in	her	lap
),	or
somewhere	in	between?
“That’s	an	interesting	thought.”	This	is	what	I	say	when	I	don’t	know	what	to
say.	When	a	client	says	something	that	throws	me,	triggers	a	strong	reaction,
or	sets	my	mind	in	a	frenzy	trying	to	figure	out	how	to	respond,	I	find	this
little	phrase	stops	me	from	rushing	in	and	getting	caught	up	in	the	content.	It’s
a	simple	phrase	that	reminds	both	me	and	the	client	that	no	matter	what	she
has	just	said,	what	we’re	dealing	with	is	a	thought.	And	it	invites	us	both	to
stop	and	look	at	the	thought	rather	than	leaping	straight	into	the	content	of	the
thought.	I	often	follow	this	statement	with	a	long	pause,	which	allows	me	to
center	myself	so	I	can	respond	effectively	and	mindfully.
Thank	Your	Mind.	Encourage	your	client	to	thank	his	mind	for	its	input
(Hayes	et	al.,	1999).	You	might	say,	“Whatever	your	mind	says	to	you,	no
matter	how	nasty	or	scary,	see	if	you	can	simply	reply,	‘Thanks,	mind!’”	Do
this	with	a	sense	of	humor	and	an	appreciation	of	your	mind’s	amazing
capacity	for	grabbing	your	attention	with	any	means	at	its	disposal.”
Short	phrases.	When	your	client	expresses	a	particularly	negative,	critical,	or
unhelpful	thought,	you	could	say	“Nice	one!”	with	a	sort	of	nonchalant,
humorous	openness.	Or	you	can	use	other	words	such	as	“lovely,”	“neat,”
“beautiful,”	or	“very	creative.”	Once	the	client	“gets”	the	concept,	purpose,
and	experience	of	defusion—and	provided	there	is	a	good	therapeutic	rapport
so	there’s	no	chance	of	the	client	feeling	invalidated	or	belittled—then	you
can	say	these	words	in	response	to	a	wide	variety	of	harsh	criticisms,
judgments,	catastrophic	thoughts,	or	other	“nasty	stories.”	Accompanied	by	a
compassionate	grimace,	saying	“Ouch!”	can	also	work	well.
Introducing	Defusion:	Part	3
The	third	and	final	part	of	this	transcript	picks	up	about	twenty	minutes
after	the	end	of	part	2.	During	that	time,	the	therapist	took	the	client	through
several	brief	defusion	techniques,	asking	her	to	work	with	some	of	the
thoughts	written	on	the	card.	Once	she	could	discriminate	fusion	and	defusion
experientially,	he	then	didactically	explained	it	as	in	the	Simple	Summary	of
Fusion	vs.	Defusion	from	chapter	2.	During	all	that	time,	the	client	had	the
card	sitting	on	her	lap,	an	ongoing	metaphor	for	defusion	and	acceptance.
Occasionally	she	would	look	down	at	the	card,	and	the	therapist	would	ask,
“Has	it	hooked	you?”	When	the	client	looked	up	again,	the	therapist	would
make	a	light-hearted	comment	like,	“Ah.	You’re	back	again.”
Now,	in	part	3,	the	therapist	ties	the	whole	session	together	with	another
defusion	technique	called	Naming	the	Story	(Harris,	2007)	that	neatly	doubles
up	as	homework.
Therapist:
	So	let’s	come	back	to	all	these	thoughts	on	the	card	there.	I’m
going	to	ask	you	something	and	it	may	seem	a	bit	odd.
Client:
	I’m	getting	used	to	it.
Therapist:
	Suppose	we	took	all	these	thoughts,	and	all	the	painful	feelings	and
memories	that	go	with	them,	and	we	put	them	all	into	a
documentary	of	your	life,	or	an	autobiography.	And	suppose	you
were	to	give	that	film	or	book	a	short	title—the	something
something	story,	for	example,	the	“I’m	no	good”	story	or	the	“life
sucks”	story—then	what	would	you	call	it?	And	please	make	sure
the	title	acknowledges	and	honors	just	how	much	you	have
suffered;	don’t	pick	a	title	that	trivializes	or	makes	light	of	it.
Client:
	Um.	How	about	the	“useless	Jane”	story.
Therapist:
	Okay.	And	you’re	quite	sure	that	title	acknowledges	your	suffering
and	doesn’t	trivialize	it?
Client:
	Yeah.
Therapist:
	Okay.	Can	I	have	the	card	back	for	a	moment?	(
The	client	passes	it
over.
)	I’m	going	to	write	that	title	on	the	back	here.	(
The	therapist
flips	the	card	over	and	writes
,	AHA!	HERE	IT	IS	AGAIN!	THE
“USELESS	JANE”	STORY!)	Okay,	now	here’s	what	I’d	like	you	to
do,	if	you’re	willing.	First,	I’m	going	to	ask	you	to	read	through	all
of	these	negative	thoughts	on	this	side.	Then	flip	the	card	over	and
read	what’s	written	on	the	back,	and	just	notice	what	happens.
Client:
	Do	you	mean	read	it	out	loud?
Therapist:
	No.	Just	do	it	in	your	head.	And	I	honestly	don’t	know	what	will
happen.	Are	you	willing	to	just	do	it	as	an	experiment?
Client:
	Sure.	(
The	therapist	passes	the	card	to	the	client.	She	silently	reads
through	all	the	negative	thoughts,	a	frown	on	her	face.	Then	she
flips	the	card	over	and	reads	the	statement	on	the	back.	Then	she
grins.
)
Therapist:
	You’re	smiling.	How	come?
Client:
	It’s	sort	of	amusing,	I	think.	It’s	like	you	said.	I	can	see	it	as	a	story.
That’s	what	it	is.	It’s	the	“useless	Jane”	story.
Therapist:
	And	are	you	caught	up	in	this	story?
Client:
	No.	It’s—this	card	sort	of	contains	it.
Therapist:
	So	let	me	ask	you,	is	it	okay	to	have	that	story?	Have	you	got	room
for	it?
Client:
	When	it’s	like	this.
Therapist:
	When	you’re	defused	from	it?
Client:
	Yeah.
Therapist:
	Well,	that’s	what	we’re	aiming	for.	You	can’t	get	rid	of	the	story—
not	without	major	brain	surgery	anyway—but	you	can	learn	to	hold
it	lightly.
Client:
	Well,	I	can	do	it	in	here.	But	I	don’t	know	about	outside.
Therapist:
	I’m	glad	you	said	that.	Because	defusion	is	a	skill,	and	it	needs
practice.	Like	I	said	to	you	last	session,	if	you	want	to	become	a
good	guitarist,	you	need	to	practice	in	between	your	guitar	lessons.
So	if	you	want	to	get	better	at	doing	this,	would	you	be	willing	to
practice	a	couple	of	things	between	this	session	and	the	next?
Client:
	Like	what?
Therapist:
	Well,	the	first	thing	is	to	practice	naming	the	story.	For	the	next
week,	anytime	a	thought	or	a	feeling	or	a	memory	that	is	linked	to
this	story	shows	up,	the	moment	you	notice	it,	I’d	like	you	to	say	to
yourself,	“Aha!	There’s	the	‘useless	Jane’	story”	or	something	like
that.	But	that’s	all	you	do.	Just	name	it.	Sometimes	it’ll	hook	you
before	you’re	aware	of	it.	That’s	normal.	We	expect	it.	As	soon	as
you	realize	it’s	happened,	say	to	yourself,	“Oh.	Just	got	hooked	by
the	‘useless	Jane’	story.”	Does	that	sound	doable?
Client:
	Yeah.	I’ll	give	it	a	go.
Therapist:
	There’s	another	thing	too.	And	this	may	seem	a	bit	odd,	so	please
feel	free	to	say	no	if	you	don’t	want	to	do	it.
Client:
	Okay.
Therapist:
	Okay.	Well,	what	I’d	like	you	to	do	is	carry	this	card	around	in
your	purse	for	the	next	week	and	pull	it	out	at	least	four	or	five
times	a	day.	Read	through	all	these	negative	thoughts,	and	then	flip
the	card	over	and	read	what’s	written	on	the	back.
Client:
	I	hope	no	one	gets	into	my	purse.
Therapist:
	(
chuckles)
	Would	you	be	willing	to	do	that?	It’s	fine	if	you	don’t
want	to.	There	are	plenty	of	other	things	I	can	suggest.
Client:
	No.	That’s	fine.
Therapist:
	Great.
Now	Let’s	Unpack	That:	Part	3
Okay,	before	we	wrap	up,	here	are	a	few	things	to	consider:
1
.	
It	doesn’t	always	go	that	smoothly.	This	client	readily
embraced	defusion.	A	few	may	find	it	difficult	or	miss	the
point.	Others	may	return	to	the	control	agenda.	If	the	latter,
your	best	bet	is	to	jump	back	to	creative	hopelessness.
2
.	
The	therapist	could	have	used	any	number	of	defusion
techniques	in	this	session.	There’s	nothing	essential	about
writing	thoughts	on	a	card	or	naming	the	story.	However,	as
you’ve	probably	guessed,	the	therapist	is	me—and	this
double-combo	is	my	personal	favorite.	I	particularly	like
using	an	index	card	because	(a)	it	provides	a	great	physical
metaphor	to	work	with	in	session;	(b)	when	your	client	takes
it	away,	it	reminds	him	of	the	session	and	jogs	his	memory
about	homework;	(c)	carrying	the	card	around	in	a	purse	or
wallet	is	an	ongoing	metaphor	for	defusion	and	acceptance;
and	(d)	you	can	write	several	defusion	techniques	on	the
back	of	the	card,	if	you	like,	to	jog	the	client’s	memory.
3
.	
Suppose	the	client	is	reluctant	to	take	the	card	away.
Suppose	she	says,	“No,	I	don’t	want	it.”	That	would	indicate
both	fusion	and	experiential	avoidance.	In	this	case,	you
wouldn’t	try	to	coerce	her.	Instead	put	the	card	in	her	file
and	keep	it	for	more	work	in	the	next	session.
Fusion	vs.	Believability
Fusion	isn’t	the	same	as	believability.	You	can	fuse	with	a	thought	you	don’t
believe,	and	you	can	defuse	from	a	thought	that	you	do	believe.	A	couple	of
years	ago	I	gave	a	workshop	and	one	of	the	attendees—let’s	call	her	Naomi—
came	up	to	me	at	the	morning	coffee	break	and	told	me	that	she	had	a
malignant	brain	tumor.	The	tumor	was	untreatable,	and	Naomi	had	only	a	few
months	to	live.	She	was	attending	the	workshop	for	personal	reasons:	to	help
cope	with	her	fear,	and	come	to	terms	with	her	impending	death.	Naomi	said
it	was	hard	to	stay	focused	in	the	workshop.	She	kept	thinking	about	dying:
losing	her	loved	ones,	the	tumor	spreading	through	her	brain,	the	inevitable
deterioration	to	paralysis	and	coma,	then	death.
Now	clearly	if	you	have	a	terminal	illness	there’s	a	time	and	a	place	when
it’s	useful	to	think	about	dying:	if	you’re	writing	a	will,	planning	a	funeral,
making	medical	care	arrangements,	or	sharing	your	fears	with	a	loved	one.
But	if	you’re	attending	a	workshop	for	personal	growth,	it’s	not	useful	to	be
so	fused	with	your	thoughts	about	dying	that	you’re	missing	out	on	the
workshop.	So	after	listening	compassionately,	I	talked	to	Naomi	about
naming	the	story,	and	she	chose	this	title:	the	“scary	death”	story.
I	asked	her	to	practice	naming	the	“scary	death”	story	throughout	the
workshop.	By	midway	through	the	second	day,	she	had	significantly	defused
from	those	thoughts	about	death	and	dying.	They	had	not	altered	in
believability	one	tiny	bit,	but	she	was	now	able	to	let	them	come	and	go
without	getting	caught	up	in	them.
When	we	defuse	from	thoughts,	they	often	do	reduce	in	believability—but
from	an	ACT	perspective,	it’s	not	that	important.	After	all,	believing	a
thought	simply	means	taking	it	to	be	true.	In	ACT,	we’re	interested	not	in
whether	a	thought	is	true	or	false,	but	whether	it	can	help	us	with	valued
living.
Homework	and	the	Next	Session
Homework	is	essential.	Defusion,	like	any	skill,	requires	practice.	Not	all
clients	will	do	it,	of	course,	but	we	should	at	least	ask	them.	Homework	could
involve	a	quick	technique	to	practice	intermittently	throughout	the	day—like
Naming	the	Story.	Alternatively,	if	you	took	the	client	through	Leaves	on	a
Stream	or	a	mindful	breathing	exercise,	you	could	ask	him	to	practice	that
each	day.	You	might	like	to	record	these	exercises	while	you’re	doing	them	in
session,	then	burn	them	onto	a	CD	and	give	them	to	your	clients	to	assist	their
practice	at	home.	Most	clients	find	this	very	helpful.	(These	days	I	have
prerecorded	CDs	that	I	give	to	all	my	clients	on	the	first	session.	The	CDs	are
imaginatively	titled	
Mindfulness	 Skills	 Volume	 1
	and	
Mindfulness	 Skills
Volume	 2
,	 and,	 if	 interested,	 you	 can	 purchase	 them	 from
www.actmadesimple.com
.)
Another	type	of	homework	involves	asking	clients	to	fill	in	a	worksheet
such	as	Getting	Hooked,	which	you’ll	find	at	the	end	of	this	chapter.
For	a	more	informal	homework,	you	might	say	something	as	below:
Therapist:
	Between	now	and	next	session,	I	wonder	if	you’d	be	willing	to
practice	a	few	things.	First,	I’d	like	you	to	learn	more	about	how
your	mind	hooks	you	and	reels	you	in.	In	what	situations	does	it
happen?	What	sort	of	things	does	it	say	to	you?	And	as	soon	as	you
realize	you’ve	been	hooked,	just	acknowledge	it:	“Aha!	Hooked
again.”	Second,	I’d	like	you	to	play	around	with	one	of	those
defusion	techniques	we	covered.	(
Select	one	or	ask	the	client	to	pick
one
.)	Then	whenever	you’re	feeling	wound	up,	stressed,	anxious,	or
whatever,	identify	the	“hot”	thought—the	one	that	burns	you	the
most—and	try	defusing	from	it.	Third,	I’d	like	you	to	notice	any
times	that	your	mind	tries	to	hook	you,	but	you	don’t	take	the	bait—
you	just	let	the	mind	do	its	thing,	but	you	don’t	get	caught	up	in	it.
Practical	Tip
	You	can	make	homework	a	win-win	experience.	First,
when	 you	 introduce	 the	 homework,	 you	 could	 say,	 “Do	 this	 as	 an
experiment	to	see	what	happens,”	or	“Do	this	to	learn	more	about	how	your
mind	works,”	or	“Do	this	to	discover	more	about	yourself	and	how	you
operate.”	 Second,	 say	 something	 like,	 “Let’s	 make	 this	 a	 win-win
proposition.	I	hope	you	follow	through	because,	as	I	said	earlier,	practice	is
important.	However,	if	you	don’t	do	it,	I’d	like	you	to	notice	what	stopped
you.	What	thoughts	did	you	get	caught	up	in,	what	feelings	did	you	get	into
a	struggle	with,	or	what	kind	of	things	did	you	do	that	got	in	the	way?”
During	the	next	session,	if	the	client	hasn’t	followed	through,	you	would
address	these	barriers	as	in	chapter	13.
The	first	thing	to	do	on	the	next	session—preferably	after	a	brief	check-in
and	mindfulness	exercise—is	review	the	homework	and	see	what	happened.
We	may	need	to	do	more	work	around	defusion,	or	if	the	client	has	fallen	into
the	control	agenda,	we	may	need	to	move	to	creative	hopelessness.	If	he’s
making	progress	(that	is,	he’s	finding	it	easier	to	defuse	from	unhelpful
thoughts),	we	traditionally	move	on	to	acceptance	and	contacting	the	present
moment—but	we	could	move	to	any	other	part	of	the	hexaflex.
Of	course,	it’s	not	as	if	defusion	is	covered	entirely	in	one	or	two	sessions
and	then	never	mentioned	again.	As	mentioned	at	the	start	of	this	chapter,	in
every	single	session,	we	help	our	clients	defuse	from	unhelpful	cognitions
with	simple	interventions	like	these:	“Notice	what	your	mind	is	telling	you.	Is
this	an	old	story	or	a	new	one?”	or	“So	if	you	let	that	thought	dictate	what	you
do,	will	it	lead	you	to	vitality	or	suffering?”
Homework	for	You
Is	this	the	end	of	defusion?	No	way.	We’ll	be	revisiting	it	throughout	the
book.	But	before	reading	on,	let’s	talk	about	your	homework	for	this	chapter.
Here	are	a	few	suggestions:
1
.	
Try	out	all	the	defusion	techniques	on	yourself.	You’re	the
best	person	to	practice	on!
2
.	
Read	all	the	exercises,	metaphors,	and	psychoeducational
components	out	loud,	as	if	taking	a	client	through	them.
3
.	
Review	the	cases	of	two	or	three	clients,	and	identify	key
thoughts	that	they’re	fusing	with.	Especially	look	for	fusion
with	past,	future,	self,	rules,	reasons,	and	judgments.	Then
consider	which	defusion	techniques	you	might	try	with
them.
And	if	you	don’t	do	any	of	this,	identify	what’s	stopping	you,	in	terms	of
fusion,	experiential	avoidance,	and	ineffective	action.	What	thoughts	are	you
fusing	with?	(For	example,	“I	can’t	be	bothered”	or	“I’ll	do	it	later”	or	“I
don’t	need	to	do	this	stuff;	reading	is	enough.”)	What	feelings	are	you
avoiding—reluctance,	impatience,	apathy,	anxiety?	What	ineffective	actions
are	you	taking—procrastinating,	distracting	yourself,	skim	reading?
Summary
The	ability	to	think	is	very,	very	useful,	but	the	greater	the	degree	of	fusion
with	our	thoughts,	the	more	inflexible	our	behavior	becomes.	We	facilitate
defusion	in	every	session	of	ACT	by	repeatedly	asking	clients	to	notice	what
they’re	thinking,	discriminate	fusion	from	defusion,	and	look	at	their	thoughts
in	terms	of	workability.	And	we	never	need	to	debate	whether	a	thought	is
true	or	false—all	we	need	to	ask	is	something	like	this:	“If	you	hold	on	tightly
to	this	thought,	will	it	help	you	to	live	the	life	you	want?”
Chapter	8.	Open	Up
Acceptance	in	a	Nutshell
In	Plain	Language:	
Acceptance
	means	allowing	our	thoughts	and	feelings	to
be	as	they	are,	regardless	of	whether	they	are	pleasant	or	painful;	opening	up
and	making	room	for	them;	dropping	the	struggle	with	them;	and	letting	them
come	and	go	as	they	naturally	do.
Aim:	To	allow	ourselves	to	have	painful	private	experiences	if	and	when
doing	so	enables	us	to	act	on	our	values.
Synonyms:	Willingness,	expansion.
Method:	Make	full,	open,	undefended	psychological	contact	with	unwanted
private	experiences.
When	to	Use:	When	experiential	avoidance	becomes	a	barrier	to	values-
congruent	action.
A	Few	Words	on	Acceptance
Clients	often	don’t	understand	what	acceptance	is;	they	commonly	think	it
means	resignation,	tolerance,	“gritting	your	teeth	and	putting	up	with	it,”	or
even	liking	it.	Therefore,	early	on	in	therapy,	it’s	best	to	avoid	the	word.
Traditionally	“willingness”	is	used	as	an	alternative—that	is,	the	willingness
to	have	your	thoughts	and	feelings	as	they	are,	in	this	moment.	Another	term
you	can	use	is	“expansion”;	this	fits	nicely	with	the	metaphorical	talk	of
opening	up,	creating	space,	and	making	room.	Here	are	a	few	others	to	play
around	with:
Allow	it	to	be	there.
Open	up	and	make	room	for	it.
Expand	around	it.
Give	it	permission	to	be	where	it	already	is.
Let	go	of	struggling	with	it.
Stop	fighting	with	it.
Make	peace	with	it.
Give	it	some	space.
Soften	up	around	it.
Let	it	be.
Breathe	into	it.
Stop	wasting	your	energy	on	pushing	it	away.
A	Quick	Reminder
Sorry	to	keep	harping	about	this,	but	it’s	very	important,	and	many	new
practitioners	get	the	wrong	idea:	for	the	third	(and	final)	time,	we’re	not
mindfulness	fascists	in	ACT.	We	don’t	advocate	acceptance	of	every	single
thought	and	feeling.	We	advocate	acceptance	if	and	when	it	enables	us	to	act
on	our	values.
Also,	acceptance	is	short	for	“experiential	acceptance.”	It’s	about	actively
accepting	our	private	experiences:	thoughts,	feelings,	memories,	and	so	on.	It
is	
not
	about	passively	accepting	our	life	situation.	ACT	advocates	that	we	take
action	to	improve	our	life	situation	as	much	as	possible:	acceptance	
and
commitment!	For	example,	if	you	were	in	an	abusive	relationship,	we’d
advocate	that	you	make	room	for	all	the	painful	thoughts	and	feelings
showing	up	(instead	of	doing	self-defeating	things	such	as	drinking,	smoking,
overeating,	ruminating,	worrying,	and	so	on)—
and
	simultaneously	act	on
your	values	to	either	improve	the	relationship	or	leave	it.
Getting	to	Acceptance
In	 many	 protocols,	 and	 in	 the	 original	 1999	 ACT	 textbook,
acceptance/willingness	follows	creative	hopelessness/confronting	the	agenda.
If	that’s	where	you’re	coming	from,	you	could	segue	into	it	like	this:	“Okay,
so	if	trying	to	control	how	you	feel	doesn’t	work	too	well,	then	what’s	the
alternative?”	The	Pushing	Against	the	Clipboard	Metaphor	(chapter	6)	lends
itself	very	nicely	to	this	transition:
Therapist:
	So	let’s	just	do	a	quick	recap.	(
The	therapist
	
quickly	recaps	the
clipboard	 metaphor	 and	 gets	 the	 client	 pushing	 against	 it	 once
more.)
	So	you’re	pushing	and	pushing	and	pushing,	and	it’s	taking
up	all	your	time	and	your	energy.	Your	shoulders	are	tired,	and
you’re	hemmed	in,	and	you	can’t	do	anything	useful	like	drive	a	car
or	cook	dinner	or	hug	someone	you	love	while	you’re	doing	this.
Now	(
pulls	the	clipboard	away)
	let	it	just	sit	there	on	your	lap.
(
Therapist	lays	the	clipboard	gently	on	the	client’s	lap.)
	Now	how’s
that?	Isn’t	that	a	lot	less	effort?
Client:
	Well	…	yes.	It’s	less	effort.	But	it’s	still	there.
Therapist:
	Absolutely.	Not	only	is	it	still	there,	it’s	even	closer	to	you	than
before.	But	notice	the	difference:	now	you’re	free	to	do	the	things
that	make	your	life	work.	You	can	hug	someone	you	love,	cook
dinner,	or	drive	a	car.	It’s	not	draining	you,	tiring	you,	tying	you	up,
closing	you	off.	Isn’t	that	easier	than	this?	(
Therapist	 mimes
pushing	the	clipboard	away.
)	Now	suppose	you	learned	how	to	do
this	with	your	feelings	instead	of	fighting	with	them	or	organizing
your	life	around	trying	to	avoid	them.	How	do	you	think	that	might
benefit	you?
To	lead	into	acceptance	from	defusion,	you	could	say,	“So	far	we’ve	been
looking	at	painful	thoughts,	but	what	about	feelings?”	or	“Your	mind	says	this
feeling	is	unbearable.	How	about	we	check	it	out	and	see	if	that’s	the	case?”
From	values:	“So	as	you	talk	about	these	values,	what	feelings	show	up	for
you?”
From	committed	action:	“What	feelings	are	likely	to	show	up	for	you	when
you	take	this	action?”	or	“So	as	you	think	about	doing	this,	what’re	you
feeling?”	or	“What	feelings	will	you	need	to	make	room	for	in	order	to	do
this?”
From	self-as-context:	“So	from	the	perspective	of	the	observing	self,	let’s
now	take	a	look	at	some	of	these	feelings	you’ve	been	struggling	with.”
One	of	our	challenges	is	making	acceptance	acceptable	to	our	clients.	The
more	experientially	avoidant	our	clients,	the	more	reluctant	they’ll	be	to
accept	unpleasant	private	experiences.	So	we’ll	need	to	go	more	slowly	and
more	gently.	We’ll	generally	need	to	do	more	work	around	creative
hopelessness,	and	we	may	well	have	to	go	back	to	it	repeatedly.
Work	around	values	is	also	very	important	here.	We	need	to	make	a	clear
link	between	acceptance	and	vitality—that	accepting	this	pain	is	in	the	service
of	something	important,	meaningful,	and	life	enhancing.	The	magic	wand
question	is	often	very	useful:	“If	I	waved	a	magic	wand	so	that	these	feelings
couldn’t	hold	you	back	in	any	way,	what	would	you	do	differently	in	your
life?”	Once	we	know	the	answer,	we	can	say,	“Okay.	So	if	that’s	what	you
want	to	do	with	your	life,	let’s	make	it	possible.	I	don’t	have	a	magic	wand,
but	we	can	learn	some	skills	here	so	that	these	feelings	no	longer	hold	you
back.”
Of	course	we	also	need	to	keep	this	work	safe.	We	want	to	be	mindful	that
we	don’t	lecture	or	coerce	our	clients;	we	always	ask	permission,	always	give
them	a	choice,	and	let	them	know	they	can	stop	at	any	point.
The	Acceptance	Tool	Kit
As	with	all	six	core	ACT	processes,	there’s	a	wide	variety	of	techniques
available	to	you.	Some	take	only	a	few	seconds,	and	others	take	up	to	fifteen
or	twenty	minutes.	So,	given	that	I’m	about	to	open	up	a	whole	new	tool	kit,	I
feel	the	need	to	give	you	a	gentle	reminder	(sorry):	acceptance	is	a	process,
not	a	technique.	The	tools	and	techniques	are	used	to	learn	the	process.
Acceptance	of	Emotions
Now	we’re	going	to	kick	off	with	a	long	mindfulness	exercise,	which	is
constructed	from	eight	different	techniques	strung	together:	observe,	breathe,
expand,	allow,	objectify,	normalize,	show	self-compassion,	and	expand
awareness.	Afterward	I’ll	unpack	it.	As	usual,	I’d	like	you	to	read	it	out	loud
as	if	talking	to	a	client.	(However,	I	recognize	you	may	not	wish	to	do	this	if
you’re	in	a	library!)	The	ellipses	indicate	brief	pauses	of	one	to	three	seconds.
(Also	please	note:	with	my	clients,	and	throughout	this	book,	I	use	the	words
“feelings”	and	“emotions”	interchangeably.)
OBSERVE
Therapist:
	I	invite	you	to	sit	upright	in	your	chair	with	your	back	straight	and
your	feet	flat	on	the	floor.	Most	people	find	they	feel	more	alert	and
awake	sitting	this	way,	so	check	it	out	and	see	if	this	is	the	case	for
you.	And	either	close	your	eyes	or	fix	them	on	a	spot,	whichever
you	prefer.	And	take	a	few	slow,	deep	breaths,	and	really	notice	the
breath	flowing	in	and	out	of	your	lungs.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	Now
quickly	scan	your	body	from	head	to	toe,	starting	at	your	scalp	and
moving	downward.	And	notice	the	sensations	you	can	feel	in	your
head	…	throat	…	neck	…	shoulders	…	chest	…	abdomen	…	arms
…	hands	…	legs	…	and	feet.	Now	zoom	in	on	the	part	of	your	body
where	you’re	feeling	this	feeling	most	intensely.	And	observe	the
feeling	closely,	as	if	you’re	a	curious	scientist	who	has	never
encountered	anything	like	this	before.	(
Pause	5	seconds.)
	Observe
the	sensation	carefully	…	Let	your	thoughts	come	and	go	like
passing	cars,	and	keep	your	attention	on	the	feeling	…	Notice
where	it	starts	and	where	it	stops	…	Learn	as	much	about	it	as	you
can	…	If	you	drew	an	outline	around	it,	what	shape	would	it	have?
…	Is	it	on	the	surface	of	the	body	or	inside	you,	or	both?	…	How
far	inside	you	does	it	go?	…	Where	is	it	most	intense?	…	Where	is
it	weakest?	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	If	you	drift	off	into	your	thoughts,	as
soon	as	you	realize	it,	come	back	and	focus	on	the	sensation	…
Observe	it	with	curiosity	…	How	is	it	different	in	the	center	than
around	the	edges?	Is	there	any	pulsation	or	vibration	within	it?	…	Is
it	light	or	heavy?	…	Moving	or	still?	…What	is	its	temperature?	…
Are	there	hot	spots	or	cold	spots?	…	Notice	the	different	elements
within	it	…	Notice	that	it’s	not	just	one	sensation—there	are
sensations	within	sensations	…	Notice	the	different	layers.	(
Pause	5
seconds.
)
BREATHE
Therapist:
	As	you’re	observing	this	feeling,	breathe	into	it	…	Imagine	your
breath	flowing	into	and	around	this	feeling	…	Breathing	into	and
around	it	…
EXPAND
Therapist:
	And	as	you’re	breathing	into	it,	it’s	as	if,	in	some	magical	way,	all
this	space	opens	up	inside	you	…	You	open	up	around	this	feeling
…	Make	space	for	it	…	Expand	around	it	…	However	you	make
sense	of	that	…	Breathing	into	it	and	opening	up	around	it	…
ALLOW
Therapist:
	And	see	if	you	can	just	allow	this	feeling	to	be	there.	You	don’t
have	to	like	it	or	want	it	…	Just	allow	it	…	Just	let	it	be	…	Observe
it,	breathe	into	it,	open	up	around	it,	and	allow	it	to	be	as	it	is.
(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	You	may	feel	a	strong	urge	to	fight	with	it	or
push	it	away.	If	so,	just	acknowledge	the	urge	is	there	without
acting	on	it.	And	continue	observing	the	sensation.	(
Pause	 5
seconds.
)	Don’t	try	to	get	rid	of	it	or	alter	it.	If	it	changes	by	itself,
that’s	okay.	If	it	doesn’t	change,	that’s	okay	too.	Changing	or
getting	rid	of	it	is	not	the	goal.	Your	aim	is	simply	to	allow	it	…	to
let	it	to	be.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)
OBJECTIFY
Therapist:
	Imagine	this	feeling	is	an	object	…	As	an	object,	what	shape	does
it	have?	…	Is	it	liquid,	solid,	or	gaseous?	…	Is	it	moving	or	still?	…
What	color	is	it?	…	Transparent	or	opaque?	…	If	you	could	touch
the	surface,	what	would	it	feel	like?	…	Wet	or	dry?	…	Rough	or
smooth?	…	Hot	or	cold?	…	Soft	or	hard?	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)
Observe	this	object	curiously,	breathe	into	it,	and	open	up	around	it
…	You	don’t	have	to	like	it	or	want	it.	Just	allow	it	…	and	notice
that	you	are	bigger	than	this	object,	…	no	matter	how	big	it	gets,	it
can	never	get	bigger	than	you.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)
NORMALIZE
Therapist:
	This	feeling	tells	you	some	valuable	information	…	It	tells	you
that	you’re	a	normal	human	being	with	a	heart	…	it	tells	you	that
you	care	…	that	there	are	things	in	life	that	matter	to	you	…	And
this	is	what	humans	feel	when	there’s	a	gap	between	what	we	want
and	what	we’ve	got	…	The	bigger	the	gap,	the	bigger	the	feeling.
(
Pause	5	seconds.
)
SHOW	SELF-COMPASSION
Therapist:
	Take	one	of	your	hands	and	place	it	on	this	part	of	your	body	…
imagine	that	this	is	a	healing	hand	…	the	hand	of	a	loving	friend	or
parent	or	nurse	…	and	feel	the	warmth	flowing	from	your	hand	into
your	body	…	not	to	get	rid	of	the	feeling	but	to	make	room	for	it	…
to	soften	up	and	loosen	up	around	it.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	Hold	it
gently,	as	if	it’s	a	crying	baby	or	a	frightened	puppy.	(
Pause	10
seconds.
)	And	letting	your	hand	fall,	once	again	breathe	into	the
feeling	and	expand	around	it.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)
EXPAND	AWARENESS
Therapist:
	Life	is	like	a	stage	show	…	and	on	that	stage	are	all	your	thoughts,
and	all	your	feelings,	and	everything	that	you	can	see,	hear,	touch,
taste,	and	smell	…	and	for	the	last	few	minutes,	we	dimmed	the
lights	on	the	stage,	and	we	shined	a	spotlight	on	this	feeling	…	and
now	it’s	time	to	bring	up	the	rest	of	the	lights	…	So	bring	up	the
lights	on	your	body	…	notice	your	arms	and	legs	and	head	and	neck
…	and	notice	that	you’re	in	control	of	your	arms	and	legs,
regardless	of	what	you’re	feeling	…	Just	move	them	around	a	little
to	check	that	out	for	yourself	…	and	now	take	a	stretch,	and	notice
yourself	stretching	…	and	bring	up	the	lights	on	the	room	around
you	…	Open	your	eyes,	look	around,	and	notice	what	you	can	see
…	and	notice	what	you	can	hear…	and	notice	that	there’s	not	just	a
feeling	here	…	there’s	a	feeling	inside	a	body,	inside	a	room,	inside
a	world	full	of	opportunity	…	and	welcome	back!
Practical	 Tip
	 Keep	 your	 own	 eyes	 open	 when	 doing	 any
mindfulness	exercise	and	mindfully	observe	the	client.	Look	out	for	signs	of
distress	or	nodding	off,	and	intervene	as	required.	When	you	do	these
longer	exercises	with	clients,	it’s	a	good	idea	to	keep	checking	in	with
simple	questions	such	as	“How	are	you	doing?	Are	we	okay	to	keep	going
with	this?”
You	can	mix	and	match	these	eight	techniques—observe,	breathe,	expand,
allow,	objectify,	normalize,	show	self-compassion,	expand	awareness—in	any
way	you	like.	You	can	stretch	them	out	or	cut	them	down,	use	any	one	of
them	alone,	or	any	number	in	combination.	In	the	above	script,	we	focused	on
just	one	sensation—the	most	intense	one.	Often	this	is	enough	so	that
acceptance	“spreads”	through	the	whole	body.	But	sometimes	there	may	be
other	strong	sensations	in	different	parts	of	the	body,	in	which	case,	we	can
repeat	the	procedure	with	each	one.
As	we	take	the	client	through	this	exercise,	one	of	two	things	will	happen:
either	her	feelings	will	change—or	they	won’t.	It	doesn’t	matter	either	way.
The	aim	is	not	to	change	or	reduce	feelings	but	to	accept	them—to	allow
them	to	be	there	without	a	struggle.	Why?	Because	when	we	aren’t	investing
so	much	time,	energy,	and	effort	in	trying	to	control	how	we	feel,	we	can
invest	it	instead	in	acting	on	our	values.
Our	clients	often	find	that	when	they	accept	a	painful	emotion	or	sensation,
it	reduces	significantly	or	even	disappears.	When	this	happens,	we	need	to
clarify	that	(1)	this	is	a	bonus,	not	the	goal,	and	(2)	it	won’t	always	happen,	so
don’t	expect	it.	We	could	say,	“Here’s	the	reality.	When	we	accept	our
feelings,	they	may	or	may	not	reduce	in	intensity.	We	can’t	predict	it.	But	we
can	predict	this:	when	we	try	to	control	or	avoid	our	feelings,	it’s	very	likely
that	they’ll	increase	in	intensity	and	cause	us	more	distress.”
If	we	don’t	explicitly	address	this	issue,	then,	as	with	defusion,	our	clients
will	start	using	acceptance	techniques	to	try	to	control	their	feelings.	And,	of
course,	that	will	soon	backfire.	The	client	will	then	be	disappointed,	and	come
back	and	complain,	“It	isn’t	working.”	We	respond	to	this	as	with	similar
issues	around	defusion	(see	chapter	7,	It’s	Not	Working!).
Practical	Tip
	 Suppose	 your	 client	 reports	 something	 like,	 “The
feeling’s	gone”	or	“I	can	hardly	feel	it	now”	or	“I	feel	so	much	better	now.”	If
you	smile	and	say,	“That’s	great!”,	then	you’ve	just	reinforced	the	control
agenda,	and	the	chances	are	the	client	will	now	try	to	turn	this	into	a
control	technique.	So	instead,	aim	for	nonchalance:	“Enjoy	that	when	it
happens.	 But	 please	 don’t	 think	 this	 is	 a	 magic	 wand	 to	 control	 your
feelings.	It’s	not.	What	we’re	aiming	for	is	to	let	go	of	the	struggle	with	our
feelings	so	we	can	put	our	energy	into	doing	the	things	that	make	life
meaningful.”	If	your	client	seems	confused	or	ambivalent,	you	can	go	back
and	 revisit	 creative	 hopelessness.	 The	 Pushing	 Against	 the	 Clipboard
Metaphor	is	a	fast	and	effective	way	to	do	this.
Unpacking	the	Acceptance	of	Emotions
Section	1:	Observe
In	order	to	accept	a	feeling	or	sensation,	we	must	first	notice	it.	(This	is
where	contacting	the	present	moment	overlaps	with	acceptance.)	The
metaphor	of	“observing	like	a	curious	scientist”	helps	to	encourage	openness
and	curiosity	toward	the	feeling:	approach,	instead	of	avoidance.	Simply
observing	or	noticing	a	feeling	with	curiosity	often	leads	to	acceptance—and
if	not,	it’s	at	least	a	step	in	the	right	direction.
The	Ten-Second	Version
Therapist:
	Notice	that	feeling.	Notice	where	it	is.	Notice	where	it’s	most
intense.
SECTION	2.	BREATHE
Many	clients—but	not	all—find	breathing	into	a	feeling	enables	them	to
make	room	for	it.	Slow,	diaphragmatic	breathing	seems	particularly	useful	for
a	lot	of	people.
The	Ten-Second	Version
Therapist:
	Notice	that	feeling	and	gently	breathe	into	it.
SECTION	3.	EXPAND
Metaphorical	talk	around	making	room,	creating	space,	opening	up,	or
expanding	is	often	helpful.
The	Ten-Second	Version
Therapist:
	Notice	that	feeling,	and	see	if	you	can	just	open	up	around	it	a	little
—give	it	some	space.
SECTION	4.	ALLOW
Again	and	again	and	again,	we	remind	our	clients	that	acceptance	does	not
mean	liking,	wanting,	or	approving	of	a	thought	or	feeling:	it	means	
allowing
it.
The	Ten-Second	Version
Therapist:
	I	know	you	don’t	like	this	feeling,	but	see	if	you	can	just	let	it	sit
there	for	a	moment.	You	don’t	have	to	like	it—just	allow	it	to	be
there.
SECTION	5.	OBJECTIFY
Quite	often	our	clients,	especially	those	who	are	very	visual,	will
spontaneously	do	this	when	we	ask	to	them	observe	their	feelings.	When	we
turn	a	feeling	into	an	object,	it	helps	us	experience	that	this	feeling	is	not
bigger	than	we	are;	we	have	plenty	of	room	for	it.
In	some	models	of	therapy,	you	might	try	dissolving	the	object	with	white
light	or	shrinking	it	in	various	ways.	In	ACT	we	would	
not
	do	this,	as	that
would	reinforce	the	agenda	of	control.	However,	as	it	happens,	the	object
almost	always	spontaneously	changes.	Typically	it	gets	smaller	or	softer,	but
sometimes	it	gets	bigger.	If	the	latter,	we	might	say,	“No	matter	how	big	this
feeling	gets,	it	can’t	get	bigger	than	you.	So	observe	it,	breathe	into	it,	and
make	more	room	for	it.”
The	point	is	we	don’t	need	to	shrink	or	remove	the	object;	we	just	need	to
make	room	for	it.	With	acute	grief	work,	I	often	have	clients	leaving	my
office	with	a	heavy	black	rock	inside	their	stomach	or	a	thick	plank	of	wood
on	their	chest.	That’s	only	to	be	expected.	Major	losses	give	rise	to	painful
feelings.	Let’s	help	our	clients	to	carry	those	feelings	willingly,	instead	of
getting	bogged	down	in	a	struggle	with	them,	so	they	can	engage	fully	in	life
and	do	what	matters.
The	Ten-Second	Version
Therapist:
	If	this	feeling	was	an	object,	what	would	it	look	like?
SECTION	6.	NORMALIZE
If	we	can	recognize	that	it’s	normal	and	natural	to	have	painful	feelings—
that	this	is	an	inevitable	part	of	being	human—we’re	more	likely	to	accept
them.	In	contrast,	suppose	your	client	is	fused	with	a	story	like	this:	“Normal
people	don’t	feel	this	way.	There	must	be	something	wrong	with	me.”	What
effect	will	that	have	on	his	attitude	toward	his	feelings?
Instead	of	a	ten-second	version,	here	are	two	longer	interventions	that	can
help	establish	a	more	realistic	view	of	human	emotion.
Nine	Basic	Emotions
Therapist:
	I’m	going	to	run	through	a	list	of	the	nine	basic	human	emotions.
There’s	debate	about	this,	but	most	“experts”	tend	to	agree	on	these
basics.	As	I	call	them	out,	I	want	you	to	give	me	the	thumbs	up	or
the	thumbs	down.	Thumbs	up	means	it’s	a	“good”	or	“positive”
emotion.	Thumbs	down	means	it’s	a	“bad”	or	“negative”	emotion.
No	hesitation	allowed—just	thumbs	up	or	thumbs	down.	Ready?
Love	…	Joy	…	Curiosity	…	Anger	…	Fear	…	Sadness	…	Guilt	…
Shock	…	Disgust.	Now	isn’t	that	interesting?	You	did	a	thumbs-
down	for	six	out	of	nine	of	the	normal	human	emotions.	Get	that:
six	out	of	nine.	This	tells	you	something	about	what	it	is	to	be
human.	Two-thirds	of	the	normal	human	emotions	that	every	human
being	will	repeatedly	experience	throughout	life	do	not	feel	good!
We	live	in	a	feel-good	society	that	tells	us	we	should	feel	good	all
the	time,	but	how	realistic	is	that?
The	Reality	Gap
I	coined	the	phrase	“reality	gap”	in	reference	to	the	gap	between	the	reality
we	have	and	the	reality	we	desire:	the	bigger	that	gap,	the	more	pain	we	feel.
Therapist:
	There’s	a	gap	here	between	the	reality	you	want	and	the	reality	you
have.	And	it’s	not	just	a	small	gap—it’s	huge.	So	let	me	ask	you
this:	What	would	you	expect	any	human	being	to	feel	when	there’s
such	a	big	gap	between	what	you	want	and	what	you	have?
(
Usually	the	client	will	name	emotions	similar	to	her	own.	If	not,
you	can	name	the	emotions	yourself.
)	That’s	right.	So	what	you’re
feeling	is	a	normal	human	emotion.	This	is	what	we	feel	when
there’s	a	reality	gap.	And	the	bigger	the	gap,	the	bigger	and	more
painful	the	feeling.
SECTION	7.	SELF-COMPASSION
Self-compassion—being	kind	and	caring	toward	yourself—adds	an	extra
element	to	acceptance.	You’ll	often	notice	this	clinically:	you’ll	see	your
client	“softening	up”	facially	and	easing	the	tension	in	his	body.	When	the
client	lays	his	hand	on	a	painful	feeling,	it	often	promotes	acceptance	very
powerfully.	Presumably	the	warm	sensations	of	the	hand	and	the	rich
metaphor	of	“healing	hands”	contribute	to	the	effectiveness.
The	Ten-Second	Version
Therapist:
	Just	place	a	hand	where	you	feel	this	most	intensely—and	see	if
you	can	open	up	around	it	…	Hold	it	gently.
SECTION	8.	EXPAND	AWARENESS
At	times,	we	may	want	to	focus	on	our	emotions—such	as	when	we’re
learning	a	mindfulness	skill	or	grieving	for	a	loved	one.	However,	much	of
the	time,	if	we’re	too	intently	focused	on	our	feelings,	they’ll	get	in	the	way
of	living	life.	At	times,	clients	will	leave	your	session	with	strong	unpleasant
feelings	or	sensations	in	their	body.	For	example,	this	is	very	likely	when
working	with	chronic	pain	syndrome,	acute	grief	due	to	a	sudden	loss,	or
anxiety	about	some	impending	major	crisis	or	challenge.	We	want	clients	to
be	able	to	make	room	for	their	feelings	
and
	engage	with	the	world	around
them	
and
	do	whatever	they	need	to	do	to	make	their	life	work.
The	Stage	Show	Metaphor	assists	the	concept	of	narrowing	attention	and
expanding	awareness.	As	we	expand	awareness,	the	feeling	is	no	longer	in	the
spotlight;	it’s	simply	one	of	many	actors	on	a	well-lit	stage.	This	in	itself
facilitates	acceptance:	when	it’s	just	“one	part	of	the	whole	show,”	the	feeling
no	longer	seems	so	big	and	threatening.
The	Ten-Second	Version
Therapist:
	Notice	the	feeling.	And	also	notice	your	breathing	…	and	notice
your	body.	Also	notice	the	room	around	you.	Notice	there’s	a	lot
going	on.
Enhancing	Acceptance
Acceptance	is	implicit	in	mindfulness,	but	you	can	enhance	the	acceptance
“element”	of	any	mindfulness	exercise	by	adding	in	simple	instructions	such
as	these:
“Allow	your	feelings	to	be	as	they	are.	Don’t	try	to	change
them	or	control	them.”
“If	a	difficult	feeling	shows	up	for	you,	such	as	anxiety	or
backache,	simply	acknowledge	it.	Silently	say	to	yourself,
‘Here’s	 a	 feeling	 of	 backache’
	or	
‘Here’s	 a	 feeling	 of
anxiety.
’”
Also	remember	that	acceptance	is	always	in	the	service	of	valued	action,	so
we	can	enhance	it	by	explicitly	linking	it	to	values:	“Are	you	willing	to	make
room	for	this	feeling	if	this	will	enable	you	to	do	what	really	matters	to	you?”
From	an	ACT	perspective,	there’s	no	point	in	making	room	for	our	painful
private	experiences	unless	that	enables	us	to	take	meaningful,	life-enriching
action.	The	Wade	Through	the	Swamp	Metaphor	(Hayes	et	al.,	1999)
illustrates	this.
WADE	THROUGH	THE	SWAMP	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	Suppose	you	love	mountain	climbing.	It’s	something	you’re
absolutely	passionate	about.	And	one	day	you	set	out	to	climb	this
mountain	that	you’ve	heard	great	things	about.	But	when	you	get
close	to	the	mountain,	you	discover	that	a	swamp	runs	all	the	way
around	it.	It’s	a	big	surprise.	No	one	told	you	about	it.	But	now	the
only	way	you’ll	get	to	climb	that	mountain	is	to	wade	through	the
swamp.	So	that’s	what	you	do.	You	wade	through	the	swamp.	You
don’t	wallow	in	it,	just	for	the	sake	it.	You	wade	through	the	swamp
because	climbing	that	mountain	matters.
DEFUSION	AND	ACCEPTANCE:	HAND	IN	HAND
Defusion	and	acceptance	are	both	about	opening	up	and	making	room.
When	we	accept	a	thought—notice	it	and	make	room	for	it—that	involves
defusion.	When	we	defuse	from	a	thought—see	it	for	what	it	is	(words	or
pictures)	and	allow	it	to	be	there—that	involves	acceptance.	We	tend	to
reserve	the	term	“defusion”	for	dealing	with	thoughts,	images,	and	memories,
and	we	tend	to	talk	about	acceptance	when	dealing	with	emotions,	sensations,
and	urges.	Colloquially	we	can	lump	them	both	together	as	“opening	up”.
You’ll	generally	find	it	much	easier	to	facilitate	acceptance	if	you’ve
previously	done	some	work	around	defusion.	For	example,	suppose	your
client,	while	breathing	into	feelings	of	anxiety,	protests,	“It’s	too	hard.	I	can’t
do	it.”	You	might	say,	“Okay,	so	your	mind’s	telling	you	it’s	too	hard.	Is	it
okay	if	we	let	your	mind	say	that,	and	we	stick	with	the	exercise	a	little
longer?”
PSYCHOEDUCATION
Psychoeducation	about	emotions	can	play	a	big	role	in	acceptance.	We
often	talk	to	clients	about	the	evolutionary	origins	of	emotions,and	how	they
may	be	beneficial	in	some	contexts	and	a	nuisance	in	others.	For	example,	we
often	talk	about	the	fight-or-flight	response:	how	it’s	triggered	by	perceived
threats	or	challenges;	how	that	leads	to	fear,	anxiety,	and	stress;	and	how,	in
some	 situations,	 anxiety	 can	 enhance	 performance	 or	 provide	 useful
motivation.
Almost	every	client	we	see	is	likely	to	be	somewhat	avoidant	of	anxiety.
(Aren’t	you?	I	know	I	am!)	So	one	thing	we	want	to	emphasize	is	that	change
almost	always	brings	anxiety,	and	if	we’re	not	willing	to	make	room	for	it,
we’re	going	to	have	difficulty	making	changes.	The	question	we	ask	is	this:
“Are	you	willing	to	make	room	for	this	anxiety	in	order	to	make	the	changes
that	will	enrich	your	life?”	We	can	accentuate	this	by	asking	the	client	to	keep
a	journal	of	everything	she	gives	up	or	misses	out	on	because	she’s	unwilling
to	make	room	for	anxiety.
Another	important	insight	for	all	our	clients	is	that	our	feelings	do	not
control
	our	actions.	Influence,	yes—control,	no.	For	this,	we	can	use	the
exercises	mentioned	in	chapter	7:	If	Our	Thoughts	and	Feelings	Controlled
Our	Actions	and	Have	You	Ever	Had	Thoughts	and	Feelings	You	Didn’t	Act
On?	Far	more	powerful,	though,	is	to	work	with	strong	feelings	in	session.	If
your	client	is	feeling	strong	anger,	fear,	sadness,	or	other	emotions,	you	might
say,	“Notice	these	emotions	showing	up—and	notice	that	even	though	they’re
intense,	you	have	control	of	your	arms	and	legs	and	mouth.	Don’t	take	my
word	for	it—check	it	out.	Move	your	arms	and	legs	around,	play	around	with
your	hands,	make	some	gestures.	Notice	that	you	can’t	control	your	feelings,
but	you	can	control	your	actions.”	If	a	client	is	feeling	strong	anger,	you
might	ask	him	to	tell	you	in	a	whisper	how	angry	he	is—to	show	him	he	has
control	over	whether	he	yells	or	not.	If	a	client	has	strong	anxiety,	you	might
ask	her	to	walk	to	different	parts	of	the	room,	and	even	to	leave	and	return,	to
demonstrate	she	can	control	where	she	goes	and	what	she	does.
And	one	last	component	to	consider	here:	if	a	client	has	limited	awareness
of	his	own	emotions,	we	can	teach	him	to	recognize	and	label	them.	This	is	an
essential	skill	for	emotional	intelligence.
Common	Acceptance	Techniques
Figure	8.1	below	encapsulates	many	common	acceptance	techniques.	We’ve
covered	most	of	them	already.	In	finishing	off	this	chapter,	I	want	to	briefly
touch	on	three	boxes	(from	figure	8.1):	the	Observing	Self,	the	Choice	to
Feel,	and	Metaphors.
The	Observing	Self
Once	we’ve	done	some	work	around	self-as-context—we’ll	look	at	this	in
detail	in	chapter	10—we	have	yet	another	pathway	to	acceptance.	We	could
say,	“See	if	you	can	go	into	the	psychological	space	of	your	observing	self—
and	from	that	spacious	awareness,	look	at	this	feeling,	notice	where	it	is,	and
what	it’s	made	of.”	Or	more	simply,	“Look	at	this	feeling	from	the	observing
self.”
The	Choice	to	Feel
This	is	a	very	powerful	question,	adapted	from	the	workshops	of	Kelly
Wilson:	“Suppose	I	could	give	you	a	choice.	Option	A:	you	never	have	to	feel
this	painful	feeling	ever	again—ever.	But	it	means	you	lose	all	capacity	to
love	and	care.	You	care	about	nothing	and	no	one.	Nothing	matters.	No	one
matters.	Life	becomes	meaningless	because	you	don’t	care	about	anything
whatsoever.	Option	B:	You	get	to	love	and	care.	People	matter	to	you.	Life
matters.	You	care	about	what	you	do,	and	what	happens.	You	care	about
friends	and	family.	You	get	to	build	loving	relationships.	Life	becomes
meaningful.	And	when	there’s	a	gap	between	what	you	want	and	what	you’ve
got,	painful	feelings	like	this	one	will	show	up.	Which	option	do	you
choose?”
This	question	confronts	us	with	the	human	condition:	if	we’re	going	to	love
and	care,	then	we’re	going	to	feel	pain.	Love	and	pain	are	intimate	dance
partners;	they	always	go	hand	in	hand.	In	order	to	avoid	pain,	some	people	try
desperately	hard	not	to	care	or	love	or	want.	They	may	try	to	do	this	in	a
myriad	of	different	ways,	from	drugs	and	alcohol	to	social	withdrawal	to
proclaiming	“Nothing	matters”	or	“I	don’t	care	about	anything.”	Obviously
such	attempts	are	doomed	to	failure:	they	paradoxically	end	up	creating	more
pain,	not	less.
Almost	all	clients	choose	option	B,	but	once	in	a	blue	moon,	someone	will
pick	option	A.	If	so,	you	could	reply,	“Of	course,	that’s	what	you	would
choose	now	because	your	pain	seems	so	unbearable.	But	in	the	ideal	world,
which	option	would	you	like	to	choose?”	At	that	point,	the	client	almost
always	chooses	option	B,	and	then	therapy	becomes	about	making	that	choice
possible.	This	question	is	particularly	useful	in	grief	work	and	naturally	flows
into	values,	as	we’ll	see	in	chapter	11.
If	the	client	still	chooses	option	A,	we	can	turn	this	into	a	brief	creative
hopelessness	intervention.	We	could	say,	“I	completely	understand	why	you’d
choose	that.	Life	is	so	painful	right	now,	you’d	do	anything	to	stop	the	pain,
no	matter	what	the	cost.	So	let	me	ask	you:	isn’t	this	what	you’ve	been	trying
to	do?	When	you	take	drugs/get	drunk/take	an	overdose/stay	in	bed	all
day/withdraw	from	your	friends/cut	yourself	with	a	knife—aren’t	those	all
just	ways	of	trying	to	stop	the	pain?	And	how	is	that	actually	working?	In	the
long	run,	are	these	strategies	actually	making	your	life	less	painful	or	more
painful?”
Metaphors
There	are	a	huge	number	of	metaphors	for	acceptance,	and	the	ones	in	this
box	are	a	mere	sprinkling.	Passengers	on	the	Bus	(Hayes	et	al.,	1999)	and
Demons	on	the	Boat	(Harris,	2007)	are	very	versatile	in	that	they	encapsulate
the	entire	hexaflex	in	one	metaphor,	and	can	therefore	be	used	to	accentuate
any	process	in	any	session.	Both	metaphors	are	essentially	the	same.	I
changed	Passengers	on	the	Bus	to	Demons	on	the	Boat	for	three	reasons:	(1)
demons	and	boats	have	a	much	richer	cultural	heritage	than	passengers	and
buses;	(2)	just	about	every	single	book	on	ACT	has	Passengers	on	the	Bus	as
a	key	metaphor	and	I	felt	like	a	change;	and	(3)	that’s	just	the	kind	of	guy	I
am.
DEMONS	ON	THE	BOAT	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	Imagine	you’re	steering	a	boat	out	at	sea.	And	there	are	all	these
big,	scary,	ugly	demons	that	live	beneath	the	deck.	And	they’ve
made	a	deal	with	you.	As	long	as	you	drift	aimlessly	out	at	sea,
they’ll	stay	beneath	the	deck	so	you	don’t	have	to	look	at	them.	So
this	is	okay	for	a	while.	But	then	you	see	all	these	other	boats,
heading	toward	the	shore.	And	you	know	that’s	where	you	really
want	to	go.	You’ve	got	maps	and	plans—there	are	places	you	want
to	see.	So	you	pluck	up	courage	and	you	turn	the	tiller	and	head
toward	the	shore.	But	the	instant	the	boat	changes	direction,	all	the
demons	rush	up	from	below	the	decks	and	threaten	to	tear	you	to
pieces.	And	they	look	mean.	And	they’re	huge.	Razor-sharp	teeth.
Massive	horns.	Enormous	claws.	And	they	say,	“We’re	going	to	tear
you	to	shreds.	We’re	going	to	rip	you	to	pieces.”	So	you’re	terrified.
And	you	go,	“Whoa!	Sorry,	demons!”	And	you	turn	the	boat	around
and	head	back	out	to	sea.	As	soon	as	the	boat	is	drifting	aimlessly
once	more,	the	demons	disappear.	You	go	“Phew!”	and	breathe	a
sigh	of	relief.	And	for	a	while,	it’s	okay—drifting	without	any
direction.	But	then	you	see	all	those	other	boats	heading	toward	the
shore.	And	you	look	down	at	your	maps	and	your	plans.	And	you
know	where	you	really	want	to	go.	So	you	pluck	up	courage,	turn
the	tiller,	and	the	instant	the	boat	changes	direction,	the	demons	are
back.	Huge	teeth,	huge	claws:	“We’re	gonna	kill	you!”	Now	here’s
the	thing:	although	these	demons	have	been	threatening	to	kill	you
your	whole	life,	they’ve	never	actually	harmed	you.	That’s	because
they	can’t.	They	have	no	capacity	to	harm	you.	All	they	can	do	is
threaten	you.	And	as	long	as	you	believe	that	they’re	going	to	do
the	things	they	say	they’re	going	to	do,	they’ve	got	control	of	the
boat.	So—armed	with	this	knowledge—if	heading	toward	the	shore
really	matters,	what	do	you	need	to	do?	(
Elicit	response	from	the
client.
)	That’s	right;	you	need	to	keep	your	hands	on	the	tiller	and
keep	heading	toward	the	shore.	The	demons	will	then	gather	round
and	try	to	intimidate	you.	But	that’s	all	they	can	do.	And	as	you	let
them	gather	around,	you’ll	be	able	to	get	a	good	look	at	them	in
direct	sunlight.	And	you’ll	realize	that	they’re	nowhere	near	as	big
and	nasty	as	they	appeared;	they	were	using	special	effects	to	make
themselves	seem	ten	times	their	real	size.	And	as	you	keep	your
hands	on	that	tiller,	heading	toward	the	shore,	you	notice	that
there’s	an	entire	boat	here.	And	there’s	the	sky,	and	the	sea,	and	the
sun,	and	the	wind—and	fish,	and	birds,	and	other	ships;	there’s	a
whole	world	out	there	to	explore	and	appreciate,	not	just	these
demons.	And	notice	that	no	matter	how	far	you	are	from	the	shore,
the	instant	you	turn	that	tiller,	you’re	on	an	adventure;	you’re
instantly	moving	in	the	direction	you	want	to	go,	instead	of	drifting
aimlessly.
If	the	client	suggests	throwing	the	demons	overboard,	we	reply:
Therapist:
	But	there’s	an	infinite	number	of	demons.	No	matter	how	many
you	throw	overboard,	more	will	come.	And	while	you’re	trying	to
get	rid	of	them,	who’s	steering	the	boat?	It	could	crash	on	the	rocks
or	capsize.
If	the	client	suggests	jumping	overboard,	we	reply:
Therapist:
	Unfortunately	you	can’t.	The	sea	is	full	of	killer	sharks.
You	can	now	use	this	metaphor	to	assist	with	creative	hopelessness	(trying
to	throw	the	demons	overboard);	acceptance	(allowing	the	demons	to	gather
around);	defusion	(seeing	them	in	broad	daylight,	seeing	through	the	special
effects);	valued	directions	(heading	to	shore);	committed	action	(keeping	your
hands	on	the	tiller);	contacting	the	present	moment	(noticing	the	sea,	sky,
wind,	sun,	and	so	on);	and	even	the	observing	self	(you	are	not	the	boat	or	the
demons).
Thus,	for	a	defusion	technique,	you	might	name	the	demons—for	example,
the	“I	can’t	do	it”	demon,	the	“I’ve	wasted	my	life,	and	now	it’s	too	late”
demon,	or	the	“you	won’t	like	it	when	you	get	there”	demon.	For	acceptance,
you	can	ask	the	client,	“If	heading	toward	the	shore	is	what	matters,	are	you
willing	to	let	the	demons	gather	around?”	Or	you	might	say,	“Which	demon	is
controlling	the	boat	now?”	Once	it	has	been	named,	you	could	say,	“So	how
about	we	take	a	look	at	this	demon	in	broad	daylight?”	and	then	lead	into	a
defusion	or	acceptance	exercise.
THE	STRUGGLE	SWITCH
The	Struggle	Switch	(Harris,	2007,	adapted	from	Two	Scales,	Hayes	et	al.,
1999)	is	an	extended	metaphor	that	covers	both	creative	hopelessness	and
acceptance;	once	introduced,	it	becomes	a	powerful	interactive	tool	for
acceptance	work.
Therapist:
	Imagine	that	at	the	back	of	our	mind	is	a	“struggle	switch.”	When
it’s	switched	on,	it	means	we’re	going	to	struggle	against	any
physical	 or	 emotional	 pain	 that	 comes	 our	 way;	 whatever
discomfort	shows	up,	we’ll	try	our	best	to	get	rid	of	it	or	avoid	it.
Suppose	what	shows	up	is	anxiety.	(
This	is	adapted	to	the	client’s
issue:	anger,	sadness,	painful	memories,	urges	to	drink,	and	so	on.
)
If	my	struggle	switch	is	on,	then	I	absolutely	have	to	get	rid	of	that
feeling!	It’s	like,	“Oh	no!	Here’s	that	horrible	feeling	again.	Why
does	it	keep	coming	back?	How	do	I	get	rid	of	it?”	So	now	I’ve	got
anxiety	about	my	anxiety.	In	other	words,	my	anxiety	just	got
worse.	“Oh,	no!	It’s	getting	worse!	Why	does	it	do	that?”	Now	I’m
even	more	anxious.	Then	I	might	get	angry	about	my	anxiety:	“It’s
not	fair.	Why	does	this	keep	happening?”	Or	I	might	get	depressed
about	my	anxiety:	“Not	again.	Why	do	I	always	feel	like	this?”	And
all	these	secondary	emotions	are	useless,	unpleasant,	unhelpful,	and
a	drain	on	my	energy	and	vitality.	And	then—guess	what?	I	get
anxious	or	depressed	about	that!	Spot	the	vicious	cycle?	But	now
suppose	my	struggle	switch	is	off.	In	that	case,	whatever	feeling
shows	up,	no	matter	how	unpleasant,	I	don’t	struggle	with	it.	So
anxiety	shows	up,	but	this	time	I	don’t	struggle.	It’s	like,	“Okay,
here’s	a	knot	in	my	stomach.	Here’s	tightness	in	my	chest.	Here’s
sweaty	palms	and	shaking	legs.	Here’s	my	mind	telling	me	a	bunch
of	scary	stories.”	And	it’s	not	that	I	like	it	or	want	it.	It’s	still
unpleasant.	But	I’m	not	going	to	waste	my	time	and	energy
struggling	with	it.	Instead	I’m	going	to	take	control	of	my	arms	and
legs	and	put	my	energy	into	doing	something	that’s	meaningful	and
life	enhancing.	So	with	the	struggle	switch	off,	our	anxiety	levels
are	free	to	rise	and	fall	as	the	situation	dictates.	Sometimes	they’ll
be	high,	sometimes	low,	and	sometimes	there	will	be	no	anxiety	at
all.	Far	more	importantly,	we’re	not	wasting	our	time	and	energy
struggling	with	it.	But	switch	it	on,	and	it’s	like	an	emotional
amplifier—we	can	have	anger	about	our	anger,	anxiety	about	our
anxiety,	depression	about	our	depression,	or	guilt	about	our	guilt.
(
At	 this	 point,	 check	 in	 with	 the	 client:	 “Can	 you	 relate	 to
this?”
)Without	struggle,	we	get	a	natural	level	of	physical	and
emotional	discomfort,	which	depends	on	who	we	are	and	what
we’re	doing.	In	ACT,	we	call	this	“clean	discomfort.”	There’s	no
avoiding	“clean	discomfort.”	Life	serves	it	up	to	all	of	us	in	one
way	or	another.	However,	once	we	start	struggling	with	it,	our
discomfort	levels	increase	rapidly.	We	call	this	additional	suffering
“dirty	 discomfort.”	 We	 can’t	 do	 anything	 about	 the	 clean
discomfort,	but	we	can	reduce	the	dirty	discomfort.	Guess	how?
(
Wait	for	client’s	reply.
)	That’s	right:	we	learn	how	to	turn	off	the
struggle	switch.	And	what	I’d	like	to	do	next,	if	you’re	willing,	is	to
show	you	how	to	do	that.
The	next	step	is	to	work	with	a	painful	emotion	and	practice	turning	off	the
struggle	switch.	The	following	transcript	illustrates	this.
WORKING	WITH	THE	STRUGGLE	SWITCH
The	 therapist	 has	 just	 finished	 asking	 the	 client	 to	 scan	 her	 body	 and
identify	where	she’s	feeling	her	anxiety	most	intensely.
Therapist:
	(
summarizing
)	Okay,	so	there’s	a	lump	in	your	throat,	tightness	in
your	chest,	and	churning	in	your	stomach.	And	which	of	these
bothers	you	the	most?
Client:
	Here.	(
The	client	touches	her	throat.
)
Therapist:
	Okay.	And	on	a	scale	of	0	to	10,	if	0	is	no	anxiety	at	all	and	10	is
sheer	terror,	how	would	you	rate	this?
Client:
	About	an	8.
Therapist:
	Okay.	So	remember	that	struggle	switch	we	talked	about?	(
Client
nods.
)	Well,	right	now	would	you	say	it’s	on	or	off?
Client:
	On!
Therapist:
	Okay.	Suppose	we	turned	it	into	a	dial.	On	a	scale	of	0	to	10	if	10
is	full	on,	out	and	out	struggle—“I	have	to	get	rid	of	this	feeling	no
matter	what”—and	0	is	no	struggle	at	all—“I	don’t	like	this	feeling,
but	I’m	not	going	to	struggle	with	it”—and	5	is	the	halfway	point,
what	we	might	call	tolerance	or	putting	up	with	it.	On	that	scale,
how	much	are	you	struggling	with	this	feeling	right	now?
Client:
	About	a	9.
Therapist:
	Okay.	So	a	lot	of	struggle	going	on	right	now.	Let’s	see	if	we	can
bring	it	down	a	couple	of	notches.	We	may	or	may	not	be	able	to,
but	let’s	give	it	a	go.
The	therapist	now	takes	the	client	through	sections	1–4	of	the	Acceptance
of	Emotions	Exercise:	observe,	breathe,	expand,	allow.	Then	he	checks	in	with
the	client	to	see	what’s	happening.
Therapist:
	So	what’s	happening	now	with	the	struggle	switch?
Client:
	Well,	I	feel	less	anxious.
Therapist:
	Okay,	well	we’ll	come	to	that	in	a	moment.	What	I’m	interested	in
now	is	the	struggle.	On	a	scale	of	0	to	10,	how	much	are	you
struggling	with	this	feeling?
Client:
	Oh,	about	a	3.
Therapist:
	About	a	3.	Okay.	Now	you	mentioned	that	your	anxiety	is	less.	On
a	scale	of	0	to	10,	what	is	it	now?
Client:
	About	a	6.
Therapist:
	Okay,	so	enjoy	that	when	it	happens;	at	times,	when	you	drop	the
struggle	with	anxiety,	it	will	reduce,	but	that’s	not	what	we’re	trying
to	achieve	here.	Our	aim	is	to	drop	the	struggle.	Would	you	be
willing	to	keep	going?	Let’s	see	if	we	can	get	the	struggle	switch
down	another	notch	or	two?
Practical	Tip
	Be	on	the	alert	for	pseudoacceptance.	When	your
client	experiences	a	reduction	in	the	intensity	of	his	feelings,	he	often
ignores	or	misunderstands	that	“it’s	a	bonus,	not	the	goal.”	He	leaves	the
session	thinking,	
Now	 I	 know	 a	 way	 to	 reduce	 my	 anxiety,
	 and	 starts
practicing	 “acceptance”	 in	 order	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 his	 unpleasant	 feelings.
However,	that	is	not	true	acceptance.	True	acceptance	is	willingness	to
have	the	feelings,	regardless	of	whether	they	increase	or	decrease.	This
one	of	the	most	common	places	you	and	your	clients	will	get	stuck.
Common	Pitfalls	for	Therapists
In	working	with	defusion	and	acceptance,	be	alert	for	several	common
pitfalls:	 too	 much	 talk,	 not	 enough	 action;	 reinforcing	 avoidance;
insensitivity;	failing	to	link	acceptance	to	values;	and	being	too	pushy.	Let’s
take	a	quick	look	at	each	of	these	now.
Too	much	talk,	not	enough	action.	Trying	to	explain	defusion	and	acceptance
didactically	is	largely	a	waste	of	time,	so	do	it	experientially.	We	can	easily
feed	fusion	and	avoidance	by	getting	into	“analysis	paralysis”—that	is,
discussing,	analyzing,	and	intellectualizing	instead	of	doing	experiential
work.
Reinforcing	avoidance.	As	mentioned	already,	if	we	get	excited	whenever
painful	feelings	reduce	and	thoughts	disappear,	then	we	reinforce	avoidance
(or	pseudoacceptance).
Insensitivity.	If	we	don’t	validate	and	empathize	with	our	clients,	if	we
insensitively	rush	in	with	all	our	clever	tools	and	techniques,	we’ll	damage
the	therapeutic	relationship.
Failing	to	link	acceptance	to	values.	If	we	fail	to	draw	the	connection	between
valued-living	and	acceptance,	our	clients	are	likely	to	resist.
Being	too	pushy.	If	we	push	our	clients	into	intense	experiential	exercises
before	they’re	ready,	we’re	doing	them	a	major	disservice,	and	they	may	drop
out	of	therapy.
Homework	and	the	Next	Session
One	form	of	homework	is	to	formally	practice	a	mindfulness	exercise
centered	around	acceptance	of	emotions.	This	is	particularly	useful	for
anxiety	disorders	and	grief	work.	The	ideal	thing	is	to	do	such	exercises	in
session	and	record	them	as	you	go,	and	then	give	your	client	the	recording	to
take	home.	Or	you	can	give	them	a	prerecorded	CD	to	practice	with—your
own	or	a	commercially	available	one.	(My	CD	
Mindfulness	Skills:	Volume	1
has	a	recording	on	track	3	very	similar	to	the	main	exercise	in	this	chapter.)
At	
www.actmadesimple.com
,	you	can	also	download	the	Expansion	Practice
Sheet	(at	end	of	this	chapter)	and	use	it	as	an	adjunct	to	encourage	practice.
A	second	thing	you	can	do	is	ask	your	client	this	question:	“Between	now
and	next	session,	I	wonder	if	you’d	be	willing	to	practice	making	room	for
your	feelings,	as	we’ve	done	today.	As	soon	as	you	realize	you’re	struggling,
just	run	through	the	exercise.”	Then,	so	she	doesn’t	forget,	write	down	the	key
steps	you	want	her	to	practice—for	example,	“observe,	breathe,	expand”	or
“make	it	into	an	object	and	breathe	into	it.”
A	third	option	is	this:	“Over	the	next	week,	notice	when	you’re	struggling
with	your	feelings,	and	notice	when	you’re	opening	up	and	making	room	for
them.	And	notice	what	effects	it	has	when	you	respond	in	each	way.”	You
could	also	download	from	
www.actmadesimple.com
	a	copy	of	the	Struggling
vs.	Opening	Up	Worksheet	(at	the	end	of	this	chapter)	and	ask	the	client	to	fill
it	in.
Traditionally	after	defusion	and	acceptance,	we	move	on	to	contacting	the
present	moment	and	self-as-context—but	of	course	we	can	move	to	any	part
of	the	hexaflex	with	any	client	in	any	session.	So,	in	the	next	session,	ideally
after	a	brief	check-in	and	mindfulness	exercise,	we	review	the	homework	and
see	what	happened.	If	our	client	is	open	to	the	idea	of	acceptance	but	is
struggling	to	put	it	into	practice,	we	could	do	more	work	on	acceptance	skills
and	perhaps	bring	in	defusion	or	self-as-context	interventions	to	assist.	If	he’s
fallen	back	into	the	control	agenda,	we	can	either	revisit	creative	hopelessness
(What	is	it	costing	you	to	struggle	with	these	feelings?	How	is	it	working	for
you?)	or	turn	to	values	(What’s	important	to	you	in	life?	Are	you	willing	to
make	room	for	these	feelings	in	order	to	do	what	matters?).
Homework	for	You
Try	these	techniques	and	worksheets	on	yourself.	Pick	some	painful	issue	in
your	life	right	now.
Practice	opening	up	and	making	room	for	those	feelings.	Try
this	when	you	have	a	difficult	therapy	session—both	during
and	after—because	one	of	the	abilities	of	a	good	therapist	is
being	able	to	accept	your	own	emotional	reactions.
Read	all	the	exercises,	metaphors,	and	psychoeducation
components	out	loud,	as	if	you’re	taking	a	client	through
them.
Review	the	cases	of	two	or	three	clients,	and	identify	key
feelings	that	they	are	fighting	with	or	trying	to	avoid.	Then
consider	which	acceptance	techniques	you	might	try	with
them.
Summary
Acceptance	is	the	process	of	actively	making	room	for	unwanted	private
experiences	(including	thoughts,	memories,	feelings,	urges,	and	sensations).
Acceptance	and	defusion	go	hand	in	hand:	in	acceptance,	as	we	make	direct
contact	with	our	private	experiences,	we	defuse	from	our	thoughts	about
them.	Defusion	and	acceptance	also	go	hand	in	hand:	defusion,	as	we	notice
our	thoughts	and	allow	them	to	be	as	they	are,	is	an	act	of	acceptance.	So
hopefully	now	you’re	starting	to	see	what	I	meant	when	I	said	the	different
parts	of	the	hexaflex	are	all	interconnected	like	six	facets	of	a	diamond.	The
diamond	itself	is	psychological	flexibility:	the	capacity	to	“be	present,	open
up,	and	do	what	matters.”	And	thus,	when	we	talk	of	“opening	up,”	that
includes	both	defusion	and	acceptance.	In	the	next	two	chapters,	we	will
focus	on	“being	present.”
Chapter	9.	Be	Here	Now
Contact	with	the	Present	Moment	in	a	Nutshell
In	Plain	Language:	
Contact	with	the	present	moment
	means	being	in	the	here
and	now,	fully	conscious	of	our	experience,	instead	of	being	lost	in	our
thoughts.	It	involves	flexibly	paying	attention	to	both	the	inner	psychological
world	and	the	outer	material	world.
Aim:To	enhance	conscious	awareness	of	our	experience	in	the	present
moment,	so	we	can	perceive	accurately	what’s	happening,	and	gather
important	information	about	whether	to	change	or	persist	in	behavior.	To
engage	fully	in	whatever	we’re	doing	for	increased	effectiveness	and
fulfillment.
Synonyms:	Being	psychologically	present,	consciousness,	awareness,	flexible
attention.
Method:
	Notice	what	is	happening	here	and	now;	discriminate	between
noticing	and	thinking;	pay	attention	flexibly	to	both	the	inner	world	and	the
outer	world.
When	to	Use:	When	clients	are	overly	preoccupied	with	the	past	or	future,
acting	impulsively	or	mindlessly,	“disconnected”	in	their	relationships,
lacking	in	self-awareness,	or	otherwise	out	of	contact	with	their	here	and	now
experience.
The	Only	Time	Is	Now
As	Leo	Tolstoy	once	put	it,	“There	is	only	one	time	that	is	important—
NOW!	It	is	the	most	important	time	because	it	is	the	only	time	that	we	have
any	power.”	Tolstoy’s	famous	quote	reminds	us	that	life	happens	now—in	
this
moment.	The	past	and	future	only	exist	as	thoughts	occurring	in	the	present.
We	can	plan	for	the	future,	but	that	planning	happens	here	and	now.	We	can
reflect	on	and	learn	from	the	past,	but	that	reflection	happens	in	the	present.
This	moment	is	all	we	ever	have.
In	popular	usage,	the	word	“mindfulness”	has	become	synonymous	with
“being	in	the	moment,”	“being	present,”	or	“living	in	the	now.”	Why?
Because	contacting	the	present	moment	lies	at	the	heart	of	all	mindfulness.
For	example,	the	starting	point	for	all	defusion	and	acceptance	techniques	is
to	consciously	notice	the	thoughts	and	feelings	that	are	present	in	this
moment.
Being	present	plays	a	major	role	in	values-congruent	living.	If	you’re
acting	on	your	values	but	not	fully	engaged	in	what	you’re	doing,	then	you’re
“missing	out.”	Being	present	adds	richness	and	fullness	to	your	experience.	It
also	enables	effective	action:	it’s	hard	to	act	effectively	when	you	don’t	pay
attention	to	what	you’re	doing.
When	doing	values	work,	many	clients	will	mention	something	like	“living
in	the	moment,”	“appreciating	what	I’ve	got,”	or	“stopping	and	smelling	the
roses,”	and	almost	everyone	will	talk	about	wanting	to	cultivate	loving	or
caring	relationships.	These	activities	all	require	us	to	be	present.	And,	of
course,	to	know	whether	or	not	we’re	living	by	our	values,	and	whether	our
behavior	is	workable	or	not,	we	need	to	be	aware	of	what	we’re	doing	and
notice	the	consequences	of	our	actions.
Contacting	the	present	moment	is	also	essential	for	self-awareness	and	self-
knowledge.	The	more	in	touch	we	are	with	our	own	thoughts	and	feelings,	the
better	we’re	able	to	regulate	our	behavior	and	make	wise	choices	that	take	our
life	in	the	direction	we	want	to	go.
Getting	to	Contact	with	the	Present	Moment
At	times	in	every	session,	we’ll	ask	the	client	to	notice	what’s	happening	in
this	moment:	“Notice	what	your	mind	is	telling	you	right	now,”	“Notice
what’s	happening	in	your	body	right	now,”	“What	are	you	feeling?	Where	do
you	notice	that	feeling	most	intensely?”,	“As	you	make	that	commitment,
what’s	showing	up	for	you?”,	and	so	on.
In	some	ACT	protocols,	right	from	the	very	first	session,	even	before
creative	hopelessness,	clients	are	asked	to	do	short	exercises	around	noticing
their	breath	or	noticing	the	sounds	in	the	room,	and	are	asked	to	practice	these
for	homework	(for	example,	see	Walser	&	Westrup,	2007).	However,
typically	it’s	not	until	after	defusion	and	acceptance	that	therapists	start
explicitly	talking	about	living	in	the	moment	and	making	that	the	central
focus	of	a	session.
On	the	other	hand,	if	you’ve	started	therapy	with	work	around	values	and
committed	action,	you	can	segue	into	this	by	drawing	the	link	between	being
present	and	building	resonant	relationships,	acting	effectively,	performing
skillfully,	or	getting	the	most	fulfillment	out	of	whatever	it	is	you’re	doing.
At	times,	you	may	even	start	therapy	by	explicitly	focusing	on	this	process,
especially	with	clients	who	dissociate	easily	or	who	get	so	swept	away	by
their	emotions	that	it’s	difficult	to	do	any	constructive	work.
The	Mindful	Therapist
Obviously	in	order	to	do	effective	therapy,	we	ourselves	need	to	be	fully
present:	attuned	to	our	clients,	noticing	both	their	physical	and	verbal
responses.	(Indeed,	this	is	essential	for	any	relationship	we	wish	to	enhance.
Building	resonant	relationships	requires	emotional	intelligence:	awareness	of
our	own	emotional	reactions	as	well	as	those	of	the	people	with	whom	we
interact.)	Of	course,	being	fully	present	as	a	therapist	is	easier	said	than	done.
Have	you	ever	been	in	a	session	and	suddenly	realized	that	you	haven’t	heard
a	word	your	client’s	been	saying	for	the	last	two	minutes?	And	then	you	tried
to	hide	the	fact	by	saying	something	like,	“Hmmm.	Can	you	tell	me	a	bit
more	about	that?”
A	gutsier	and	more	useful	response	at	those	embarrassing	moments	is
simply	to	come	clean:	“I’m	very	sorry	about	this.	I	just	got	all	caught	up	in
my	mind	for	a	moment	there,	and	I	wasn’t	really	listening	to	you.	If	we	were
at	a	social	function,	I’d	try	to	cover	that	up	and	pretend	it	hadn’t	happened,
but	here	it’s	a	good	opportunity	to	demonstrate	that	we’re	all	in	the	same	boat.
Our	minds	just	pull	us	out	of	our	experience.	So	I	hope	you’ll	forgive	me,	and
could	you	please	repeat	what	you	just	said?”
While	responding	in	this	way	is	likely	to	bring	up	some	anxiety	for	you,	it
builds	a	more	open,	honest,	and	equal	relationship,	and	it	powerfully	models
both	self-acceptance	and	being	present.	It	also	brings	home	the	reality	that
being	present	is	simple	but	not	easy.	While	it	is	easy	to	
get
	present—we
simply	notice	our	experience—it’s	very	difficult	to	
stay
	present.	Our	mind	all
too	easily	carries	us	off.	We	need	to	be	up	front	with	our	clients	on	this	issue.
We	need	to	let	them	know	that	we	can	get	better	at	being	present—like	any
skill,	the	more	we	practice,	the	better	we	get—but	we	can’t	get	perfect.	Even
Zen	masters	get	hooked	by	their	minds	at	times.
Introducing	the	Present	Moment
When	explicitly	introducing	this	element,	it’s	often	good	to	start	with	a
metaphor	that	conveys	the	difficulties	of	being	present.	For	example,	if	we’ve
introduced	the	mind	as	a	problem-solving	machine	(as	in	chapter	1),	we	can
refer	back	to	it:	“We’ve	talked	before	about	how	our	mind	is	like	a	problem-
solving	machine.	And	it’s	very,	very	good	at	its	job.	It’s	always	looking	out
for	problems.	And	unfortunately	when	we	get	caught	up	in	problem	solving,
we	often	miss	out	on	enjoying	or	appreciating	life.	It’s	hard	to	appreciate	what
we	have	right	now	when	we’re	focused	on	all	the	things	that	are	bad	or
wrong,	or	not	quite	right,	or	need	to	be	fixed	and	sorted.	So	one	important
part	of	our	work	here	is	learning	how	to	do	that—to	shift	from	problem-
solving	mode	to	appreciating	what’s	here	and	now.”	Other	good	candidates
for	introducing	this	notion	include	these	metaphors:	Hands	As	Thoughts	(see
chapter	2),	section	1	of	ACT	in	a	Nutshell	(see	chapter	1),	or	the	Time
Machine	(see	below).	With	depressed	or	anxious	clients,	you	can	directly	and
explicitly	link	these	metaphors	to	dwelling	on	the	past	or	worrying	about	the
future.
THE	TIME	MACHINE	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	It’s	lucky	for	us	that	our	mind	can	conceptualize	the	past	and	the
future.	It’s	a	hugely	useful	ability.	It	allows	us	to	reflect	on	and
learn	from	the	past,	and	to	predict	and	plan	for	the	future.	As	we
grow	older,	our	mind	gets	better	and	better	at	doing	these	tricks:
conjuring	up	the	past	and	the	future.	But	unfortunately,	this	starts	to
create	problems.	As	children,	we	can	easily	live	in	the	present,	but
by	adulthood	our	mind	is	like	an	out-of-control	time	machine	that
constantly	pulls	us	back	into	the	past	or	forward	into	the	future.	As
a	result,	we	spend	a	lot	of	time	in	the	past	reliving	old	hurts,
failures,	rejections,	and	mistakes,	or	a	lot	of	time	in	the	future,
worrying	about	everything	that	could	go	wrong.	And	meanwhile
we’re	missing	out	on	life	in	the	present.	It’s	hard	to	get	any
satisfaction	or	fulfillment	from	your	life	if	you’re	not	actually
present	to	appreciate	it.
Once	you’ve	used	a	metaphor	to	introduce	this	process	and	convey	why	it’s
relevant	to	the	client,	there	are	a	vast	number	of	exercises	you	can	turn	to—
and	they	all	boil	down	to	one	basic	instruction.
The	Basic	Mindfulness	Instruction
The	basic	instruction	that	you’ll	find	at	the	core	of	every	single	mindfulness
exercise—from	a	ten-second	ACT	technique	to	a	ten-day	silent	meditation
retreat—is	this:	“Notice	X.”	(Common	alternatives	to	“notice”	include
observe,	pay	attention	to,	focus	on,	be	aware	of,	or	bring	your	awareness	to.)
The	“X”	that	we’re	noticing	can	be	anything	that’s	present	in	this	moment:	a
thought,	a	feeling,	a	sensation,	a	memory—or	anything	that	we	can	see,	hear,
touch,	taste,	or	smell.	X	might	be	the	view	from	a	window,	the	expression	on
the	face	of	a	loved	one,	the	sensations	of	a	hot	shower,	the	taste	of	a	piece	of
chocolate	in	our	mouth,	the	action	of	tying	our	shoelaces,	the	movement	of
our	lungs,	or	the	sounds	we	can	hear	in	the	room	around	us.
At	times,	we	may	want	a	very	broad	awareness	of	the	present:	for	example,
if	we’re	walking	in	the	countryside	and	we	want	to	take	in	all	the	sights	and
sounds	and	smells.	At	other	times,	we	may	want	a	much	more	focused
attention:	if	we’re	driving	in	pouring	rain,	we	want	to	be	absolutely	focused
on	the	road,	not	tuning	in	to	the	radio	or	chatting	with	the	passengers.	At
times,	we	may	want	to	direct	our	attention	inward	to	the	world	of	thoughts,
feelings,	and	sensations;	at	other	times,	outward	to	the	world	around	us;	and
much	of	the	time,	to	both	worlds	at	once—freely	moving	from	one	event	to
another,	as	required	by	the	demands	of	the	situation.	A	useful	term	for	this
ability	is	
flexible	attention.
Construct	Your	Own	Mindfulness	Exercises
In	this	and	every	other	book	on	ACT,	you’ll	find	plenty	of	scripts	for
mindfulness	exercises,	but	once	you	know	the	“basic	formula,”	you	can	easily
construct	your	own.	All	exercises	basically	boil	down	to	some	combination	of
these	three	instructions:
1
.	
Notice	X.
2
.	
Let	go	of	your	thoughts.
3
.	
Let	your	feelings	be.
All	mindfulness	exercises	include	instruction	1:	noticing	your	experience	is
the	very	core	of	mindfulness.	Most	exercises	also	include	instruction	2,
defusion.	Instruction	3,	acceptance,	is	less	commonly	given	(but	always
implied).
Read	through	some	of	the	longer	scripts	in	this	book	or	any	other
mindfulness	book	you	may	have,	and	you’ll	see	they’re	all	constructed	around
some	combination	of	these	basic	instructions.	For	example,	the	first	section	of
the	Acceptance	of	Emotions	Exercise	(see	chapter	8)	is	simply	an	extended
riff	on	“notice	X,”	where	X	is	an	intense	sensation	in	the	body.	The	Leaves	on
a	Stream	Exercise	(see	chapter	7)	is	built	around	both	“notice	X”	and	“let	go
of	your	thoughts,”	as	is	the	common	mindfulness	instruction,	“When	you
notice	that	you’ve	drifted	off	into	your	thoughts,	gently	acknowledge	it	and
bring	your	attention	back	to	X.”
To	construct	an	exercise	around	contacting	the	present	moment	is	simple.
All	you	need	to	do	is	direct	your	client’s	attention	to	“X”—for	example,
breath,	body	posture,	feelings,	sounds	in	the	room,	and	so	on—and	then	ask
herto	observe	“X”	with	openness	and	curiosity.	If	you	wish	to	add	in	elements
of	defusion	or	acceptance	then	simply	add	instructions	2	or	3	from	above.
One	of	the	most	popular	exercises	to	start	off	with	is	Mindfulness	of	the
Breath	(below).	I	ask	clients	initially	to	practice	this	for	five	minutes	once	or
twice	a	day,	then	increase	the	duration	by	two	or	three	minutes	every	few	days
until	they	can	do	this	for	fifteen	to	twenty	minutes	at	a	time.	(Of	course,	not
all	clients	will	agree	to	this	or	follow	through	with	it,	but	those	who	do
usually	derive	significant	benefits.)
MINDFULNESS	OF	THE	BREATH
Therapist:
	I	invite	you	to	sit	with	your	feet	flat	on	the	floor	and	your	back
straight,	and	either	fix	your	eyes	on	a	spot	or	close	your	eyes.	Bring
your	attention	to	your	breathing,	and	observe	it	as	if	you’re	a
curious	scientist	who	has	never	encountered	breathing	before.
(
Pause	 5	 seconds.
)	Notice	the	air	as	it	comes	in	through	your
nostrils	…	and	goes	down	to	the	bottom	of	your	lungs.	(
Pause	5
seconds.
)	And	notice	it	as	it	flows	back	out	again.	(
Pause	 5
seconds.
)	Notice	the	air	moving	in	and	out	of	your	nostrils	…	how
it’s	slightly	warmer	as	it	comes	out	…	and	slightly	cooler	as	it	goes
in.	Notice	the	subtle	rise	and	fall	of	your	shoulders	…	(
Pause	5
seconds.
)	and	the	gentle	rise	and	fall	of	your	rib	cage	…(
Pause	5
seconds.
)	and	the	soothing	rise	and	fall	of	your	abdomen.	(
Pause	5
seconds.
)	Fix	your	attention	on	one	of	these	areas,	whichever	you
prefer:	on	the	breath	moving	in	and	out	of	the	nostrils,	on	the	rising
and	falling	of	the	rib	cage,	or	the	abdomen.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)Keep
your	attention	on	this	spot,	noticing	the	movement—in	and	out—of
the	breath.	(
Pause	 20	 seconds.
)	Whatever	feelings,	urges,	or
sensations	 arise,	 whether	 pleasant	 or	 unpleasant,	 gently
acknowledge	them,	as	if	nodding	your	head	at	people	passing	by
you	on	the	street.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	Gently	acknowledge	their
presence	and	let	them	be.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	Allow	them	to	come
and	go	as	they	please,	and	keep	your	attention	on	the	breath.	(
Pause
20	 seconds.
)	Whatever	thoughts,	images,	or	memories	arise,
whether	comfortable	or	uncomfortable,	simply	acknowledge	them
and	allow	them	to	be	…	Let	them	come	and	go	as	they	please,	and
keep	your	attention	on	the	breath.	(
Pause	20	seconds.
)	From	time	to
time,	your	attention	will	wander	as	you	get	caught	up	in	your
thoughts.	Each	time	this	happens,	notice	what	distracted	you,	then
bring	your	attention	back	to	the	breath.	(
Pause	20	seconds.
)	No
matter	how	often	you	drift	off,	whether	a	hundred	times	or	a
thousand—your	aim	is	simply	to	note	what	distracted	you	and	to
refocus	on	your	breath.	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	Again	and	again	and
again,	you’ll	drift	off	into	your	thoughts.	This	is	normal	and	natural
and	happens	to	everyone.	Our	minds	naturally	distract	us	from	what
we’re	doing.	So	each	time	you	realize	your	attention	has	wandered,
gently	acknowledge	it,	notice	what	distracted	you,	and	return	your
attention	to	the	breath.	(
Pause	20	seconds.
)	If	frustration,	boredom,
anxiety,	impatience,	or	other	feelings	arise,	simply	acknowledge
them,	and	maintain	your	focus	on	the	breath.	(
Pause	20	seconds.
)
No	matter	how	often	your	attention	wanders,	gently	acknowledge	it,
note	what	distracted	you,	and	then	refocus	on	your	breath.	(
Pause
10	seconds.
)	And	when	you	are	ready,	bring	yourself	back	to	the
room	and	open	your	eyes.
MINDFULNESS	OF	YOUR	HAND
The	exercise	that	follows	is	my	personal	favorite,	and	was	inspired	by	my
son,	Max.	Once,	when	Max	was	about	ten	months	old,	I	watched	him
discovering	his	hands.	He	held	one	tiny	little	hand	up	in	front	of	his	face,
wiggling	his	tiny	little	fingers	around,	utterly	fascinated	by	their	movements
—as	was	I!	And	I	thought,	“Wow.	That	would	make	a	good	mindfulness
exercise.”	(I	don’t	mean	looking	at	Max’s	hands—I	mean	looking	at	your
own!)	It’s	impossible	to	appreciate	the	beauty	and	simplicity	of	this	exercise
purely	through	reading,	so	I’ve	also	recorded	a	version	as	an	MP3,	which	you
can	download	for	free	from	
www.actmadesimple.com
.
Therapist:
	In	a	moment,	I’m	going	to	ask	you	to	notice	your	hand.	And	I
mean,	
really
	notice	it.	In	fact,	I’m	going	to	ask	you	to	look	at	it	for
five	minutes.	But	before	we	do	that,	I’d	like	to	know,	what’s	your
mind	predicting	about	the	next	five	minutes?
Client:
	Seems	like	a	long	time.
Therapist:
	Yeah.	And—just	guessing	here—is	your	mind	predicting	it’s	going
to	be	boring,	tedious,	difficult—something	like	that?
Client:
	(
laughs
)	Yeah,	it	sounds	pretty	boring.
Therapist:
	Okay.	So	let’s	check	it	out	and	see	if	that’s	the	case.	Sometimes
our	mind	is	right	on	at	predicting	things.	Gets	it	absolutely	right.
But	very	often,	its	predictions	are	a	bit	off	mark.	So	let’s	see	what
happens—see	if	it	really	is	slow,	tedious,	and	boooooring.
In	 the	 following	 transcript,	 the	 ellipses	 indicate	 pauses	 of	 about	 three
seconds.
Therapist:
	I	invite	you	to	get	into	a	comfortable	position.	And	just	turn	one	of
your	hands	palm	upward,	and	hold	it	a	comfortable	distance	from
your	face.	For	the	next	few	minutes,	I’d	like	you	to	observe	your
hand	as	if	you’re	a	curious	scientist	who	has	never	seen	a	hand
before.	And	from	that	perspective,	first	notice	the	outline.	Mentally
trace	the	outline	of	your	hand,	starting	at	the	base	of	the	thumb,	and
tracing	around	all	the	fingers	…	and	notice	the	shapes	of	the	spaces
in	between	the	fingers	…	and	notice	where	your	hand	tapers	in	at
the	wrist.	And	now,	notice	the	color	of	your	skin	…	notice	it’s	not
just	one	color	…	there	are	different	tones	and	shades,	and	dappled
areas	…	and	ever	so	slowly,	stretch	your	fingers	out,	and	push	them
as	far	back	as	they	will	go,	and	notice	how	the	color	changes	in
your	skin	…	and	then	slowly	release	the	tension,	and	notice	how	the
color	returns	…	and	do	that	once	more,	ever	so	slowly,	noticing	the
color	disappear	…	and	then	return	…	and	now	notice	the	large	lines
on	your	palm	…	notice	the	shapes	they	make	where	they	come
together	or	diverge	or	intersect	…	and	zoom	in	one	of	those	lines
and	notice	how	there	are	many,	smaller	lines	feeding	into	it	and
branching	out	of	it	…	and	now	shift	your	attention	to	one	of	your
fingertips	…	and	notice	the	spiral	pattern	there	…	the	pattern	that
you	always	see	on	fingerprints	…	and	notice	how	the	pattern
doesn’t	stop	in	your	finger	tip	…	it	carries	on	down	your	finger	…
and	trace	it	right	on	down	and	notice	how	it	continues	into	your
palm	…	and	now	ever	so	slowly,	bring	your	little	finger	toward
your	thumb	…	and	notice	the	flesh	in	your	palm	scrunches	up	…
and	now	slowly	release	…	and	notice	the	flesh	resume	its	normal
contours	…and	now	turn	your	hand	to	the	karate-chop	position	…
and	notice	the	difference	between	the	skin	on	the	palm	and	the	skin
on	the	back	…	and	look	at	your	index	finger,	and	notice	there’s	a
sort	of	dividing	line,	where	those	two	types	of	skin	meet	each
other…	and	ever	so	slowly	turn	your	hand	over	…	and	notice	the
skin	on	the	back	…	and	notice	any	criticisms	or	judgments	your
mind	makes	…	notice	any	scars,	sunspots,	blemishes	…	and	notice
the	different	colors	in	the	skin	…	where	it	passes	over	a	vein	…	or
over	your	knuckles	…	and	ever	so	slowly,	curly	your	hand	into	a
gentle	fist	…	and	notice	how	the	texture	of	your	skin	changes	…
and	notice	any	comments	your	mind	makes	about	that	…	and	focus
in	on	your	knuckles	…and	gently	rotate	your	fist,	and	notice	the
contours	and	valleys	of	your	knuckles	…	and	now	tighten	your	fist,
and	notice	what	happens	to	the	knuckles	…	to	their	color	and	their
prominence	…	and	then	ever	so	slowly	open	your	hand	up,
straighten	your	fingers,	and	notice	how	your	knuckles	just	disappear
…	and	now	bring	your	attention	to	one	of	your	fingernails	…	and
notice	the	texture	of	the	nail	…	and	the	different	shades	of	color	…
and	notice	where	it	disappears	under	the	skin	…	and	the	cuticle	that
seals	it	in	there	…	and	now	ever	so	slowly,	ever	so	gently,	wiggle
your	fingers	up	and	down	…	and	notice	the	tendons	moving	under
the	skin	…	pumping	up	and	down	like	pistons	and	rods	…	and	that
brings	us	to	just	over	five	minutes.
Client:
	(
Amazed
)	You’re	kidding?	That	was	five	minutes?
Therapist:
	Sure	was.	And	was	it	slow,	tedious,	boring?
Client:
	No.	It	was	really	interesting.
Almost	everybody	who	does	that	exercise	is	amazed	not	only	at	how
quickly	time	passes	—it	seems	like	the	blink	of	an	eye—but	also	at	just	how
fascinating	their	hand	is.	We	now	debrief	the	exercise:	“What	did	you
discover?	What	interested	you	most?”	Then	we	can	ask,	“So	what	is	the
relevance	of	this	exercise	to	your	life?”	Through	questioning	our	client—and
providing	the	answers	if	he	doesn’t	come	up	with	any—we	now	draw	out	(a)
how	we	take	things	for	granted	and	fail	to	appreciate	them,	and	(b)	how,	when
we	really	pay	attention,	life	is	so	much	more	interesting	and	fulfilling.
Useful	questions	to	ask	include	these:	“What	might	happen	in	your	closest
relationships	if	you	paid	attention	to	your	loved	ones	in	the	same	way	you	just
did	to	your	hand?	Would	you	be	willing	to	give	it	a	go?”	“Next	time	you’re
feeling	bored,	stressed,	anxious,	or	otherwise	caught	up	in	your	head,	would
you	be	willing	to	really	engage	in	whatever	it	is	you’re	doing,	like	you	just
did	with	your	hand,	and	notice	what	happens?”
BEING	PRESENT	AND	LIFE	SATISFACTION
We	like	to	draw	the	connection	between	being	entangled	in	your	mind	and
missing	out	on	your	life.	We	can	ask	clients	questions	such	as	these:	“What’s
it	like	for	you,	spending	so	much	time	caught	up	in	worries	about	the	future	or
pain	from	the	past?”	“Is	that	really	where	you	want	to	spend	your	time?”
“What	do	you	miss	out	on,	when	you’re	trapped	inside	your	mind?”	We	can
point	out	that	although	we	can’t	stop	our	mind	from	bringing	up	painful
memories	or	telling	us	scary	stories	about	the	future,	we	
can
	learn	to	let	those
thoughts	come	and	go	instead	of	latching	on	to	them	(that	is,	instead	of
worrying	or	ruminating).	Leaves	on	a	Stream	(see	chapter	7)	is	an	excellent
exercise	for	this	purpose.
Also	establish	that	fully	engaging	in	your	experience	leads	to	increased
satisfaction	and	fulfillment.	The	exercise	that	follows,	Mindfully	Eating	a
Raisin	(Kabat-Zinn,	1990),	makes	this	point	very	powerfully.	(If	your	client
doesn’t	like	raisins,	a	peanut	or	a	small	piece	of	chocolate	will	do	nicely.)
MINDFULLY	EATING	A	RAISIN
The	ellipses	represent	pauses	of	five	seconds.
Therapist:
	Throughout	this	exercise,	all	sorts	of	thoughts	and	feelings	will
arise.	Let	them	come	and	go,	and	keep	your	attention	on	the
exercise.	 And	 whenever	 you	 notice	 that	 your	 attention	 has
wandered,	briefly	note	what	distracted	you,	and	then	bring	your
attention	back	to	the	raisin.	Now	take	hold	of	the	raisin,	and	observe
it	as	if	you’re	a	curious	scientist	who	has	never	seen	a	raisin	before
…	Notice	the	shape,	the	colors,	the	contours	…	Notice	that	it’s	not
just	one	color—there	are	many	different	shades	to	it	…	Notice	the
weight	of	it	in	your	hand	…	and	the	feel	of	its	skin	against	your
fingers	…	Gently	squish	it	and	notice	its	texture	…	Hold	it	up	to	the
light,	and	notice	how	it	glows	…	Now	raise	it	to	your	nose	and
smell	it	…	and	really	notice	the	aroma	…	And	now	raise	it	to	your
mouth,	rest	it	against	your	lips,	and	pause	for	a	moment	before
biting	into	it	…	And	notice	what’s	happening	inside	your	mouth	…
Notice	the	salivation	…	Notice	the	urge	to	bite	…	And	in	a	moment
—don’t	do	it	yet—I’m	going	to	ask	you	to	bite	it	in	half,	keeping
hold	of	one	half	and	letting	the	other	half	drop	onto	your	tongue	…
And	so	now,	in	ultraslow	motion,	bite	the	raisin	in	half,	and	notice
what	your	teeth	do	…	and	let	the	raisin	sit	there	on	your	tongue	for
a	moment	…	and	I	invite	you	to	close	your	eyes	now,	to	enhance
the	experience	…	And	just	notice	any	urges	arising	…	And	then
gently	explore	the	raisin	with	your	tongue,	noticing	the	taste	and	the
texture	…	And	now,	in	ultraslow	motion,	eat	the	raisin	and	notice
what	your	teeth	do	…	and	your	tongue	…	and	your	jaws	…	and
notice	the	changing	taste	and	texture	of	the	raisin	…	and	the	sounds
of	chewing	…	and	notice	where	you	can	taste	the	sweetness	on	your
tongue	…	and	when	the	urge	to	swallow	arises,	just	notice	it	for	a
moment	before	acting	on	it	…	and	when	you	do	swallow,	notice	the
movement	and	the	sound	in	your	gullet	…	and	then	notice	where
your	tongue	goes	and	what	it	does	…	and	after	you’ve	swallowed,
pause	…	and	notice	the	way	the	taste	gradually	fades	…	but	still
faintly	remains	…	and	then,	in	your	own	time,	eat	the	other	half	in
the	same	way.
Afterward	debrief	the	exercise	much	as	for	the	Mindfulness	of	Your	Hand
Exercise.	Clients	commonly	comment	with	amazement	on	how	much	taste
and	flavor	there	is	in	one	raisin,	and	how	much	activity	goes	on	in	the	mouth.
Ask	your	client	how	she	usually	eats	raisins,	and	she’ll	usually	mime
chucking	a	whole	handful	into	her	mouth.	Use	this	exercise	as	a	metaphor	for
life:	how	much	richer	it	is	when	we’re	mindful.	This	exercise	can	be	very
useful	for	depressed	or	dysphoric	clients	who	complain	they	get	no	pleasure
from	previously	enjoyable	activities;	it’s	hard	to	get	pleasure	or	enjoyment
from	an	activity	if	you	are	not	psychologically	present	(that	is,	if	you’re	fused
with	an	ongoing	stream	of	negative	thoughts).
NOTICING	SELF-DEFEATING	BEHAVIOR
Most	impulsive,	self-defeating,	or	self-destructive	behaviors	are	motivated
by	fusion	and	avoidance.	Mindfulness	exercises	can	be	designed	to	enhance
your	client’s	self-awareness	around	what	they’re	fusing	with	and	what	they’re
trying	to	avoid.	For	example,	you	can	ask	your	clients	to	notice	their	thoughts
and	feelings	
before
	they	actually	start	doing	the	problem	behavior	(drinking,
binge	eating,	self-harming,	gambling,	and	so	on).	You	might	say,	“Next	time
you’re	about	to	start	[doing	the	problem	behavior],	stop	for	a	moment,	take	a
deep	 breath,	 and	 notice	 your	 thoughts/feelings/sensations.	 Notice	 any
thoughts	or	feelings	you’re	trying	to	push	away/escape	from/get	rid	of.	Notice
any	urges.	Notice	what	your	mind	is	telling	you	to	do.”
Mindfulness	exercises	can	also	disrupt	problematic	behaviors.	Clients	can
be	assigned	to	mindfully	observe	the	way	they	do	the	problematic	behavior,	to
notice	every	aspect	of	it	in	great	detail,	and,	in	particular,	to	notice	what
thoughts	and	feelings	are	present	while	they’re	doing	so.	Often	simply
bringing	full	awareness	to	the	behavior	disrupts	it.
NARROW	FOCUS	VS.	BROAD	FOCUS
Think	about	whether	the	clinical	problem	warrants	a	broader	focus	or	a
narrower	focus	for	mindfulness.	For	example,	if	clients	are	prone	to	worry
and	rumination,	you	may	want	to	encourage	a	narrower	focus:	have	them
engage	in	some	valued	activity	and	focus	their	attention	primarily	on	that
activity.	They	can	let	thoughts	come	and	go	in	peripheral	awareness	while
repeatedly	bringing	their	attention	back	to	the	activity	itself.	In	contrast,	if	the
problem	is	chronic	pain,	you	may	want	to	encourage	a	broader	focus.	While
pain	is	acknowledged	and	accepted,	awareness	is	broadened	to	encompass	the
five	senses,	the	surrounding	environment,	and	the	current	activity.	Thus	pain
becomes	only	one	aspect	of	a	much	broader	experience.
In	session,	we	often	ask	clients	to	focus	primarily	on	one	aspect	of	their
private	experience—for	example,	on	their	thoughts,	feelings,	or	sensations.
It’s	important	that	they	realize	this	is	simply	to	teach	them	a	skill.	In	the	world
of	everyday	living,	the	idea	is	that	when	distressing	thoughts	and	feelings
arise,	they	can	be	accepted	as	just	one	aspect	of	awareness	(one	performer
among	many	on	a	well-lit	stage)	rather	than	completely	dominating	awareness
(one	performer	standing	in	a	spotlight	on	a	darkened	stage).
Keeping	Clients	Present
When	working	with	people	that	dissociate	easily,	or	those	at	the	extreme
end	of	the	experiential	avoidance	spectrum	(for	example,	clients	with
borderline	personality	disorder	or	eating	disorders),	it’s	generally	best	to	start
with	exercises	focused	on	the	external	world:	we	ask	them	to	notice	what	they
can	see	and	hear	and	touch.	And	if	our	client	is	very	drowsy	or	dissociates
easily,	we	keep	these	exercises	short,	and	they	do	them	with	their	eyes	open.
If	our	client	“drifts	off”	in	a	session,	we	bring	him	back:	“I	seem	to	have
lost	you.	Where	are	you?”	or	“I	may	be	wrong	about	this,	but	I	get	a	sense
that	you’re	not	fully	present	right	now.	You	seem	a	bit	distant	or
preoccupied.”	Or	“Can	I	just	check	in	with	you	for	a	moment?	I	notice	you’re
staring	down	at	the	floor	and	I	think	you	may	have	gotten	caught	up	in	a	story.
Am	I	right?”	Once	our	client	is	present	again,	we	could	ask	“Where	did	your
mind	take	you	just	then?”	or	“So	how	did	it	hook	you?”	We	can	take	these
opportunities	to	point	out—compassionately	and	respectfully—how	easily	our
mind	pulls	us	out	of	our	experience.
When	our	client	keeps	drifting	into	the	past	or	the	future—rehashing	a
story	we’ve	already	heard	several	times—we	can	respectfully	point	out	what’s
happening	and	interrupt	it.	If	we	just	sit	back,	say	nothing,	allow	him	to
ramble	on,	we’re	not	helping	him,	or	ourselves;	he’s	uselessly	fused	with	his
worries	or	memories,	and	he’s	missing	out	on	the	present—plus	we’re	getting
bored	or	frustrated,	and	we’re	missing	the	opportunity	to	help	him	develop	a
useful	mindfulness	skill.	Here’s	an	example:
Client:
	That	bitch!	I’m	tellin’	ya.	I	still	can’t	believe	it.	I	can’t	believe—ten
f****ing	years,	there	I	am	working	like	a	dog,	morning,	noon,	and
night—while	she’s	at	home	f****ing	the	next-door	neighbor.	And
then—then	she	has	the	balls	to	ask	for	half	the	house.
Therapist:
	I’m	sorry	to	interrupt	you.	I	can	see	how	painful	this	is	for	you,
and	I	can	only	begin	to	imagine	what	that	must	feel	like.	At	the
same	time,	I’m	wondering	if	you’ve	noticed	what’s	happening	here.
You’ve	already	told	me	about	this	several	times	now	in	quite	some
detail.	Is	there	anything	helpful	or	useful	in	going	over	it	again?
Client:
	(
long	pause
)	Not	really.	No.
Therapist:
	Can	you	notice	how	your	mind	keeps	hooking	you	here?	Pulling
you	back	into	the	past,	back	into	all	that	pain.	Is	that	really	where
you	want	to	be	right	now?
Client:
	No.	But—I	can’t	stop	thinking	about	it.
Therapist:
	I’m	not	surprised.	This	is	very	painful	for	you.	It’s	not	like	you	can
just	put	on	a	happy	face	and	pretend	it	never	happened.
Client:
	That’s	right.	My	friends	say	I	should	get	over	it,	but	I’d	like	to	see
them	try	it.
Therapist:
	So	how	about	this:	rather	than	trying	to	stop	the	thoughts,	how
about	we	practice	letting	them	come	and	go	instead	of	holding	on	to
them?
DROPPING	ANCHOR
At	any	point	in	a	session	where	our	client	seems	to	be	experiencing
emotional	distress,	it’s	useful	to	bring	her	into	contact	with	the	present.	For
example,	we	could	say,	“I	can	see	you’re	distressed.	What	are	you	feeling
right	now?	Where	are	you	feeling	it?”	We	could	then	go	into	her	physical
sensations	and	do	some	work	with	acceptance.	Or	we	could	move	to	defusion:
ask	her	to	notice	what	she’s	thinking.	Or	we	could	ask	him	to	contact	the
external	world:	“Can	you	have	this	feeling	and	also	stay	present	in	the	room?
See	if	you	can	allow	the	feeling	to	be	there,	and	also	notice	what	you	can	see
and	hear	around	you.	See	if	you	can	really	be	present	with	me—fully	here
with	me—even	while	you’re	having	this	feeling.”
A	 useful	 metaphor/mindfulness	 technique/exercise	 for	 working	 with
distressed	clients	is	Dropping	Anchor.	In	the	transcript	below,	the	client	has
been	talking	feverishly	about	her	partner’s	intention	to	leave	her,	and	is
clearly	very	distressed.
Therapist:
	This	is	clearly	a	very	stressful	situation,	so	it’s	hardly	surprising
that	you’re	feeling	distraught.	The	thing	is,	right	now	you’re	caught
in	an	emotional	storm.	All	these	thoughts	and	feelings	are	whirling
around	your	body,	dragging	you	here,	there,	and	everywhere.	And
you	can’t	do	anything	useful	until	you	drop	an	anchor.
Client:
	(
talking	very	fast
)	What	d’you	mean?	There’s	nothing	I	can	do.	He’s
going	to	leave	me.	He’s	not	going	to	change	his	mind	now.	He’s	got
someone	else.	He’s	already	taken	most	of	his	stuff.	And	there’s	no
way	I	can	pay	the	rent	by	myself.	Plus	everything’s	in	his	name—
the	gas,	the	electricity,	the	phone,	the	…
Therapist:
	Please	excuse	me	for	interrupting	you,	but	it’s	important	to	notice
what’s	happening	here.	Your	mind’s	pulling	you	all	over	the	place.
You’re	being	tossed	around	in	a	storm	of	thoughts	and	feelings	and
while	that’s	going	on,	you	can’t	think	effectively	or	act	effectively.
There’s	one	thing	you	need	to	do	before	anything	else:	you	need	to
drop	an	anchor.
Client:
	What	do	you	mean?
Therapist:
	Okay.	Push	your	feet	hard	into	the	floor.	Feel	the	ground	beneath
you.	Now	sit	up	in	your	chair,	and	notice	how	you’re	sitting.	And
look	around	the	room,	and	notice	what	you	can	see.	Notice	what
you	can	hear.	Notice	what	you’re	doing	right	now—notice	that	you
and	I	are	in	this	room,	talking	to	each	other.	Now	take	a	few	deep
breaths,	and	see	if	you	can	breathe	down	into	your	feet.	And	keep
them	firmly	pressed	into	the	floor.	And	notice	how	your	mind	keeps
trying	to	pull	you	somewhere	else,	and	see	if	you	can	stay	present.
Notice	the	room	around	you.	Notice	what	we’re	doing	here,	right
now.
When	a	client	attends	in	crisis	mode	or	becomes	highly	emotionally
aroused	during	a	session,	these	are	valuable	opportunities	for	teaching	him
how	to	ground	himself:	an	essential	first	step	in	responding	effectively	to	the
challenge	at	hand.
Homework	and	the	Next	Session
Homework	is	to	practice	being	present.	You	can	ask	your	client	to	mindfully
do	any	activity:	wash	the	dishes,	play	with	her	kids,	drive	the	car,	do	the
gardening,	work	out	at	the	gym,	take	a	shower,	iron	shirts,	brush	teeth,	put	the
garbage	out,	cook	dinner,	listen	to	music,	stretch,	walk,	run,	dance,	sing,	eat,
drink,	talk,	shave,	make	love,	make	a	cup	of	tea,	and	so	on.	Here	are	a	few	of
the	things	I	often	ask	clients	to	do:
Practice	ten	to	twenty	minutes	of	mindful	breathing	each
day.	(This	is	much	easier	for	your	client	if	he	has	a	CD	to
practice	with.	Naturally	I	recommend	my	own	CDs,	but
there	are	many	others	out	there.	In	fact,	you	can	easily
record	your	own:	a	simple	MP3	recorder	and	a	CD	burner
on	your	computer	are	all	you	need.	It	may	not	have	the	same
sound	quality	as	a	professionally	recorded	CD,	but	your
clients	won’t	care	a	bit.	The	sound	of	your	voice	will	have
special	significance	for	them.)
Practice	five	to	ten	mindful,	slow,	deep	breaths	at	every
opportunity	throughout	the	day	(for	example,	at	traffic
lights,	in	supermarket	lines,	during	commercial	breaks	on
TV).
Practice	a	brief	centering	technique	(a)	whenever	you	feel
yourself	starting	to	“zone	out”/	dissociate/“flip	out”;	(b)
whenever	you’re	entering	a	stressful	situation;	(c)	the
moment	 you	 realize	 that	 you	 have	 been	 “zoning
out”/“flipping	out”/dissociating,	and	so	on;	(d)	at	every
opportunity	throughout	the	day	(for	example,	at	traffic
lights,	in	supermarket	lines,	during	commercial	breaks	on
TV).
You	could	also	give	your	clients	a	copy	of	Informal	Mindfulness	Practice,
Simple	Ways	to	Get	Present,	or	the	Mindful	Breathing	Practice	Sheet,	which
you’ll	find	at	the	end	of	this	chapter.	These	worksheets	can	also	be
downloaded	from	
www.actmadesimple.com
.
In	traditional	protocols,	work	around	being	present	segues	into	self-as-
context.	In	others,	it	segues	into	more	explicit	work	around	values	and
committed	action.	Being	present	is,	of	course,	essential	for	valued	actions
such	as	connecting	and	caring,	loving	and	nurturing,	appreciation	and
gratitude,	and	peak	performance.
Homework	for	You
Read	all	the	exercises,	metaphors,	and	psychoeducation
components	out	loud	as	if	taking	a	client	through	them.
Review	the	cases	of	two	or	three	clients,	and	identify	when
and	how	they’re	losing	touch	with	the	present	moment:
worrying,	ruminating,	dissociating,	using	drugs	and	alcohol,
and	so	on.	Then	do	the	same	for	yourself.	In	particular,
notice	how	you	“drift	off”	during	your	therapy	sessions:
How	does	your	mind	pull	you	away	from	your	client?	How
often	do	you	get	caught	up	in	thinking	about	what	to	do	next
or	in	judging	yourself	or	your	client?
Practice	the	activities	described	in	Informal	Mindfulness
Practice	(below)	and	notice	what	happens.	This	is	invaluable
information	for	you	because	whatever	you	struggle	with,
your	clients	will	also	struggle	with.	And	if	you	don’t	do	the
exercises,	notice	how	your	mind	stopped	you:	What	stories
did	it	get	you	to	buy	into?	Was	it	perhaps	one	of	these—too
busy,	too	tired,	can’t	be	bothered,	not	important,	do	it	later,
why	should	I,	it’s	too	hard,	I	already	know	this	stuff?
Invent	a	few	mindfulness	practices	of	your	own.	What	do
you	have	in	your	therapy	room	that	could	become	an	“X”	to
notice?
Summary
Contact	with	the	present	moment	is	at	the	very	core	of	mindfulness	and
naturally	plays	an	important	role	in	every	session	of	ACT.	To	facilitate	this
process,	the	basic	instruction	we	give	to	our	clients	is	“notice	X,”	where	X	is
anything	that	is	here	in	this	moment.	Contact	with	the	present	moment	is
implicit	in	both	defusion	and	acceptance:	the	first	step	in	defusing	from	a
thought	or	accepting	a	feeling	is	to	notice	it.
Of	course,	at	times	we	find	it	life	enhancing	to	“escape	from	the	present
moment”	through	daydreams,	fantasies,	novels,	and	movies.	However,	in
general,	the	more	fully	we	can	contact	our	here	and	now	experience,	the	more
effectively	we	can	act	and	the	more	fulfilling	life	becomes.
Chapter	10.	Pure	Awareness
Self-as-Context	in	a	Nutshell
In	 Plain	 Language:
	Self-as-context	is	not	a	thought	or	a	feeling	but	a
“viewpoint”	from	which	we	can	observe	thoughts	and	feelings,	and	a	“space”
in	which	those	thoughts	and	feelings	can	move.	We	access	this	“psychological
space”	through	noticing	that	we	are	noticing,	or	becoming	conscious	of	our
own	consciousness.	It	is	a	“place”	from	which	we	can	observe	our	experience
without	being	caught	up	in	it.	“Pure	awareness”	is	a	good	alternative	term
because	that’s	all	it	is:	awareness	of	our	own	awareness.
Aim
:To	connect	with	a	transcendent	sense	of	self	that	is	separate	from
thoughts	and	feelings,	and	that	provides	a	safe	and	constant	viewpoint	from
which	to	observe	and	accept	them.	To	help	people	stop	running	from	their
pain,	we	help	them	experience	that	there	is	a	“place	inside”	where,	no	matter
how	great	the	pain	is,	it	cannot	harm	them.
Synonyms:
	Self-as-perspective,	the	observing	self,	the	noticing	self,	the	silent
self,	pure	consciousness,	pure	awareness,	the	transcendent	self.
Method
:	Any	ongoing	mindfulness	practice	generally	leads	to	a	sense	of	self-
as-context.	This	is	enhanced	by	exercises	that	explicitly	direct	attention	to
one’s	own	consciousness.
When	to	Use
:	To	facilitate	acceptance,	when	the	client	is	afraid	of	being
harmed	by	his	own	inner	experiences;	to	facilitate	defusion	when	the	client	is
overly	attached	to	the	conceptualized	self;	to	facilitate	conscious	choice	and
effective	action	by	providing	a	space	in	which	thoughts	and	feelings	don’t
control	actions.
Three	Senses	of	Self
While	there	are	many	ways	in	which	we	can	talk	about	self,	ACT
traditionally	focuses	on	three	senses	of	self:	the	conceptualized	self,	self-as-
awareness,	and	self-as-context.	(These	are	not	terms	we	use	with	clients.
When	you	read	ACT	textbooks,	you	may	become	a	bit	confused	as	different
authors	use	different	terminology,	so	here	I’ve	stuck	with	the	most	commonly
used	terms.)
The	conceptualized	self:
	all	the	beliefs,	thoughts,	ideas,
facts,	images,	judgments,	memories,	and	so	on	that	form	my
self-concept,	that	describe	“who	I	am”	as	a	person:	my	self-
description.	Fusion	with	these	thoughts	leads	to	a	sense	of
self-as-description:	I	am	my	thoughts!
Self-as-awareness:
	the	ongoing	process	of	noticing	our
experience,	contacting	the	present	moment.
Self-as-context:
	 the	 locus/space	 from	 where	 noticing
happens;	the	perspective/viewpoint	from	which	noticing
happens;	the	“I”	that	notices	whatever	is	being	noticed	in
any	moment.
THE	SLIT	LAMP	METAPHOR
A	metaphor	adapted	from	Buddhism	illuminates	these	three	senses	of	self.
Imagine	walking	into	a	pitch-black	room.	In	your	hands	is	a	slit	lamp.	You
open	the	slit,	and	a	beam	of	light	shoots	out	and	illuminates	part	of	the	room,
revealing	a	chair,	a	bed,	and	a	table.	The	furniture	is	like	your	conceptualized
self.	The	beam	of	light	is	like	the	ongoing	process	of	noticing	(self-as-
awareness).	When	the	light	shines	on	different	parts	of	the	room,	different
pieces	of	furniture	are	revealed:	a	desk,	a	wardrobe,	a	chest	of	drawers.	But
wherever	the	light	shines,	whatever	it	illuminates	and	reveals,	the	light	beam
is	always	coming	from	the	same	source,	the	same	locus:	the	lamp	itself.	The
lamp	is	like	self-as-context.
The	Observing	Self	Is	Implicit	in	Mindfulness
René	Descartes,	in	his	famous	declaration,	said,	“I	think,	therefore	I	am,”
but	who	is	the	“I”	that	notices	all	that	thinking?	In	ACT,	we	often	refer	to	this
“I”	as	the	“observing	self,”	and	the	observing	self	is	implicit	in	all
mindfulness.	If	the	basic	mindfulness	instruction	is	“notice	X,”	that	implies
there’s	a	locus	or	perspective	from	which	X	is	noticed.	And	this	locus	or
perspective	never	changes.	I	notice	my	thoughts,	I	notice	my	feelings,	I	notice
my	body,	I	notice	the	world	outside	my	body—and	I	even	notice	my	own
noticing.	So	that	which	is	being	noticed—X—changes	continually.	But	the
locus	or	perspective	from	which	the	noticing	happens,	in	and	of	itself,	never
changes:	throughout	life,	everything	is	always	noticed	from	a	locus	or
perspective	of	I/here/now.
If	you’re	struggling	to	make	sense	of	this,	it’s	not	surprising,	because	the
observing	self	is	an	experience	beyond	all	words.	Whatever	words	we	use	to
describe	it,	whatever	images	we	create	of	it,	whatever	beliefs	or	concepts	we
formulate	about	it—they’re	not	it!	It’s	the	aspect	of	us	that	notices	or	observes
all	those	words,	images,	beliefs,	and	concepts	that	we	use	to	try	and	describe
it.	Even	calling	it	“it”	is	a	problem,	because	when	you	label	something	“it,”
you’re	treating	“it”	as	an	object.	And	yet	this	observing	self	cannot	be	an
object	as	“it”	has	no	physical	properties.
The	closest	we	can	get	to	this	experience	in	language	is	via	metaphor.
Metaphors	usually	refer	to	it	as	a	“space”	in	which	thoughts	and	feelings
move,	or	a	“perspective”	from	which	thoughts	and	feelings	are	observed.	One
excellent	 metaphor	 (which	 can	 be	 found	 in	 Buddhism,	 Taoism,	 and
Hinduism)	compares	the	observing	self	to	the	sky.	You	can	use	this	metaphor
conversationally	with	your	clients,	but	I	prefer	to	deliver	it	at	the	end	of	a
mindfulness	exercise,	as	written	below:
THE	SKY	AND	THE	WEATHER	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	Your	observing	self	is	like	the	sky.	Thoughts	and	feelings	are	like
the	weather.	The	weather	changes	continually,	but	no	matter	how
bad	it	gets,	it	cannot	harm	the	sky	in	any	way.	The	mightiest
thunderstorm,	the	most	turbulent	hurricane,	the	most	severe	winter
blizzard—these	things	cannot	hurt	or	harm	the	sky.	And	no	matter
how	bad	the	weather,	the	sky	always	has	room	for	it—and	sooner	or
later	the	weather	always	changes.Now	sometimes	we	forget	the	sky
is	there,	but	it’s	still	there.	And	sometimes	we	can’t	see	the	sky—
it’s	obscured	by	clouds.	But	if	we	rise	high	enough	above	those
clouds—even	the	thickest,	darkest,	thunderclouds—sooner	or	later
we’ll	reach	clear	sky,	stretching	in	all	directions,	boundless	and
pure.	More	and	more,	you	can	learn	to	access	this	part	of	you:	a	safe
space	inside	from	which	to	observe	and	make	room	for	difficult
thoughts	and	feelings.
Getting	to	Self-as-Context
In	traditional	ACT	protocols,	the	observing	self	is	introduced	after	several
sessions	on	defusion,	acceptance,	and	the	present	moment.	However,	as	with
all	six	core	processes,	we	can	bring	self-as-context	into	any	session.	In	recent
years,	I’ve	increasingly	introduced	this	concept	right	from	the	very	beginning
of	active	therapy,	using	the	concept	of	the	thinking	self	and	the	observing	self
(Harris,	2007).Before	reading	on,	please	refresh	your	memory	of	this	concept
by	turning	back	to	chapter	4	and	rereading	the	section	entitled	The	Thinking
Self	and	the	Observing	Self.
If	we	follow	a	traditional	ACT	protocol,	then	we	bring	in	self-as-context
after	several	sessions	focused	on	defusion,	acceptance,	and	being	present.	We
might	say,	“So	you’ve	been	doing	all	these	mindfulness	exercises—noticing
thoughts,	noticing	feelings,	noticing	your	breath,	and	so	on.	What	is	this	part
of	you	that	does	all	the	noticing?	We	don’t	have	a	name	for	it	in	everyday
language.	In	ACT,	we	call	it	the	noticing	self	or	the	observing	self.	And	if
you’re	open	to	it,	I’d	like	to	take	you	through	an	exercise	now	to	have	a
deeper	connection	with	this	part	of	you.”
Another	useful	metaphor	for	introducing	self-as-context	is	the	Chessboard
(Hayes	et	al.,	1999).
THE	CHESSBOARD	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	Imagine	a	chessboard,	where	the	white	pieces	are	all	your	positive
thoughts	and	feelings,	and	the	black	pieces	are	all	your	negative
ones.	We	go	through	life	desperately	trying	to	move	our	white
pieces	across	and	wipe	off	all	the	black	pieces.	But	the	problem	is—
there	are	an	infinite	number	of	white	and	black	pieces.	No	matter
how	many	black	pieces	you	wipe	off,	more	will	appear.	Also,	the
white	pieces	attract	black	pieces.	You	move	forward	the	white
piece,	“I’m	a	good	parent,”	and	it	immediately	attracts	the	black
piece,	“No,	you’re	not.	What	about	the	way	you	yelled	at	your	kids
last	night.”	So	we	can	go	through	life,	wasting	a	lot	of	time	and
energy,	trying	to	win	this	battle	that	can	never	be	won.	Or	we	can
learn	how	to	be	more	like	the	chessboard.	The	board	is	in	intimate
contact	with	all	the	pieces,	but	it’s	not	involved	in	the	battle.
There’s	a	part	of	us	that	operates	like	this	chessboard.	In	ACT,	we
call	it	the	observing	self.	It	enables	us	to	step	out	of	the	battle	with
our	thoughts	and	feelings	while	giving	them	plenty	of	space	to
move	around.
Experiential	Exercises
Once	we’ve	introduced	self-as-context	by	metaphor,	there	are	many
experiential	 exercises	 we	 can	 use.	 Remember	 the	 basic	 mindfulness
instruction—“notice	X”?	To	facilitate	self-as-context,	X	becomes	your	own
awareness	or	consciousness—that	is,	you	notice	your	noticing,	or	notice	your
awareness,	or	notice	your	consciousness.	We	can	facilitate	this	by	adding
simple	instructions	to	any	mindfulness	exercise	such	as	“notice	who	is
noticing”	or	“be	aware	that	you’re	noticing.”	The	following	exercise
illustrates	this.
THERE	GO	YOUR	THOUGHTS	…
This	exercise	is	simply	an	extension	of	Watch	Your	Thoughts,	the	defusion
technique	introduced	in	chapter	7.
Therapist:
	Find	a	comfortable	position,	and	close	your	eyes.	Now	notice:
where	are	your	thoughts?	…	Where	do	they	seem	to	be	located:
above	you,	behind	you,	in	front	of	you,	to	one	side?	(
Pause	 5
seconds.
)	And	notice	the	form	of	those	thoughts:	are	they	pictures,
words,	or	sounds?	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	And	notice—are	they	moving
or	still?	…	And	if	moving,	what	speed	and	what	direction?	(
Pause
10	seconds.
)	Notice	there	are	two	separate	processes	going	on	here:
there’s	a	process	of	thinking—your	thinking	self	is	throwing	up	all
sorts	of	words	and	pictures—and	there’s	a	process	of	noticing—
your	observing	self	is	noticing	all	those	thoughts.	(
Pause	 5
seconds.
)	Now	this	gets	your	mind	whirring,	debating,	and
analyzing,	so	let’s	do	it	again.	Notice:	where	are	your	thoughts?	…
Are	they	pictures	or	words,	moving	or	still?	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)
There	go	your	thoughts—and	there	“you”	are,	observing	those
thoughts.	Your	thoughts	keep	changing.	The	“you”	that	observes
them	does	not	change.	Now	once	again,	this	gets	your	mind
whirring,	debating,	and	analyzing,	so	let’s	just	do	that	one	last	time.
Notice:	where	are	your	thoughts?	…	Are	they	pictures	or	words,
moving	or	still?	…	(
Pause	10	seconds.
)	There	go	your	thoughts—
and	there	“you”	are,	observing	them.	Your	thoughts	change;	you
don’t.
NOTICING	THE	STAGE	SHOW
Another	useful	exercise	is	Noticing	the	Stage	Show.	I	won’t	reproduce	it
here	as	it	is	comprised	of	sections	1	and	2	of	the	Hexaflexercise,	exactly	as
transcribed	in	chapter	4.	Please	go	back	and	reread	it	now	before	continuing.
You	can	use	Noticing	the	Stage	Show	as	the	introduction	to	any
mindfulness	exercise,	such	as	Mindfulness	of	the	Breath,	Leaves	on	a	Stream,
or	Mindfully	Eating	a	Raisin.	This	lays	the	groundwork	for	deeper
exploration	later.	The	Stage	Show	Metaphor	also	provides	a	useful	conclusion
to	any	mindfulness	exercise,	as	in	section	8	of	the	Acceptance	of	Emotions
Exercise	(see	chapter	8).	Again,	please	go	back	and	reread	it	now	before
continuing.
You	can	also	tie	this	metaphor	into	earlier	defusion	and	acceptance	work:
thoughts	and	feelings	are	like	performers	in	the	show,	trying	their	hardest	to
get	your	full	attention—and	if	you’re	not	careful,	they	grab	hold	of	you	and
pull	you	up	onto	the	stage	(fusion).	Defusion	and	acceptance	are	like	stepping
back	from	the	stage	so	you	can	take	in	the	whole	show.
NOTICE	WHO’S	NOTICING
A	simple	way	of	bringing	self-as-context	into	any	mindfulness	exercise	is
to	slip	in	an	instruction	such	as	“And	as	you	notice	your	breath/your
thoughts/this	sensation	in	your	chest/the	taste	of	the	raisin	on	your	tongue,
take	a	moment	to	notice	who	is	noticing.”	Variants	on	this	include	“Be	aware
that	you’re	noticing”	or	“Recognize	that	there’s	a	‘you’	in	there—a	‘you’
behind	your	eyes	who	is	noticing	all	this”	or	“There	is	X,	and	there	you	are,
noticing	X.”
TALKING	AND	LISTENING
Here’s	another	ultraquick	exercise.
Therapist:
	For	the	next	thirty	seconds,	silently	listen	in	to	what	your	mind	is
saying.	And	if	your	thoughts	stop,	just	keep	listening	until	they	start
again.	(
Pause	30	seconds.
)	So	there	you	have	it:	there’s	a	part	of
your	mind	that	talks—the	thinking	self—and	a	part	of	your	mind
that	listens—the	observing	self.
Practical	Tip
	Suppose	your	client	says,	“I	don’t	get	it.	I	don’t	seem
to	have	an	observing	self.	I	just	keep	thinking.”	You	can	reply	(with	suitable
pauses	in	between	each	question):,	“So	can	you	notice	yourself	telling	me
this?	…	Can	you	notice	your	feelings	of	confusion?	…	Can	you	notice	the
sensations	of	that	frown	upon	your	forehead?	…	Can	you	notice	all	your
thoughts	about	not	getting	it?	…	Can	you	notice	me	talking	to	you?	…	Can
you	notice	what	you’re	thinking	now	about	my	replies?	Okay,	so	there’s	a
part	of	you	in	there	that	notices	everything.	That’s	it—that’s	the	observing
self.”
THE	CONTINUOUS	YOU
What	follows	is	a	much-shortened	version	of	the	“classic”	observer
exercise	from	Hayes	and	colleagues	(1999),	often	known	as	the	“continuous
you”	exercise	(for	reasons	that	will	soon	be	obvious).	The	exercise	may	at
first	seem	complex,	but	it’s	basically	comprised	of	only	four	instructions:
1
.	
Notice	X.
2
.	
There’s	X—and	there	you	are	noticing	X.
3
.	
If	you	can	notice	X,	you	cannot	be	X.
4
.	
X	changes	continually;	the	you	who	notices	X	does	not
change.
X	can	include	some	or	all	of	the	following:	your	breath,	your	thoughts,
your	feelings,	your	physical	body,	the	roles	you	play.	With	most	clients,	I	run
through	the	entire	exercise	in	one	go,	which	takes	about	fifteen	minutes,	but
you	can	break	it	up	into	smaller	sections	and	debrief	them	as	you	go.	I	always
conclude	this	exercise	with	the	Sky	and	the	Weather	Metaphor,	which	usually
has	a	strong	impact.
Therapist:
	I	invite	you	to	sit	up	straight,	with	your	feet	flat	on	the	floor,	and
either	fix	your	eyes	on	a	spot	or	close	them	…	Notice	the	breath
flowing	in	and	out	of	your	lungs	…	notice	it	coming	in	through	the
nostrils	…	down	into	the	lungs	…	and	back	out	again	…	And	as
you	do	that,	be	aware	you’re	noticing	…	there	goes	your	breath	…
and	there	you	are	noticing	it.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	If	you	can	notice
your	breath,	you	cannot	be	your	breath.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	Your
breath	changes	continually	…	sometimes	shallow,	sometimes	deep
…	sometimes	fast,	sometimes	slow	…	but	the	part	of	you	that
notices	your	breath	does	not	change.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	And	when
you	were	a	child,	your	lungs	were	so	much	smaller	…	but	the	you
who	could	notice	your	breathing	as	a	child	is	the	same	you	who	can
notice	it	as	an	adult.Now	that	gets	your	mind	whirring,	analyzing,
philosophizing,	debating	…	So	take	a	step	back	and	notice,	where
are	your	thoughts?	…	Where	do	they	seem	to	be	located?	….	Are
they	moving	or	still?	…	Are	they	pictures	or	words?	…	(
Pause	5
seconds.
)	And	as	you	do	notice	your	thoughts,	be	aware	you’re
noticing	…	there	go	your	thoughts	…	and	there	you	are	noticing
them.	(
Pause	 5	 seconds.
)	If	you	can	notice	your	thoughts,	you
cannot	be	your	thoughts.	(
Pause	5	seconds.)
	Your	thoughts	change
continually	…	sometimes	true,	sometimes	false	…	sometimes
positive,	sometimes	negative	…	sometimes	happy,	sometimes	sad
…	but	the	part	of	you	that	notices	your	thoughts	does	not	change.
(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	And	when	you	were	a	child,	your	thoughts	were
so	very	different	than	they	are	today	…	but	the	you	who	could
notice	your	thoughts	as	a	child	is	the	same	you	who	notices	them	as
an	adult.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	Now	I	don’t	expect	your	mind	to	agree
to	this.	In	fact,	I	expect	throughout	the	rest	of	this	exercise	your
mind	will	debate,	analyze,	attack,	or	intellectualize	whatever	I	say,
so	see	if	you	can	let	those	thoughts	come	and	go	like	passing	cars,
and	engage	in	the	exercise	no	matter	how	hard	your	mind	tries	to
pull	you	away.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)Now	notice	your	body	in	the	chair
…	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	And	as	you	do	that,	be	aware	you’re	noticing
…	there	is	your	body	…	and	there	you	are	noticing	it.	(
Pause	5
seconds.
)	It’s	not	the	same	body	you	had	as	a	baby,	as	a	child,	or	as
a	teenager	…	You	may	have	had	bits	put	into	it	or	bits	cut	out	of	it
…	You	have	scars,	and	wrinkles,	and	moles	and	blemishes,	and
sunspots	…	it’s	not	the	same	skin	you	had	in	your	youth,	that’s	for
sure	…	But	the	part	of	you	that	can	notice	your	body	never	changes.
(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	As	a	child,	when	you	looked	in	the	mirror,	your
reflection	was	very	different	than	it	is	today	…	but	the	you	who
could	notice	your	reflection	is	the	same	you	that	notices	your
reflection	today.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	Now	quickly	scan	your	body
from	head	to	toe,	and	notice	the	different	feelings	and	sensations	…
and	pick	any	feeling	or	sensation	that	captures	your	interest	…	and
observe	it	with	curiosity	…	noticing	where	it	starts	and	stops	…	and
how	deep	in	it	goes	…	and	what	its	shape	is	…	and	its	temperature
…	And	as	you	notice	this	feeling	or	sensation	…	just	be	aware
you’re	noticing	…	there	is	the	feeling	…	and	there	you	are	noticing
it.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	If	you	can	notice	this	feeling	or	sensation,	you
cannot	be	this	feeling	or	sensation.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	Your	feelings
and	sensations	change	continually	…	sometimes	you	feel	happy,
sometimes	you	feel	sad	…	sometimes	you	feel	healthy,	sometimes
you	feel	sick	…	sometimes	you	feel	stressed,	sometimes	relaxed	…
but	the	part	of	you	that	notices	your	feelings	does	not	change.
(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	And	when	you’re	frightened,	angry,	or	sad	in
your	life	today	…	the	you	who	can	notice	those	feelings	is	the	same
you	that	could	notice	your	feelings	as	a	child.Now	notice	the	role
you’re	playing	in	this	moment	…	and	as	you	do	that,	be	aware
you’re	noticing	…	right	now,	you’re	playing	the	role	of	a	client	…
but	your	roles	change	continuously	…	at	times,	you’re	in	the	role	of
a	 mother/father,	 son/daughter,	 brother/sister,	 friend,	 enemy,
neighbor,	 rival,	 student,	 teacher,	 citizen,	 customer,	 worker,
employer,	employee,	and	so	on.	(
Pause	 5	 seconds.
)	If	you	can
notice	those	roles,	you	cannot	be	those	roles.	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)
And	there	are	some	roles	that	you	will	never	have	again	…	like	the
role	of	a	young	child	…	(
Pause	5	seconds.
)	But	the	you	who	notices
your	roles	does	not	change	…	It’s	the	same	you	that	could	notice
your	roles	even	when	you	were	very	young.We	don’t	have	a	good
name	in	everyday	language	for	this	part	of	you	…	I’m	going	to	call
it	the	observing	self,	but	you	don’t	have	to	call	it	that	…	you	can
call	it	whatever	you	like	…	and	this	observing	self	is	like	the	sky.
(
Finish	the	exercise	with	the	Sky	and	the	Weather	Metaphor.
)
Longer	versions	of	the	exercise	take	the	client	back	through	several
memories	from	different	periods	of	her	life	and	have	her	recognize	that	in
each	case,	the	observing	self	was	present	when	the	memory	was	“recorded.”
Many	clients	find	this	exercise	a	profoundly	moving	spiritual	experience.
It’s	better	not	to	analyze	it	afterward	or	you	run	the	risk	of	intellectualizing	it.
Accentuating	Defusion	and	Acceptance
As	mentioned	in	chapters	7	and	8,	once	you’ve	introduced	the	observing
self,	you	can	bring	it	into	sessions	as	a	brief	intervention	to	enhance	defusion
and	acceptance:	“See	if	you	can	take	a	step	back	and	look	at	this
thought/feeling	from	the	observing	self.”	You	can	see	this	play	out	in	the
following	transcript,	from	a	fourth	session,	following	work	on	defusion,
acceptance,	and	self-as-context.	The	client,	a	middle-aged	woman,	wants	to
tell	her	twenty-six-year-old	son	to	move	out	of	her	home.
Client:
	(
looking	pale,	tense,	agitated,	and	anxious
)	I	don’t	know	if	I	can	do	it.
I	want	to,	I	mean,	I	want	him	to	go	…	I’ve	had	enough	of	him	…
but	…	I	feel	so	…	well,	I’m	his	mother,	aren’t	I?	Oh,	God.	I	can’t
stand	this	feeling.
Therapist:
	Take	a	step	back	for	a	moment	and	see	if	you	can	look	at	this	from
the	observing	self	…	Notice	all	those	thoughts	whizzing	through
your	head	…	and	all	those	feelings	whirling	around	in	your	body	…
and	notice	your	body	sitting	in	the	chair	…	and	notice	the	room
around	you	…	what	you	can	see	and	hear	…	including	little	old	me,
sitting	over	here	…	There’s	a	whole	stage	show	going	on	here—and
there’s	a	part	of	you,	an	observing	self,	that’s	able	to	notice	that
show	…	From	that	perspective,	notice	this	feeling	in	your	body	…
and	recognize	that	it’s	only	one	actor	on	the	stage.	Now	your	mind
says	you	can’t	stand	this	feeling,	but	when	you	look	at	it	from	the
observing	self,	is	that	really	the	case?
Client:
	No.	It’s—when	I	look	at	it	like	that,	it’s	a	bit	easier.
Therapist:
	Easier	to	make	room	for?
Client:
	Yeah.
The	session	now	turns	to	an	exploration	of	the	mother’s	values.	This	reveals
that	 asking	 her	 son	 to	 leave	 home	 is	 in	 the	 service	 of	 encouraging	 his
independence,	helping	him	to	“grow	up,”	and	creating	a	home	atmosphere
conducive	to	greater	intimacy	with	her	husband.	About	ten	minutes	later,	the
therapist	returns	to	the	observing	self.
Therapist:
	For	just	a	moment,	can	I	get	you	back	into	contact	with	your
observing	self?	(
Client	 nods	 yes.
)	Then	once	again	from	that
perspective,	just	notice	the	thoughts	passing	though	your	mind	…
and	notice	the	feelings	surging	through	your	body	…	and	notice	that
the	stage	show	has	changed	from	a	few	minutes	ago	…	but	the	you
who	notices	the	stage	show	has	not	changed.
The	therapist	goes	through	this	brief	exercise	one	more	time	near	the	end	of
the	session	then	asks	the	client:
Therapist:
	I	wonder	if	you’d	be	willing	to	do	this	exercise	two	or	three	times
a	day—just	take	a	moment	to	step	back	and	notice	the	stage	show.
Notice	 that	 it	 changes	 all	 the	 time—there’s	 a	 never-ending
procession	of	new	thoughts	and	feelings	strutting	their	stuff	on	the
stage.	And	as	you	do	that,	notice	that	the	part	of	you	noticing	the
show—the	observing	self—never	changes.
Let	Your	Self	Go
Clients	will	often	say,	“I	have	no	self-esteem”	or	“I	want	more	self-esteem.”
While	there	are	different	constructs	of	self-esteem,	far	and	away	the	most
popular	concept	is	this:	Self-Esteem	=	Thinking	Positively	About	Yourself.
Certainly	the	majority	of	self-esteem	programs	place	huge	emphasis	on	trying
to	judge	yourself	positively,	focusing	on	your	strong	points,	and	trying	to
reduce	or	eliminate	negative	self-judgments.	However,	from	an	ACT
perspective,	fusion	with	a	self-description	is	likely	to	create	problems	whether
it	is	positive	or	negative.	The	following	transcript	makes	this	clear.
THE	GOOD	SELF/BAD	SELF	EXERCISE
Client:
	But	high	self-esteem	is	good,	isn’t	it?
Therapist:
	Well,	you	have	three	young	kids,	right?
Client:
	Yeah.
Therapist:
	So	suppose	you	have	the	thought	
I	am	a	wonderful	mother.	I	do	a
brilliant	job.
	Now	if	you	hold	on	tightly	to	that	thought,	there’s	no
doubt	it	will	give	you	very	positive	self-esteem.	But	what	might	be
the	danger	of	fusing	with	it?	Going	through	your	day	convinced
you’re	a	wonderful	mom,	doing	a	brilliant	job	with	no	need	for
improvement?
Client:
	(
chuckles)
	Well,	it’s	not	true	for	a	start.
Therapist:
	Okay,	so	one	cost	is	you	lose	touch	with	reality.	What	else?	What
might	happen	to	your	relationship	with	your	kids	if	you	100	percent
believed	that	everything	you	did	was	wonderful?
Client:
	I	guess	I	might	not	realize	when	I	was	doing	things	wrong.
Therapist:
	Sure.	You	would	lack	self-awareness,	and	you’d	probably	become
insensitive.	And	then	you	wouldn’t	grow	and	develop	into	a	better
mom	because	that	only	happens	when	you	can	see	your	mistakes
and	learn	from	them.	Now	let	me	ask	you:	at	your	funeral,	which	of
these	do	you	want	your	kids	to	be	saying,	“Mom	had	a	really	high
opinion	of	herself”	or	“Mom	was	really	there	for	me	when	I	needed
her?”
Client:
	
(laughs)
The	second	one.	(
confused)
	But	can’t	self-esteem	help	me	to
be	a	better	mom?
Therapist:
	Okay.	Let’s	check	this	out.	(
Therapist	pulls	out	an	index	card.
)
When	your	mind	wants	to	beat	you	up,	what	are	some	of	the
nastiest	things	it	says	to	you?
Client:
	(
sighs
)	Same	old	stuff
.
	I’m	fat.	And	I’m	dumb.
Therapist:
	Okay.	So	this	is	the	“bad	self”:	“I’m	fat”	and	“I’m	dumb.”
(
Therapist	writes	“I’m	fat”	and	“I’m	dumb”	on	one	side	of	the
index	card,	then	turns	the	card	over.
)	Now	on	those	rare	occasions
when	your	mind	is	being	nice	to	you,	what	are	some	of	the	nice
things	it	says	about	you?
Client:
	Um.	I’m	a	good	person.	I’m	kind	to	others.
Therapist:
	Okay.	So	this	is	the	“good	self.”	“I’m	a	good	person”	and	“I’m
kind.”	(
Therapist	writes	these	down	on	the	flip	side	of	the	card.)
This	is	a	bit	like	that	exercise	we	did	a	couple	of	sessions	back.	So
if	you’re	willing	to,	I’d	like	you	to	hold	the	card	up	in	front	of	your
face	so	you	can	read	all	the	negative	stuff.	That’s	it—hold	it	right
up	in	front	of	you	so	that’s	all	you	can	see.	(
Client	holds	the	card	in
front	of	her	face,	cutting	off	the	therapist	from	her	view.
)	Hold	it
tightly.	Get	all	caught	up	in	your	“bad	self.”	Now,	that’s	very	low
self-esteem,	isn’t	it?
Client:
	Yeah.
Therapist:
	And	notice—while	you’re	all	caught	up	in	this,	what	happens	to
your	relationship	with	me?	Do	you	feel	engaged,	connected?
Client:
	No.	I	can’t	see	you.
Therapist:
	Okay.	Now	turn	it	around,	so	you’re	looking	at	all	the	positive
stuff.	That’s	it—and	keep	it	up	there	right	in	front	of	you.	(
Client
turns	the	card	around	and	continues	to	hold	it	up	in	front	of	her
face.
)	Now	get	all	caught	up	in	your	“good	self.”	Hold	it	tightly—
all	those	lovely	positive	thoughts.	And	now	you’ve	got	really	high
self-esteem.	But	what’s	your	relationship	with	me	like?	Do	you	feel
engaged,	connected?
Client:
	(
chuckling
)	No.
Therapist:
	Okay.	Now	put	the	card	down	on	your	lap.	(
Client	does	so.
)	Now,
what’s	your	relationship	like	with	me?
Client:
	(
Client	looks	at	the	therapist.	He	grins,	and	she	grins	back.
)	Much
better.
Therapist:
	Engaged?	Connected?
Client:
	Yes.
Therapist:
	And	notice,	as	long	as	you	let	it	sit	there	in	your	lap,	it	doesn’t
matter	which	way	up	the	card	is—good	self,	bad	self	doesn’t	matter
—if	you’re	not	holding	on	to	it	or	getting	absorbed	in	it,	it	doesn’t
stop	you	from	doing	what	you	want	to	do.	So	in	terms	of	being	a
good	mom,	what’s	more	important?	Trying	to	hold	on	to	tightly	to
all	these	thoughts	about	how	good	you	are,	or	engaging	and
connecting	with	your	kids	and	really	being	there	for	them?
Client:
	Being	there	for	my	kids,	of	course.
At	the	end	of	the	session,	the	therapist	gave	the	card	to	the	client.	He
asked	her	to	(a)	write	five	more	positive	self-judgments	on	the	“good	self”
side,	and	five	more	negatives	on	the	“bad	self”	side;	(b)	carry	the	card
around	in	her	purse	for	a	week;	and	(c)	pull	it	out	several	times	a	day,	read
both	 sides,	 then	 put	 it	 back	 in	 her	 purse	 again.	 During	 the	 following
session,	the	client	reported	she	had	been	much	better	at	defusing	from
self-judgments	(positive	and	negative)	and	had	developed	a	greater	sense
of	self-acceptance.
Self-Acceptance	vs.	Self-Esteem
From	an	ACT	perspective,	self-acceptance	is	far	more	empowering	than
self-esteem.	In	most	models	of	psychology,	self-acceptance	is	taught	as	a
thinking	process—that	is,	telling	yourself	things	like	
I	accept	myself	as	a
fallible	human	being;	we	all	make	mistakes.
	While	this	can	undoubtedly	be
useful,	in	ACT,	the	emphasis	is	on	developing	self-acceptance	through
mindfulness	rather	than	self-talk.	Self-acceptance	develops	naturally	when	we
repeatedly	defuse	from	self-judgments	(both	positive	and	negative)	and
thoughts	comparing	us	to	others.
A	more	profound	experience	of	self-acceptance	happens	when	we	enter	the
psychological	space	of	self-as-context	and	when,	from	that	space,	we
recognize	the	conceptualized	self	for	what	it	is:	nothing	more	or	less	than	an
incredibly	complex	construction	of	thoughts,	memories,	and	images.	The
figures	below	illustrates	this	progression.
In	figure	10.1,	the	person	is	fused	with	(attached	to)	the	conceptualized
self.	And	whether	this	conceptualized	self	is	positive	or	negative,	fusion	with
it	is	likely	to	be	problematic.	Fusion	with	a	positive	self	can	easily	lead	to
arrogance,	narcissism,	intolerance	of	others,	and	refusal	to	acknowledge
negative	feedback;	fusion	with	a	negative	self	can	lead	to	depression,	anxiety,
feelings	of	worthlessness,	and	so	on.	In	either	case,	lack	of	self-awareness	and
psychological	inflexibility	result.
For	example,	consider	what	impact	it	might	have	on	a	manager	if	he	is
fused	with	“I	work	hard	and	I	don’t	tolerate	fools	gladly.”	Or	suppose	a	police
officer	is	absolutely	fused	with	“I	am	an	officer	of	the	law”—he	bases	his
whole	self-worth	on	this	identity,	and	then	one	day	he	becomes	permanently
disabled	and	unable	to	work.	He	will	then	struggle	to	accept	and	adapt	to	this
significant	life	change,	and	his	conceptualized	self	may	now	contain	elements
such	as	“Without	my	job,	I	am	nobody.”
In	figure	10.2,	the	person	is	defusing	from	thoughts	that	make	up	her
conceptualized	self.	Those	thoughts	then	have	less	influence;	they	still	come
up,	but	they	“take	up	less	space.”	She	is	no	longer	clinging	to	her	self-
description/self-image/self-concept;	instead	she	“holds	it	lightly.”
In	figure	10.3,	the	person	is	in	the	psychological	space	of	self-as-context;
from	this	perspective,	there	is	maximum	defusion.	The	conceptualized	self	is
recognized	as	a	construction	of	thoughts	and	not	“the	essence	of	who	I	am.”
Who	Am	I?
At	times,	when	you’ve	taken	someone	through	a	self-as-context	experience,
a	client	will	ask,	“Well,	who	am	I	then?”	It’s	easy	to	get	bogged	down	in
deep,	philosophical	questions	at	this	point,	and	for	our	purposes	in	ACT,	we
don’t	wish	to	do	that.	We’re	coaches	and	therapists,	not	philosophers,	gurus,
or	meditation	teachers.	So	I	usually	reply	along	these	lines:	“‘Who	am	I?’	is	a
big	question.	There	are	many	different	senses	of	self.	In	our	society,	we	tend
to	focus	on	two	main	senses	of	self:	the	physical	self—our	body—and	the
thinking	self,	more	commonly	known	as	‘the	mind.’	What	we’re	aiming	to	do
here	is	recognize	a	third	sense	of	self.	The	‘observing	self’	can	observe	both
our	thinking	self	and	our	physical	self,	but	it	is	distinct	from	them.	You	are
comprised	of	all	three	of	these	selves,	but	whereas	the	thinking	self	and	the
physical	self	change	continuously,	the	observing	self	doesn’t.	It’s	like	a	safe
place	inside	you	that’s	always	there—a	place	from	where	you	can	observe
what’s	happening	in	the	mind	or	the	body	without	being	harmed.”
IS	THIS	THE	SOUL?
At	times,	clients	may	ask	if	this	is	the	soul.	My	response	is	simple:	“That’s
not	a	word	I	would	personally	use,	but	you	can	call	it	whatever	you	like.
Whatever	words	you	use	to	describe	it,	this	is	the	part	of	you	that	notices	all
those	words.”
THERAPY	VS.	MYSTICISM
If	you	were	to	“stay	in	the	space”	of	self-as-context	for	a	prolonged	period,
you	would	have	the	“mystical	experience”:	there	is	no	individual	self,
“everything	is	one.”	We	are	
not
	trying	to	create	mystical	experiences	in	ACT;
it	is	not	some	religious	or	spiritual	path	to	enlightenment.	With	prolonged
mindfulness	practice,	we	can	“stay	in	the	space”	of	self-as-context	for	longer
periods,	but	from	an	ACT	perspective,	that’s	not	actually	necessary.
In	practice,	most	people	get	only	brief	“glimpses”	of	this	space,	and	then
they	quickly	get	“pulled	out	of	it”	by	their	thoughts.	However,	that’s	more
than	enough	to	serve	our	purposes.	We	simply	want	people	to	experience	that
there’s	a	powerful	psychological	resource	within	us,	a	resource	that	is	readily
accessible,	a	place	from	which	to	observe	and	make	room	for	our	painful
thoughts	and	feelings.	Furthermore,	it	is	a	psychological	space	that	frees	us	to
make	conscious	choices	about	what	we	do.	How	so?	Because	from	this
perspective,	we	can	“clearly	see”	that	our	thoughts	and	feelings	are	transient
events	that	don’t	define	who	we	are	or	control	our	actions.
A	TECHNICAL	POINT
In	the	scripts	of	some	ACT	exercises,	you	may	read	comments	like	this:
“The	observing	self	is	there	your	whole	life—from	the	moment	you’re	born,
until	the	moment	you	die.”	For	the	purposes	of	coaching	or	therapy,	it’s	fine
to	talk	this	way,	however	please	keep	in	mind,	it’s	not	technically	accurate.
RFT	(relational	frame	theory;	the	theory	of	language	and	cognition	on	which
ACT	rests)	explains	how	we	develop	this	transcendent	sense	of	self,	typically
around	age	four,	through	a	process	called	“deictic	framing.”	This	is	just	one
of	the	many	fascinating	things	you	will	learn	about	if	you	should	choose	to
delve	further	into	RFT.
Homework	and	the	Next	Session
There	are	two	ideas	for	homework	already	in	this	chapter:	the	first	involves
contacting	 self-as-context,	 and	 the	 other	 involves	 defusing	 from	 the
conceptualized	self.	And,	of	course,	we	can	make	the	Good	Self/Bad	Self
Exercise	 more	 specific:	 it	 could	 be	 good	 mother/bad	 mother,	 good
therapist/bad	therapist,	or	even	good	cop/bad	cop.
Here’s	another	simple	option:	we	suggest	that	our	client	continue	with	any
previous	mindfulness	practice	and	we	add	the	instruction,	“From	now	on,	as
you’re	doing	that,	from	time	to	time	check	in	and	see	if	you	can	notice	who’s
noticing.”
You	could	also	ask	clients	to	practice	mindfulness	exercises	that	are
explicitly	oriented	toward	self-as-context.	This	is	more	effective	if	you	have
recorded	the	exercises	in	session,	or	if	your	client	has	a	commercial	CD	(for
example,	track	5	of	my	CD	
Mindfulness	Skill
s:	
Volume	1
	is	a	recording	of	the
Continuous	You	Exercise).
As	for	the	next	session,	traditionally	we	would	move	on	to	values	and
committed	 action.	 We	 would	 continue	 to	 bring	 in	 self-as-context
experientially	as	needed	as	an	aid	to	overcoming	any	psychological	barriers
(that	is,	to	facilitate	defusion	or	acceptance).
Homework	for	You
Read	all	these	exercises	and	metaphors	out	loud,	and
practice	them	as	if	you	were	working	with	clients.
Pick	two	or	three	cases	and	identify	thoughts,	beliefs,
judgments,	and	other	self-descriptions	that	comprise	the
conceptualized	self.	Consider	how	you	could	introduce	self-
as-context	work	with	these	clients—both	brief	interventions
and	longer	ones.
Try	these	exercises	on	yourself.	In	particular,	pull	out	an
index	card	and	do	the	Good	Self/Bad	Self	Exercise,	and
carry	the	card	around	with	you	for	a	week.	If	possible,	have
a	friend	or	colleague	take	you	through	the	Continuous	You
Exercise—or	record	it	yourself	and	then	listen	to	it.	And	if
you	have	an	ongoing	mindfulness	practice,	from	time	to
time	notice	who	is	noticing.
Summary
The	observing	self	(self-as-context)	is	implicit	in	all	mindfulness	exercises	or
practices.	It	is	not	really	a	“self”	at	all:	rather	it	is	the	locus	or	perspective	or
psychological	space	from	which	we	observe	or	notice	everything	else.	If
“Notice	X”	is	the	basic	mindfulness	instruction,	then	in	self-as-context	work,
the	X	we	notice	is	our	own	awareness	or	consciousness.	Thus	self-as-context
can	be	conceptualized	as	awareness	of	awareness,	or	consciousness	of
consciousness.
Many	mindfulness-based	models	of	therapy	never	make	self-as-context
explicit;	they	rely	on	people	to	discover	“it”	for	themselves	through	ongoing
mindfulness	practice.	However,	in	ACT	we	like	to	make	self-as-context
explicit	as	it	enhances	defusion	and	acceptance,	and	allows	us	to	experience	a
transcendent	sense	of	self.
Chapter	11.	Know	What	Matters
Values	in	a	Nutshell
In	Plain	Language:
	Values	are	statements	about	what	we	want	to	be	doing
with	our	life:	about	what	we	want	to	stand	for,	and	how	we	want	to	behave	on
an	ongoing	basis.	They	are	leading	principles	that	can	guide	us	and	motivate
us	as	we	move	through	life.
Aim:
	To	clarify	what	gives	our	life	a	sense	of	meaning	or	purpose,	and	to	use
our	values	as	an	ongoing	guide	for	our	actions.
Synonyms:
	Chosen	life	directions.
Method:
	Distinguish	values	from	goals;	help	clients	connect	with	and	clarify
their	values	so	they	can	use	them	to	inspire,	motivate,	and	guide	ongoing
action.
When	to	Use:
	When	looking	for	guidance	from	within;	when	motivation	for
action	is	lacking;	as	a	precursor	to	goal	setting	and	action	plans;	to	facilitate
acceptance;	to	add	richness,	fulfillment,	and	meaning	to	life.
Getting	to	Values
The	whole	ACT	model	is	aimed	toward	one	outcome:	mindful,	values-
congruent	living	or,	in	lay	terms,	a	rich,	full,	and	meaningful	life.	It’s	this
outcome	that	motivates	everything	we	do	in	ACT:	we	wouldn’t	want	someone
to	accept	pain,	or	practice	defusion,	or	expose	herself	to	challenging	situations
unless	it	served	to	make	her	life	richer	and	fuller.	Some	ACT	protocols	do	not
explicitly	work	on	values	until	they’ve	first	covered	defusion,	acceptance,
present	moment,	and	self-as-context.	However,	others	start	with	clarifying
values	up	front.	There	are	pros	and	cons	to	both	approaches.	On	one	hand,
work	around	values	often	triggers	fusion	and	avoidance;	therefore	some
clients	will	be	unable	or	unwilling	to	explore	values	in	any	depth	until	they
first	develop	defusion	and	acceptance	skills.	On	the	other	hand,	some	clients
will	not	be	motivated	to	do	the	hard	work	of	therapy	unless	they	first	get	in
touch	with	their	values.
For	a	sense	of	the	first	approach,	you	may	like	to	read	my	self-help	book,
The	Happiness	Trap
	(Harris,	2007),	which	takes	the	reader	step-by-step	along
the	more	traditional	route	of	creative	hopelessness	first,	followed	by
mindfulness	skills,	and	then	values	and	action.	For	a	sense	of	the	second
approach,	you	might	want	to	look	at	
ACT	with	Love
	(Harris,	2007),	my	self-
help	book	for	relationship	issues	(Harris,	2009).
Personally,	wherever	possible,	I	prefer	to	start	therapy	or	coaching	with	a
focus	on	values.	That’s	why,	in	chapter	5,	I	suggested	that	we	start	clarifying
values	from	our	very	first	encounter	with	the	client.	So	before	reading	on,
please	go	back	to	chapter	5	and	read	again	the	section	entitled	A	Basic	Guide
to	Taking	a	History.
Of	course,	sometimes	we’ll	have	a	client	who	initially	won’t	go	anywhere
near	values.	If	we	give	him	a	values	worksheet	on	the	first	session,	he	may
leave	it	blank,	put	a	cross	through	it,	scrunch	it	into	a	ball,	or	protest	that	he
“can’t	think	of	anything”	or	it’s	“a	waste	of	time.”	A	response	like	this	gives
us	useful	information:	it	alerts	us	to	a	significant	lack	of	contact	with	or
clarity	about	values,	and	it	usually	indicates	high	experiential	avoidance.	In
these	cases,	we’ll	generally	need	to	tread	slowly	and	gently,	and	do	plenty	of
work	around	defusion	and	acceptance	before	we	can	get	to	core	values.
Practical	Tip
	Sometimes	we	may	be	lucky	enough	to	have	a	client
who	responds	dramatically	to	discussions	about	values	and	immediately
starts	making	significant	changes	in	her	life.	If	so,	we	don’t	need	to	go
digging	around	trying	to	find	psychological	barriers	or	trying	to	“sell	her”	on
mindfulness	skills.	However,	in	most	cases,	as	she	starts	acting	on	her
values,	psychological	barriers	will	start	showing	up.
Regardless	of	what	number	session	we’re	in,	and	which	parts	of	the
hexaflex	we’ve	covered,	if	we	haven’t	yet	explored	the	client’s	values,	there’s
a	simple	way	to	lead	into	it:	we	compassionately	and	nonjudgmentally	point
out	that	we	know	a	lot	about	what	the	client	doesn’t	want—but	little	or
nothing	about	what	he	
does
	want.	For	example,	we	could	say,	“I	think	I	know
quite	a	lot	about	what	your	problems	are:	the	painful	feelings	you	struggle
with,	the	painful	thoughts	you	get	entangled	in,	the	difficulties	you	face	in
different	parts	of	your	life,	the	things	other	people	do	that	you	don’t	like,	and
the	things	that	you	do	that	either	don’t	help	or	just	make	things	worse.	In
other	words,	I	know	a	lot	about	what	you	
don’t
	want,	what	you’ve	had	more
than	enough	of.	But	there’s	a	big	gaping	hole	in	my	knowledge	here.	I	know
very	little	about	what	you	
do
	want—about	what	sort	of	person	you	want	to	be,
what	sort	of	relationships	you	want	to	build,	and	what	you	want	to	do	with
your	life	to	make	it	richer,	fuller,	and	more	meaningful.	So	that’s	what	I’d	like
us	to	look	at	now.	Would	that	be	okay?”
What	Values	Are—and	What	They	Aren’t
When	I	describe	values	to	my	clients,	I	say	something	like,	“Values	are	our
heart’s	deepest	desires	for	the	way	we	want	to	interact	with	the	world,	other
people,	and	ourselves.	They’re	what	we	want	to	stand	for	in	life,	how	we	want
to	behave,	what	sort	of	person	we	want	to	be,	what	sort	of	strengths	and
qualities	we	want	to	develop.”
As	you	read	a	few	books	on	ACT,	you’ll	encounter	several	different
technical	definitions	of	values.	Here’s	the	one	that	I	think	is	most	user-
friendly:	values	are	“desired	global	qualities	of	ongoing	action”	(Hayes,
Bond,	Barnes-Holmes,	&	Austin,	2006,	p.16).	Let’s	break	that	down	into
three	components:
1.	Ongoing	action.	Values	are	about	“ongoing	action.”	In	other	words,	values
are	about	how	you	want	to	behave	or	act	on	an	ongoing	basis—what	you	want
to	keep	on	doing.	For	example,	your	values	may	include	being	loving	and
caring;	giving,	sharing,	and	contributing;	being	a	good	friend;	maintaining
health	and	fitness;	being	open	and	honest.	In	contrast,	goals	are	about	what
you	want	to	get	or	have	or	complete.	Thus,	if	it’s	not	something	you	can	
do
	on
an	ongoing	basis,	then	it’s	not	a	value.	Happiness	is	not	a	value—you	can’t	
do
it.	A	sense	of	belonging	is	not	a	value—you	can’t	
do
	it.	Being	loved	and
respected	by	others	is	not	a	value—you	can’t	
do
	it.	To	have	a	big	car,	a	big
house,	a	great	job,	a	wonderful	partner,	or	a	thin	body:	those	are	not	things
you	can	do—they	are	goals,	not	values.
2.	Global	qualities.	Values	are	about	“global	qualities”	of	ongoing	action.	So
let’s	suppose	you	want	to	play	baseball.	Now	clearly	“playing	baseball”	is
something	you	can	do	on	an	ongoing	basis—it	is	an	ongoing	action,	but	it’s
not	a	
quality
	of	action.	To	clarify	this,	here	are	four	possible	qualities	of	that
ongoing	action:	playing	baseball	
skillfully
,	playing	baseball	
clumsily
,	playing
baseball	
energetically
,	playing	baseball	
half-heartedly
.
So	what	do	we	mean	by	a	“global”	quality?	We	mean	a	quality	that	“unites”
many	different	patterns	of	action.	For	example,	if	your	value	is	“being
supportive”	to	the	other	players	in	your	team,	then	there	are	many	different
actions	you	could	take	with	the	quality	of	“supportiveness.”	And	if	your	value
is	“being	fair,”	there	are	many	different	actions	you	could	take	with	the
quality	of	“fairness.”
So	in	order	to	get	to	your	values	around	playing	baseball,	I	could	ask	you
questions	such	as:	“
How
	do	you	want	to	play	baseball?”	“What	personal
qualities	or	strengths	do	you	want	to	model	or	demonstrate	during	the	game?”
“How	do	you	want	to	behave	in	your	relationships	with	the	other	players,
both	on	your	team	and	the	opposing	team?”	These	questions	may	uncover
values	such	as	being	focused,	being	competitive,	applying	yourself	fully,
being	respectful,	being	cooperative	with	your	teammates,	being	fair,	“giving	it
your	best,”	challenging	yourself,	and	so	on.
Note	that	these	qualities	of	action	are	available	to	you	in	any	moment:	even
if	you	become	paralyzed	from	the	waist	down	and	unable	to	ever	play
baseball	again,	you	can	still	be	focused,	competitive,	respectful,	cooperative,
fair;	you	can	still	apply	yourself	fully	to	whatever	you’re	doing	and	“give	it
your	best”;	you	can	still	act	in	ways	that	challenge	you.
3.	Desired.	Values	are	“desired”	qualities	of	ongoing	action.	They’re
statements	about	how	you	
want
	to	behave,	how	you	desire	to	act,	what
matters	to	you,	and	what’s	important	to	you.	They’re	not	about	what	you
should	do	or	have	to	do.	(In	many	ACT	textbooks,	you’ll	find	the	word
“chosen”	rather	than	the	word	“desired”;	this	is	to	emphasize	that	you	not
only	desire	these	qualities	in	your	actions,	but	you	also	consciously	choose	to
employ	them.)
VALUES	VS.	GOALS
Useful	questions	to	clarify	values	include	these:	“Deep	down	inside,	what’s
important	to	you?”	“What	do	you	want	to	stand	for	in	life?”	“What	sort	of
personal	strengths	and	qualities	do	you	want	to	cultivate?”	“How	do	you	want
to	behave	in	your	relationships?”
When	clients	answer	these	questions,	they’ll	usually	give	us	goals	rather
than	values.	This	is	hardly	surprising.	Our	society	is	largely	goal	focused,	not
values	focused.	So	we’ll	need	to	do	some	psychoeducation:	explain	that
values	are	like	directions	in	which	we	want	to	move	throughout	our	lives,
whereas	goals	are	things	that	we	want	to	achieve	or	complete.	To	help	our
clients	understand	this,	we	often	compare	values	to	a	compass	(Hayes	et	al.,
1999).
THE	COMPASS	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	Values	are	like	a	compass.	A	compass	gives	you	direction	and
keeps	you	on	track	when	you’re	traveling.	And	our	values	do	the
same	for	the	journey	of	life.	We	use	them	to	choose	the	direction	in
which	we	want	to	move	and	to	keep	us	on	track	as	we	go.	So	when
you	act	on	a	value,	it’s	like	heading	west.	No	matter	how	far	west
you	travel,	you	never	get	there;	there’s	always	further	to	go.	But
goals	are	like	the	things	you	try	to	achieve	on	your	journey:	they’re
like	the	sights	you	want	to	see	or	the	mountains	you	want	to	climb
while	you	keep	on	traveling	west.
We	can	give	clients	a	couple	of	examples	to	clarify	the	difference.	One	of
my	favorite	examples	is	the	contrast	between	“getting	married”	and	“being
loving”	(Hayes	et	al,	1999).	If	you	want	to	be	loving	and	caring,	that’s	a	value
—it’s	ongoing;	you	want	to	behave	that	way	for	the	rest	of	your	life.	And	in
any	moment	you	have	a	choice:	you	can	either	act	on	that	value	or	neglect	it.
But	if	you	want	to	get	married,	that’s	a	goal.	It’s	something	that	can	be
completed,	achieved,	“crossed	off	the	list.”	And	you	can	achieve	the	goal	of
marriage	even	if	you	completely	neglect	your	values	around	being	loving	and
caring.	(Of	course,	your	marriage	might	not	last	too	long.)
Values	are	far	more	empowering	than	goals	because	they’re	always
available	to	us.	In	any	moment,	we	can	act	on	them	or	neglect	them;	the
choice	is	ours.	Not	so	for	goals.	We	can’t	guarantee	we’ll	ever	achieve	the
goal	of	marriage,	but	in	any	moment	we	can	act	on	our	values	around	being
loving	and	caring.	This	is	possible	even	if	we	don’t	have	a	partner;	we	can	be
loving	and	caring	toward	our	friends,	neighbors,	family,	pets,	pot	plants,
environment—and,	of	course,	ourselves.
Here’s	another	example	I	often	give:	if	you	want	a	better	job,	that’s	a	goal.
Once	you’ve	got	it,	it’s	“mission	accomplished.”	But	if	you	want	to	be	helpful
and	efficient	and	productive,	those	are	values:	desired	qualities	of	ongoing
action.	And	in	any	moment,	you	can	act	on	those	values—even	if	you	don’t
like	your	job	or	you	don’t	currently	have	one.
Here	are	a	few	more	examples	to	really	hammer	this	point	home:	To	lose
ten	pounds	of	weight	is	a	goal;	eating	healthily	is	a	value.	To	go	to	the	gym	is
a	goal;	caring	for	your	body	is	a	value.	To	have	a	big	house	is	a	goal;
supporting	your	family	is	a	value.	To	get	love	and	respect	from	others	is	a
goal;	to	be	loving	and	respectful	is	a	value.	To	feel	less	anxious	is	an
“emotional	goal”;	acting	courageously	is	a	value.	To	feel	happy	is	an
emotional	goal;	being	warm,	open,	and	friendly	toward	others	is	a	value.	To
stop	criticizing	your	partner	is	a	“dead	person’s	goal”	(a	dead	person	will
never	criticize	his	partner);	being	accepting,	understanding,	and	appreciative
is	a	value.
VALUES	VS.	DESIRES,	WANTS,	NEEDS,	FEELINGS,	VIRTUES,	MORALS,	AND	ETHICS
At	times,	both	therapists	and	clients	may	confuse	values	with	the	things
mentioned	in	the	heading	above,	so	let’s	quickly	clarify	the	differences.
Wants,	needs,	and	desires.	We	may	want	or	need	or	desire	all	sorts	of	things
from	other	people—love,	respect,	kindness,	and	so	on.	But	those	are	not
values	because	they’re	not	ways	that	we	want	to	behave	on	an	ongoing	basis.
Naturally	we	validate	those	wants/needs/desires	in	our	clients.	And	if	a	client
can	fulfill	those	wants/needs/desires	in	a	manner	that’s	workable,	then	we
help	her	to	do	so.	Likewise,	we	help	her	to	accept	the	pain	that	arises	when
there’s	a	gap	between	what	she	desires	and	what	she’s	got.
At	the	same	time,	we	help	our	clients	to	recognize	that	while	we	do	have	a
lot	of	control	over	how	we	act
,
	we	don’t	have	any	control	over	what	we	get.
So	it	makes	sense	to	focus	on	what	is	most	within	our	control.	The	most
empowering	response	to	unmet	needs	and	unfulfilled	desires	is	to	accept	the
pain,	connect	with	our	values,	and	take	action.
Feelings.	Values	are	not	feelings.	Our	values	will	affect	how	we	feel	about
any	given	event	or	situation	and	how	we	act	in	response	to	it,	but	they	are	not
feelings.	To	get	to	values,	we	can	ask,	“What	do	I	want	to	stand	for	in	the	face
of	this?	How	do	I	want	to	act	in	response	to	this	event	or	situation?”
Virtues,	morals,	and	ethics.	Values	are	beyond	right	or	wrong,	good	or	bad.
They	are	simply	expressions	of	what	matters	to	us.	Of	course,	our	society
judges	those	values	as	good	and	bad,	and	the	“good”	ones	get	called	“virtues.”
Then	our	society	lays	down	rules	about	the	right	way	and	the	wrong	way	to
act	on	our	values,	and	it	tells	us	that	if	we	don’t	act	the	“right	way”	we	are
“bad.”	This	gives	rise	to	morals,	ethics,	and	codes	of	conduct.
So	if	our	clients	start	talking	about	right,	wrong,	good,	or	bad,	we	know
they	have	shifted	from	values	into	the	realm	of	morals,	ethics,	or	codes	of
conduct.
Five	Key	Points	about	Values
Aside	from	the	distinction	between	values	and	goals,	there	are	at	least	five
other	key	points	to	draw	out	in	therapy:
1
.	
Values	are	here	and	now;	goals	are	in	the	future.
2
.	
Values	never	need	to	be	justified.
3
.	
Values	often	need	to	be	prioritized.
4
.	
Values	are	best	held	lightly.
5
.	
Values	are	freely	chosen.
Let’s	quickly	zip	through	these	one	by	one.
VALUES	ARE	HERE	AND	NOW;	GOALS	ARE	IN	THE	FUTURE.
Values	are	here	and	now:	in	any	moment,	you	can	choose	to	act	on	them	or
neglect	them.	Even	if	you’ve	totally	neglected	a	core	value	for	years	or
decades,	in	this	moment	right	now	you	can	act	on	it.	In	contrast,	goals	are
always	in	the	future:	a	goal	is	something	that	you’re	aiming	for,	striving	for,
working	toward.	And	the	moment	you	achieve	it,	it’s	no	longer	a	goal.
Because	of	this,	people	who	lead	a	very	goal-focused	life	often	find	that	it
leads	to	a	sense	of	chronic	lack	or	frustration.	Why?	Because	they’re	always
looking	to	the	future	and	continually	striving	to	achieve	the	next	goal	under
the	illusion	it	will	bring	lasting	happiness	or	contentment.	In	the	values-
focused	life,	we	still	have	goals,	but	the	emphasis	is	on	living	by	our	values	in
each	moment;	this	approach	leads	to	a	sense	of	fulfillment	and	satisfaction	as
our	values	are	always	available.	The	metaphor	of	Two	Kids	in	the	Car	gets
this	across	well	(Harris,	2007).
TWO	KIDS	IN	THE	CAR	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	Imagine	there	are	two	kids	in	the	back	of	a	car,	and	Mom’s	driving
them	to	Disneyland.	It’s	a	three-hour	trip	to	get	there,	and	one	kid’s
saying,	every	five	minutes,	“Are	we	there	yet?	Are	we	there	yet?
Are	we	there	yet?”	Mom’s	getting	annoyed,	the	kid’s	frustrated,
they’re	snapping	at	each	other—it’s	a	state	of	chronic	tension.	But
the	other	kid’s	looking	out	of	the	window,	waving	at	the	other	cars,
noticing	with	great	interest	all	the	towns	and	farms	and	factories
that	they’re	driving	past.	Now	both	kids	reach	Disneyland	at	the
same	time,	and	both	have	a	great	time	when	they	get	there.	But	only
one	of	these	kids	has	had	a	rewarding	journey.	Why?	Because	he
wasn’t	just	focused	on	the	goal;	he	also	valued	exploring,	traveling,
learning	about	the	world	outside	the	car.	And	on	the	way	home,	the
first	kid	keeps	saying,	“Are	we	home	yet,	are	we	home	yet,	are	we
home	yet?”	Whereas	the	other	one	enjoys	the	ride	by	looking	out
the	window	and	appreciating	how	everything	looks	so	different	at
night.
Practical	Tip
	Most	people	think	of	success	as	achieving	goals.	I
invite	clients	 to	consider	 a	different	 definition:	success	 is	living	 by	our
values.	With	this	definition,	we	can	be	successful	right	now	even	though
our	goals	may	be	a	long	way	off	(and	even	though	we	may	actually	never
achieve	them).
VALUES	NEVER	NEED	TO	BE	JUSTIFIED
Values	are	like	our	taste	in	ice	cream:	we	don’t	need	to	justify	why	we	like
strawberry	or	chocolate	or	maple	syrup—or	whatever	our	favorite	flavor	is.
Values	are	simply	statements	about	what’s	meaningful	to	us;	we	never	need	to
justify	that.
However,	we	may	need	to	justify	the	actions	we	take.	If,	for	example,	you
value	connecting	with	nature,	you	don’t	have	to	justify	that—but	if	you	move
your	family	from	the	city	to	the	countryside,	you	may	have	a	lot	of	explaining
to	do.Our	assumption	in	ACT	is	that	destructive	behavior—to	self	or	others—
is	not	motivated	by	values.	This	is	a	pragmatic	assumption,	because	what
happens	if	we	start	from	the	alternative	viewpoint—that	your	client’s
destructive	behavior	reflects	who	he	really	wants	to	be	and	what	he	wants	to
stand	for	in	life?	What	sort	of	therapeutic	relationship	will	we	build,	if	that’s
our	attitude?
Therapists	sometimes	ask,	“What	if	my	client	has	values	I	ethically	oppose,
such	as	wanting	to	rape	or	torture	others?”	The	short	answer	is	you	aren’t
obliged	to	work	with	any	client	if	doing	so	compromises	your	own	ethical
standards.	The	longer	answer	is	this:	even	in	forensic	populations	where	our
clients	have	committed	awful	crimes	such	as	rape,	torture,	and	murder,	if	we
work	hard,	build	a	strong	rapport,	and	dig	down	under	layers	and	layers	of
thickened,	hardened,	encrusted	fusion	and	avoidance,	then	we’ll	almost
always	discover	core	values	similar	to	our	own.	When	these	people
committed	their	crimes,	it’s	highly	unlikely	they	were	acting	mindfully	on
their	values;	they	were	almost	certainly	acting	impulsively	or	mindlessly,
motivated	by	fusion	and	avoidance.
VALUES	OFTEN	NEED	TO	BE	PRIORITIZED
Because	all	our	values	are	available	in	each	moment,	we’ll	need	to
prioritize	which	we	act	on.	For	example,	we	may	value	being	loving	and
caring	toward	our	parents,	but	if	they’re	continually	hostile	and	abusive	to	us,
we	may	cut	off	all	contact	with	them	because	our	values	around	self-
protection	and	self-nurture	take	priority.	Our	values	around	being	loving	and
caring	haven’t	disappeared;	they’ve	just	been	prioritized.
Psychologist	John	Forsyth	has	a	good	analogy	for	this:	our	values	are	like	a
cube.	In	any	position,	some	faces	of	the	cube	are	clearly	visible,	and	other
faces	can’t	be	seen	at	all.	The	unseen	faces	haven’t	ceased	to	exist,	they’re
just	not	visible	in	this	position.	And	whenever	the	cube	changes	position,
some	faces	come	to	the	foreground,	while	others	recede	into	the	background.
VALUES	ARE	BEST	HELD	LIGHTLY
In	ACT	we	say,	“Pursue	your	values	vigorously,	but	hold	them	lightly.”	We
want	to	be	aware	of	our	values	and	in	contact	with	them,	but	we	don’t	want	to
be	fused	with	them.	When	we	fuse	with	them,	our	values	start	to	feel
oppressive	and	restrictive,	like	commandments	we	have	to	obey.	They	turn
into	rigid	rules	rather	than	flexible	guides.	To	use	the	compass	metaphor:
when	you	go	on	a	journey,	you	don’t	want	to	clutch	the	compass	tightly	every
step	of	the	way—you	want	to	carry	it	in	your	backpack,	knowing	that	anytime
you	need	it	to	steer	a	course	or	find	your	way,	you	can	instantly	pull	it	out	and
use	it.
VALUES	ARE	FREELY	CHOSEN
We	consciously	choose	to	bring	these	desired	qualities	to	our	actions.	We
don’t	
have	to
	act	in	this	way;	we	choose	to	simply	because	it	matters	to	us.	To
highlight	this,	we	may	ask	clients,	“Suppose	I	waved	a	magic	wand	so	you
could	have	any	values	you	wanted;	what	values	would	you	choose?”	This	is	a
neat	question,	because	whatever	values	you’d	choose	in	a	magical	world,	you
can	act	on	those	very	same	values	right	now	in	this	moment;	there’s	no	need
for	a	magic	wand.	This	is	often	a	useful	intervention	for	clients	who	say,	“I
have	no	values.”
Bringing	Values	to	Life
There	are	two	ways	of	working	with	values.	One	way	is	in	a	very	dry,
theoretical,	wordy,	conceptual	manner:	discussing	values,	analyzing	values,
theorizing	about	values—that	is,	working	with	them	largely	at	an	intellectual
level.	This	isn’t	particularly	satisfying	or	useful	for	client	or	therapist,	and
usually	indicates	that	both	are	lost	in	fusion	and	avoidance.	You	can	tell	when
this	is	happening	because	your	session	will	be	dull,	tiring,	intellectual,
lifeless,	and	unsatisfying.
The	other	way	of	working	with	values	is	at	the	level	of	“heart	and	soul.”	In
other	words,	rather	than	just	talking	or	thinking	about	them,	you	facilitate
deep,	intimate,	experiential	contact	with	values.	(No	guesses	as	to	which	way
we	work	in	ACT.)
Effective	conversations	about	values	have	a	sense	of	openness,	vitality,	and
freedom.	When	a	client	truly	connects	with	her	values,	it	brings	a	sense	of
liberation	and	expansiveness;	she	realizes	that	even	in	desperate	situations	she
has	choices;	that	she	can	open	up	her	life	and	take	it	in	meaningful	directions.
During	these	conversations,	your	client	will	be	very	much	in	the	present—
engaging	with	you,	sharing	with	you,	letting	you	in.	You’ll	see	him	“coming
to	life”	in	front	of	your	eyes.	The	session	will	be	alive,	engaging,	and
fulfilling—and	often	intense	emotions	will	arise,	running	the	full	gamut	from
joy	and	love	to	sadness	and	fear.	You’ll	often	experience	a	profound	sense	of
connection	as	you	get	to	see	deep	into	the	heart	of	a	fellow	human	being	and
bear	witness	to	the	pain	and	the	love	that	resides	within.
WORKING	WITH	VALUES
In	the	transcript	that	follows,	the	client	is	a	single,	middle-aged	woman,
struggling	to	cope	with	her	son’s	behavior.	Her	twenty-three-year-old	son	has
a	heroin	addiction,	and	every	few	days	he	comes	home	to	beg	for	money.	If
she	doesn’t	give	him	the	money,	he	becomes	aggressive;	he	often	screams	and
yell	abusively,	blames	her	for	screwing	up	his	childhood,	accuses	her	of	being
cold	and	uncaring,	or	insists	that	she	doesn’t	really	love	him.	This	has	been
going	on	for	over	two	years.	She	constantly	worries	about	him,	and	after	his
visits	she	feels	hopeless,	guilty,	and	remorseful.	She	says	she	knows	that
giving	him	money	is	“wrong”	because	it	“just	feeds	his	habit,”	but	she	finds	it
“too	hard	to	say	no.”
Client:
	You	know,	to	be	honest,	sometimes	I	think	it’d	be	easier	if	he	would
just	…	die.	(
She	bursts	out	crying.
)
Therapist:
	(
pause
)	I	can	see	you’re	in	a	lot	of	pain	right	now	…	and	I	wonder
if	just	for	a	moment	we	can	slow	this	right	down	…	and	I	wonder	if
you	could	look	at	what’s	happening	here	from	your	observing	self
…	just	kind	of	take	a	step	back	and	notice	what’s	going	on,	how
you’re	sitting	in	the	chair,	the	position	of	your	body	…	and	notice
the	feelings	showing	up	inside	you	…	where	they	are	in	your	body
…	and	also	notice	the	thoughts	whizzing	around	in	your	head.
(
pause
)	And	what’s	your	mind	telling	you	right	now?
Client:
	(
wiping	her	eyes)
	I’m	a	monster.	I	mean,	what	sort	of	mother	am	I?
How	could	I	think	something	like	that?
Therapist:
	So	your	mind’s	telling	you	that	you’re	some	sort	of	monster
because	you	have	thoughts	that	life	would	be	easier	if	your	son
were	dead?
Client:
	Yeah.	I	mean,	he’s	my	son.	He’s	my	son!	How	can	I	think	like	that?
Therapist:
	(
pause)
	Remember	we	talked	about	how	your	mind	is	like	a	super-
duper	problem-solving	machine?
Client:
	Yeah.
Therapist:
	Well,	there’s	a	big	problem	here,	isn’t	there?	I	mean,	a	very	big,
very	painful	problem.	Right?	So	quite	naturally,	the	problem-
solving	machine	goes	into	action.	It	starts	cranking	out	solutions.
And	let’s	face	it:	one	solution	to	any	problematic	relationship	is	to
have	the	other	person	disappear.	So	that	thought,	about	your	son
disappearing,	is	just	your	mind	doing	its	job.	And	you	know	what?
There’s	no	way	you	can	stop	it	from	doing	that.
Client:
	But	maybe	David’s	right.	Maybe	I	don’t	really	love	him.
Therapist:
	Well,	that’s	an	interesting	thought.	(
pause
)	I’ll	bet	your	mind	loves
to	torment	you	with	that	one.
Clien:	Yeah.	All	the	time.
Therapist:
	Can	I	ask,	what’re	you	feeling	in	your	body	right	now?
Client:
	I	just	feel	sick.	Really,	really	sick.
Therapist:
	And	where	do	you	feel	that	most	intensely	in	your	body?
Client:
	Right	in	here.	(She	places	a	hand	on	her	stomach.)
Therapist:
	Okay,	so	just	notice	that	feeling	for	a	moment	…	notice	where	it	is
…	and	what	it’s	doing.	(
pause
)	What	would	you	call	this	emotion?
Client:
	Oh—it’s	guilt.	I	hate	it.	I	feel	it	all	the	time.
Therapist:
	Okay.	So	notice	that	guilt	for	a	moment	…	Observe	it	…	Breathe
into	it	…	Close	your	eyes	if	you’d	like	…	and	just	breathe	into	it	…
and	see	if	you	can,	in	some	way,	just	open	up	around	it	…	give	it
some	room.…	And	at	the	same	time,	I’d	like	you	to	tune	in	to	your
heart	…	Just	take	a	moment	to	get	in	touch	with	what	your	son
means	to	you	…	(
pause
)	What	does	this	feeling	tell	you	about	your
son,	about	what	he	means	to	you?
Client:
	(
crying
)	I	just	want	him	to	be	happy.
Therapist:
	(
pause
)	So	your	mind	says,	“Maybe	I	don’t	really	love	him.”	What
does	your	heart	say?
Client:
	Of	course	I	do.
Therapist:
	You	said	it.	I	mean,	if	you	didn’t	care	about	him,	you’d	have	no
guilt,	right?
Client:
	(
teary	but	relieved)
	Yeah.
Therapist:
	So	tell	me,	you	really	care	about	David	…	so	what	sort	of	mom	do
you	want	to	be	to	him?
Client:
	I	just	want	him	to	be	happy.
Therapist:
	Okay.	So	let’s	suppose	I	wave	a	magic	wand	and	David	is	happy
forever	after.	Then	what	sort	of	mother	would	you	want	to	be?
Client:
	I	don’t	know.	I	just	want	to	be	a	good	mom.
Therapist:
	Okay.	So	if	you	wanted	to	earn	that	title—of	being	a	good	mom—
how	would	you	be	toward	David?	What	sort	of	qualities	would	you
want	to	have	as	a	mother?
Client:
	I	don’t	know.
Therapist:
	Well,	suppose	a	miracle	happens,	and	David	sorts	his	life	out,	and
a	few	years	from	now	we	interview	him	on	national	television,	and
we	ask	him,	“David,	what	was	your	mom	like	when	you	were	going
through	the	worst	of	that	heroin	addiction?”	In	the	ideal	world,	what
would	you	like	him	to	say?
Client:
	I	guess	I’d	like	to	him	to	say	that	I	was	…	um	…	loving	…	and	kind
…	and	…	um	…	supportive.
Therapist:
	Anything	else?
Client:
	That	I	was	there	for	him	when	he	needed	me.
Therapist:
	So	to	be	loving,	kind,	supportive—that’s	what	you	want	to	stand
for	as	a	mother?
Client:
	Yeah.
Therapist:
	Okay.	So	just	sit	with	that	for	a	moment.	To	be	loving,	kind,
supportive:	that’s	what	matters	to	you	as	a	mom.
Client:
	Yeah.	(
She	sits	upright,	nodding	her	head	slowly.
)	I	want	to	do	what’s
best	for	him.	I	want	to	do	the	right	thing.	And	I	know	that	giving
him	money—that’s	not	it.
Therapist:
	Okay.	(
pause
)	So	next	time	your	son	comes	over,	it	seems	like	you
have	a	choice	to	make.	On	the	one	hand,	you	can	let	your	mind
bully	you—push	you	around	and	tell	you	what	to	do.	And	you
know	exactly	what	your	mind’s	going	to	tell	you—that	you	have	to
give	him	the	money,	and	if	you	don’t,	you’re	a	bad	mother,	and
saying	no	is	so	stressful	and	painful,	it’s	easier	to	just	give	him	the
money,	and	then	he’ll	leave	you	alone.	That’s	one	choice.	On	the
other	hand,	you	could	choose	to	let	your	mind	say	whatever	it	likes,
but	instead	of	buying	into	it,	you	can	be	the	sort	of	mother	you
really	want	to	be—loving,	kind,	supportive,	and	doing	what’s	best
for	David	in	the	long	run.	Which	will	you	choose?
Client:
	Well,	I—I	want	to	be	loving	and	supportive.	I	want	to	help	him.
Therapist:
	So	if	you	were	truly	acting	on	those	values	instead	of	being	pushed
around	by	the	“can’t	say	no”	story,	then	how	would	you	respond	to
David’s	requests	for	money?
Client:
	(smiles	thinly)	I’d	say	no.
Therapist:
	You’d	say	no?
Client:
	(nods)	Uh-huh.
Therapist:
	What	are	you	feeling	right	now,	as	you	say	that?
Client:
	I’m	really	nervous.	I’m	shaking.
Therapist:
	I	can	see	that,	and	I’m	sure	I’d	feel	the	same	way	if	I	were	in	your
shoes.	So	the	question	is	are	you	willing	to	make	room	for	these
feelings	of	nervousness	and	shakiness	if	that’s	what	it	takes	to	be
the	sort	of	mom	you	truly	want	to	be?
Client:
	Yes.
Giving	her	son	money	to	“feed	his	habit”	was	actually	inconsistent	with
this	client’s	core	values.	The	action	was	motivated	by	avoidance	(trying	to	get
rid	of	guilt	and	anxiety)	and	fusion	(with	thoughts	like	“It’s	too	hard	to	say
no,”	“I	can’t	stand	to	see	him	like	this,”	or	“I’m	a	bad	mother	if	I	don’t	help
him”),	not	by	values.	After	the	intervention	above,	the	conversation	turned	to
the	many	different	ways	in	which	she	could	act	on	her	values:	how	she	could
be	loving,	kind,	supportive	to	David	in	other	ways	without	giving	him	money
(or	things	he	could	sell	for	cash).
You	can	see	in	that	transcript	the	overlap	and	interplay	between	defusion,
acceptance,	and	values.	We	call	this	“dancing	around	the	hexaflex”—moving
flexibly	and	fluidly	from	one	process	to	another	as	required.
Practical	Tip	Clients	will	often	give	you	values	such	as	“I	want	to	be	a	good
Mom/Dad”	or	“I	want	to	be	a	good	friend.”	This	is	a	good	starting	point,	but
it’s	a	bit	vague	and	nonspecific.	It’s	generally	useful	to	explore	further,	with
questions	such	as:	“So	what	are	the	qualities	of	a	good	Mom/Dad/friend?”	or
“If	you	wanted	to	earn	that	title—good	Mom/Dad/friend—how	would	you
behave	toward	your	children/friends?”
TECHNIQUES	FOR	CLARIFYING	AND	CONTACTING	VALUES
In	this	chapter,	we’re	going	to	cover	a	lot	of	techniques.	But	remember,
they’re	only	a	means	to	an	end:	to	help	our	clients	connect	with	their	own
humanity,	to	find	their	own	sense	of	meaning	and	purpose	in	life.	So	while
applying	these	techniques,	we	always	need	to	be	mindful:	attuned	to	our	client
and	watchful	for	those	qualities	of	vitality,	openness,	and	liberation.
Figure	 11.1	 below	 summarizes	 many	 common	 values	 clarification
techniques.	Please	read	through	them	all	to	get	a	sense	of	the	many	different
ways	we	can	do	this	work.
As	you	can	see,	there	are	techniques	galore	available	to	you,	and	many	of
them	involve	asking	questions.	And	if	we	ask	these	questions	dryly	and
intellectually,	we’ll	get	dry,	intellectual	responses.	So	take	your	time	with
these	questions;	don’t	rush	them.	Ask	your	client	to	consider	deeply,	to	take
her	time.	We	could	say,	“Can	you	sit	with	this	question	for	a	while?	Really
reflect	on	it	and	see	what	comes	up.	Take	your	time	with	it.	There’s	no	hurry.”
We	could	also	invite	her	to	close	her	eyes	and	contemplate.	If	an	answer
seems	superficial,	we	could	say,	“I	could	be	wrong	about	this,	but	my
impression	is	we’re	only	just	scratching	the	surface	here.	See	if	you	can	go
deeper—really	explore	this.	Tune	into	your	heart.	Deep	down,	what	really
matters	to	you?”
Most	of	these	techniques	are	far	more	powerful	when	we	deliver	them	as	an
experiential	exercise	as	opposed	to	just	having	a	conversation.	For	example,
we	can	start	off	with	a	short	mindfulness	exercise,	such	as	Mindfulness	of	the
Breath,	and	then	ask	our	client	to	close	his	eyes	and	silently	reflect	upon	the
question	or	imagine	the	scene.	The	transcript	below,	which	includes	the
Imagine	Your	Eightieth	Birthday	Exercise,	illustrates	this.
IMAGINE	YOUR	EIGHTIETH	BIRTHDAY
Therapist:
	So	I’m	going	to	ask	you	to	imagine	your	eightieth	birthday	and	to
imagine	that	three	different	people	stand	up	to	make	speeches	about
you.	And	keep	in	mind,	this	is	a	fantasy—an	imaginary	exercise—
so	it	doesn’t	have	to	follow	the	rules	of	logic	and	science.	You	can
be	eighty,	but	your	friends	may	look	exactly	as	they	do	today.	And
you	can	have	people	there	who	are	already	dead,	or	who’ll	be	dead
by	the	time	you’re	eighty.	And	if	you	want	to	have	children	one	day,
then	you	can	have	your	children	there.	Also	keep	in	mind,	you
aren’t	trying	to	realistically	predict	the	future.	You’re	creating	a
fantasy—if	magic	could	happen	so	that	all	your	dreams	come	true
—then	what	would	your	eightieth	birthday	look	like?	So	if	your
mind	starts	interfering	and	saying	things	like,	
People	don’t	mean
what	they	say	at	these	events
	or	
No,	that	person	would	never	say
that	about	me,
	then	just	say	“Thanks,	mind”	and	come	back	to	the
exercise.	Okay?
Client:
	Okay.
Therapist:
	Okay.	So	I	invite	you	to	get	into	a	comfortable	position,	and	either
close	your	eyes	or	fix	them	on	a	spot	…	and	for	the	next	few
breaths,	focus	on	emptying	your	lungs	…	pushing	all	the	air	out	…
and	allowing	them	to	fill	by	themselves	…	Notice	the	breath
flowing	in	and	flowing	out	…	in	through	the	nostrils	…	down	into
the	lungs	….	and	back	out	…	Notice	how,	once	the	lungs	are	empty,
they	automatically	refill	…	And	now,	allowing	your	breath	to	find
its	own	natural	rate	and	rhythm	…	no	need	to	keep	controlling	it	…
I’d	like	you	to	do	an	exercise	in	imagination	…	to	create	a	fantasy
of	your	ideal	eightieth	birthday	…	not	to	try	and	realistically	predict
it	but	to	fantasize	how	it	would	be	in	the	ideal	world,	if	magic	could
happen	and	all	your	dreams	came	true	…	So	it’s	your	eightieth
birthday,	and	everyone	who	truly	matters	to	you	…	friends,	family,
partner,	parents,	children,	colleagues	…	anyone	and	everyone
whom	you	truly	care	about,	even	if	they’re	no	longer	alive,	is
gathered	there	in	your	honor	…	This	might	be	a	small	intimate
affair	in	a	family	home	or	a	huge	affair	in	a	classy	restaurant	…	it’s
your	imagination,	so	create	it	the	way	you	want	it	…	Now	imagine
that	one	person	whom	you	really	care	about—friend,	child,	partner,
parent,	you	choose—stands	up	to	make	a	speech	about	you	…	a
short	speech,	no	more	than	three	or	four	sentences	…	and	they	talk
about	what	you	stand	for	in	life	…	what	you	mean	to	them	…	and
the	role	that	you	have	played	in	their	life	…	and	imagine	them
saying	whatever	it	is	deep	in	your	heart	you	would	most	love	to
hear	them	say.	(
Pause	40	to	50	seconds.
)
The	therapist	now	repeats	this	for	two	other	people—always	allowing	the
client	to	choose	who	will	speak—and	each	time	allowing	forty	to	fifty	seconds
of	silence	for	reflection.
Therapist:
	Most	people	find	that	this	exercise	brings	up	a	whole	range	of
feelings,	some	warm	and	loving,	and	some	very	painful.	So	take	a
moment	to	notice	what	you’re	feeling	…	and	consider	what	these
feelings	tell	you	…	about	what	truly	matters	to	you	…	what	sort	of
person	you	want	to	be	…	and	what	if,	anything,	you’re	currently
neglecting.	(
Pause	30	seconds.
)	And	now,	bringing	the	exercise	to
an	end	…	and	notice	your	breathing	…	and	notice	your	body	in	the
chair	…	and	notice	the	sounds	you	can	hear	…	and	open	your	eyes
and	notice	what	you	can	see	…	and	take	a	stretch	…	and	notice
yourself	stretching	…	and	welcome	back!
Afterward	we	debrief	the	exercise	in	detail:	What	happened?	What	did
people	say	about	you?	What	does	this	tell	you	about	what	matters	to	you,
what	you	want	to	stand	for,	and	what	sort	of	person	you	want	to	be?
We	can	also	inquire	about	fusion	and	avoidance:	How	did	your	mind	try	to
interfere	with	the	exercise?	Did	you	get	hooked	at	any	point?	How	did	you
unhook	yourself?	What	feelings	showed	up	for	you?	Did	you	make	room	for
them	or	struggle?	Did	you	avoid	doing	the	exercise?
FORMS	AND	WORKSHEETS
All	the	forms	and	worksheets	mentioned	in	the	Forms	and	Worksheets	box
in	 figure	 11.1	 above	 are	 downloadable	 at	 no	 cost	 from
www.actmadesimple.com
.	To	get	a	sense	of	how	these	forms	work,	please
stop	reading,	download	a	copy	of	each,	and	fill	them	in	for	yourself.
Hopefully	you	already	did	the	Life	Compass	and	the	Bull’s	Eye	back	in
chapter	5;	if	not,	please	do	them	now.
Both	these	forms	are	quick,	simple	tools	for	rapidly	gathering	some
information	about	your	client’s	(or	your	own)	values.	You	can	fill	them	in
collaboratively	during	a	session	or	give	them	out	as	homework.	The	Bull’s
Eye	is	particularly	useful	as	a	quick	assessment	tool	on	the	very	first	session.
You	can	also	ask	your	client	to	quickly	fill	one	in	during	the	check-in	at	the
start	of	each	session;	it’s	a	simple	guide	for	tracking	how	therapy	is
progressing.
The	Life	Compass	is	also	very	useful	because	(a)	it	gives	a	visual	overview
of	the	client’s	life;	(b)	it	identifies	core	values	that	cut	through	many	different
domains	of	life;	and	(c)	if	your	client	feels	overwhelmed	by	all	the	changes	he
wants	to	make,	you	can	ask	him	to	“just	pick	one	box	to	start	with.”
Problems	in	Clarifying	Values
As	 a	 general	 rule,	 it’s	 easier	 to	 do	 values	 work	 with	 high-
functioning/worried-well/coaching	clients	than	with	lower-functioning	clients
or	those	with	high	levels	of	experiential	avoidance.	This	is	because	the	more
someone’s	life	is	driven	by	experiential	avoidance,	the	more	he	becomes
disconnected	from	his	values.	Obvious	examples	include	many	clients	with
borderline	personality	disorder	or	chronic	addictions	to	alcohol	or	narcotics.
Often	these	clients	have	repeatedly	hurt,	abused,	or	neglected	their	body,	their
friends,	their	families,	their	partners,	and	so	on.	This	is	the	sad	consequence
of	long-standing	unworkable	behavior	that	is	driven	by	fusion	and	avoidance.
Not	surprisingly,	it	gives	rise	to	a	lot	of	emotional	pain.	To	connect	with
neglected	values,	therefore,	means	to	connect	with	all	that	pain.
So	if	clients	repeatedly	resist,	avoid,	or	put	up	blocks	to	values—“I	don’t
know,”	“Nothing	matters,”	“I	don’t	have	any	values,”	“I	don’t	see	the	point,”
“I	don’t	deserve	to	have	a	life,”	“This	is	so	corny”—that	usually	indicates
experiential	avoidance	and	necessitates	work	with	acceptance	and	defusion.
Of	course	sometimes	the	client	simply	has	no	idea	what	“values”	are;	if	she
has	led	a	deprived	or	impoverished	life,	“values”	may	seem	like	something
from	another	planet.	Thus	in	one	program	for	ACT	with	borderline
personality	disorder,	they	actually	give	the	clients	a	list	of	thirty	common
values	and	ask	them	to	check	the	ones	that	personally	resonate	(Brann	et	al.,
2007–09).
WORKING	FROM	GOALS	TO	VALUES:	USEFUL	QUESTIONS
When	we	ask	a	client	about	values,	she	will	commonly	give	us	goals.	He
may	describe	the	partner,	job,	or	body	he	wants	to	have,	or	the	things	he
wants	to	get	from	others	such	as	love	or	friendship	or	forgiveness.	Or	she	may
say	she	wants	fame,	wealth,	status,	respect,	or	success.	Or	he	may	give	us	an
emotional	goal:	to	feel	happy	or	to	have	more	self-confidence.	Or	she	may
give	us	a	dead	person’s	goal:	to	not	use	heroin,	to	not	have	panic	attacks,	to
not	lose	her	temper,	to	not	feel	self-conscious.	So	to	get	to	the	values
underlying	a	goal,	we	can	ask	any	or	all	of	the	following	questions	(preface
them	with	this	phrase,	“If	this	goal	were	achieved	…”):
What	would	you	do	differently?
How	would	you	act	differently?
How	would	you	behave	differently	in	your	relationships,
work	life,	social	life,	family	life,	and	so	on?
What	personal	qualities	or	strengths	would	it	demonstrate?
What	would	it	show	that	you	stand	for
?
What	would	it	enable	you	to	do	that	is	meaningful	and	that
matters	in	the	big	picture?
For	example,	if	you	had	self-esteem,	or	you	felt	happy,	or	you	had	a	sense
of	belonging,	or	you	had	a	big	car/great	body/fantastic	job,	then	how	would
you	act	differently?	What	would	you	do	differently?	How	would	you	behave
differently?
If	clients	give	us	a	negative	goal—something	that	they	don’t	want—we	can
often	quickly	transform	it	into	a	positive	one	by	asking	“What	do	you	want
instead?”	For	example,	if	the	client	says,	“I	want	to	stop	fighting	with	my
mom,”	we	can	ask,	“So	what	would	you	like	to	do	instead?	How	would	you
like	to	be	when	you	spend	time	with	her?”
If	clients	give	you	a	positive	goal,	additional	useful	questions	to	elicit
underlying	values	include	“What’s	that	in	the	service	of?”	“What’s	important/
meaningful	about	that?”	“What	is	it	that	matters	about	achieving	that	goal?”
“What’s	important	about	that?”	“What	would	having	that	enable	you	to	do?”
For	 example,	 the	 values	 underlying	 a	 holiday	 may	 be	 about	 being
adventurous,	nurturing	mental	health,	or	spending	quality	time	with	the
family,	and	so	on.
Practical	Tip
	As	long	as	you’re	not	coming	across	like	the	Spanish
Inquisition,	it’s	okay	to	keep	asking	questions.	Clients	rarely	get	to	core
values	after	only	one	or	two	questions.	If	you’re	concerned,	you	could	say,
“My	 mind’s	 telling	 me	 that	 you’re	 going	 to	 get	 annoyed	 with	 all	 these
questions.	 I	 keep	 asking	 because	 we’re	 trying	 to	 get	 to	 something	 of
fundamental	 importance	 here,	 and	 my	 sense	 is,	 so	 far,	 we’re	 just
scratching	the	surface.	So	is	it	okay	if	we	keep	going	with	this	a	bit	longer?”
PLEASING	OTHERS
Some	clients	are	so	focused	on	gaining	approval	from	others	or	doing	what
they’ve	been	told	to	do	by	their	parents,	religion,	or	culture	that	they
disconnect	from	their	own	core	values.	To	help	reconnect	them,	here’s	a
useful	question:	“Suppose	I	were	to	wave	a	magic	wand	so	that	you
automatically	had	the	approval	of	everybody	whose	opinion	matters	to	you;
so	that	whatever	you	did,	they	totally	approved	of	it,	whether	you	became	a
saint	or	a	serial	killer.	Once	this	wand	has	been	waved,	you’d	never	have	to
impress	anyone	or	please	anyone	ever	again—whatever	you	do,	they’d	be
delighted.	Then—what	would	you	do	with	your	life?	And	how	would	you	act
in	your	relationships?”
WHEN	THE	GOAL	IS	TO	CHANGE	OTHERS
If	a	client	says,	“I	want	my	wife/husband/mother/boss/colleague	to	be	more
cheerful/cooperative/friendly/loving/respectful,”	 and	 so	 on—or	 “less
abusive/lazy”	and	so	on,	we	may	ask,	“Let’s	assume	I	have	a	magic	wand,	and
I	can	instantly	change	this	person	to	fit	your	ideal.	If	you	did	have	that	ideal
relationship,	how	would	you	act	differently?	What	personal	qualities	or
strengths	would	you	like	to	develop	or	bring	into	that	relationship?	What	sort
of	friend/relative/colleague	would	you	like	to	be?	How	would	you	ideally
treat	the	other	person?”
After	this,	we	may	consider	how	the	client	can	influence	the	behavior	of
others	by	acting	on	his	own	values.	We	would	emphasize	that	we	can’t	control
others;	we	can	merely	influence	them.	And	the	more	we	take	control	of	our
own	actions,	the	more	effectively	we’ll	be	able	to	influence	others.
Homework	and	Next	Session
Homework	 can	 involve	 writing	 about	 values,	 thinking	 about	 values,
meditating	on	values,	discussing	values	with	loved	ones,	or	filling	in	the
forms	and	worksheets	named	in	figure	11.1.	A	simple	homework	assignment
is	this:	“Between	now	and	next	session,	would	you	be	willing	to	do	two
things?	One,	notice	when	you’re	acting	on	your	values,	and	two,	notice	what
it’s	like	to	do	so,	what	difference	it	makes.”
In	the	next	session,	we	might	do	more	work	around	values	or	move	on	to
goal	setting	and	taking	action.	And	if	fusion	and	avoidance	get	in	the	way	of
clarifying	values,	then	we’d	dance	across	the	hexaflex	to	defusion	and
acceptance.
From	time	to	time,	we’ll	encounter	a	high-functioning	client	who’s	already
doing	all	the	things	that	matter—going	to	work,	looking	after	the	kids,
keeping	fit,	and	so	on—but	is	deeply	unfulfilled.	Often	her	lack	of	fulfillment
is	because,	although	she’s	doing	what	matters,	she’s	not	psychologically
present.	Instead	she’s	caught	up	in	her	head:	lost	in	thoughts	about	all	the
things	on	her	“to	do”	list,	or	immersed	in	an	ongoing	commentary	about
what’s	 not	 good	 enough,	 or	 consumed	 by	 worrying,	 ruminating,	 or
daydreaming.	With	these	clients,	we	would	work	on	“being	present.”
Homework	for	You
For	this	chapter,	there’s	no	homework	for	you.	Nah,	I’m	just	kidding!	There’s
actually	lots	of	it.	If	you	haven’t	yet	completed	all	the	aforementioned	values
forms,	please	download	them	and	do	so.
Read	all	the	values	interventions	out	loud,	as	if	taking	your
clients	through	them.
Think	of	other	questions	you	might	ask.	Are	there	any	other
exercises	you	know,	or	ideas	you	have,	about	ways	to	get
clients	in	touch	with	values?
Pick	two	or	three	clients	and	identify	what	values	they’ve
lost	touch	with.	Consider	what	exercises	you	could	do	to
help	reconnect	them	with	their	values.
Reflect	on	your	own	values	as	a	therapist:	What	matters	to
you,	deep	in	your	heart,	about	doing	this	work?	What	do
you	want	to	stand	for	as	a	therapist?	What	personal	strengths
and	qualities	do	you	want	to	bring	into	the	therapy	room?
Over	the	next	week,	notice	when	you’re	in	touch	with	your
values—and	what	that’s	like.	What	difference	does	it	make
in	your	life?
Summary
Technically	values	are	desired	qualities	of	ongoing	action.	Poetically	they’re
our	heart’s	deepest	desires	for	how	we	want	spend	our	brief	time	on	this
planet.	Metaphorically	they’re	like	a	compass:	they	give	us	direction	and	keep
us	on	track.	Helping	our	clients	to	get	in	touch	with	their	values	can	be
difficult;	 we	 often	 encounter	 all	 sorts	 of	 misconceptions	 and
misunderstandings,	most	commonly	around	the	difference	between	values	and
goals.	Furthermore,	we’ll	frequently	come	up	against	barriers	in	the	form	of
fusion	and	avoidance.	Thus	we’ll	often	be	dancing	back	and	forth	between
values,	defusion,	and	acceptance.	However,	with	patience	and	persistence,	we
can	usually	help	our	clients	get	in	touch	with	their	hearts—and	when	we	see
that	happen,	it’s	truly	magical.
Chapter	12.	Do	What	It	Takes
Committed	Action	in	a	Nutshell
In	 Plain	 Language:
	
Committed	 action
	means	taking	larger	and	larger
patterns	of	effective	action,	guided	and	motivated	by	values.	It	also	means
flexible	action:	readily	adapting	to	the	challenges	of	the	situation,	and	either
persisting	with	or	changing	behavior	as	required;	doing	what	it	takes	to	live
by	our	values.
Aim:
	To	translate	values	into	ongoing,	evolving	patterns	of	action.	To
establish	the	pattern	of	repeatedly	returning	to	our	values,	no	matter	how
many	times	we	lose	touch	with	them.
Synonyms:
	None.
Method:	Use	values	to	set	goals,	and	break	those	goals	down	into	specific
actions.	Ask	the	client	to	commit	to	this	action.	Identify	barriers	to	action,	and
overcome	them	using	the	other	five	core	ACT	processes.
When	to	Use:	Whenever	a	client	needs	help	with	translating	values	into
workable	action.	This	includes	learning	any	new	skills	necessary	for	values-
congruent	living.
Getting	to	Committed	Action
Committed	action	happens	in	every	session.	Turning	up	for	therapy	is
committed	action;	doing	a	mindfulness	exercise	or	discussing	a	painful	topic
is	committed	action;	doing	ACT	homework	is	committed	action.	However,
committed	action	doesn’t	usually	take	center	stage	until	we	have	clarified
values.
Almost	always,	as	we	move	from	values	to	goals	to	taking	action,	we’ll
encounter	psychological	barriers.	So	if	we’ve	already	covered	some	or	all	of
the	four	mindfulness	processes—defusion,	acceptance,	contacting	the	present
moment,	self-as-context—we	can	now	use	them	for	overcoming	these
barriers.	And	if	we	haven’t	yet	covered	these	components	of	the	hexaflex,
then	we	can	now	move	on	to	them.
Under	the	heading	of	committed	action,	we	can	incorporate	any	and	all
traditional	 behavioral	 interventions—skills	 training,	 exposure	 and
desensitization,	behavioral	activation	for	depression,	and	so	on.	So,	for
example,	we	may	teach	crisis	coping,	problem	solving,	self-soothing,
assertiveness,	communication,	or	conflict	resolution	skills.	As	long	as	these
skills	are	in	the	service	of	mindful	valued	living	(and	they	aren’t	emotional
control	strategies,	such	as	distraction	techniques),	then	they	can	be	considered
a	part	of	ACT.
Committed	Action:	Step	by	Step
Basically	there	are	four	steps	to	committed	action:
1
.	
Choose	a	domain	of	life	that	is	high	priority	for	change.
2
.	
Choose	the	values	to	pursue	in	this	domain.
3
.	
Develop	goals,	guided	by	those	values.
4
.	
Take	action	mindfully.
Our	ultimate	aim	is	to	generalize	this	approach	into	larger	and	larger
patterns	of	committed	values-guided	action,	creating	a	domino	effect	that
spills	over	into	all	domains	of	life.	Setting	Values-Based	Goals	(below)	is	a
worksheet	to	help	you	with	the	first	three	steps:	picking	a	life	domain,
clarifying	values,	and	setting	goals.	Please	read	through	it	now.
SMART	GOALS,	LIVE-PERSON’S	GOALS
Note	the	SMART	acronym	for	goal	setting	(which	is	a	bit	different	from
some	other	versions.)	Goals	need	to	be:
S	=	Specific
M	=	Meaningful
A	=	Adaptive
R	=	Realistic
T	=	Time-framed
(Also	make	sure	to	avoid	emotional	goals	and	dead-person’s
goals.)
Of	course,	we	can	do	all	this	goal	setting	conversationally	if	we	(or	our
client)	don’t	like	forms.	However,	writing	it	down	in	session	makes	it	more
tangible	and	gives	our	client	a	valuable	reminder	to	take	away.	We	may	well
find	that	during	this	work,	our	client	starts	to	fuse	with	unhelpful	thoughts
about	it	all	being	too	hard,	hopeless,	pointless,	or	doomed	to	failure.	This
provides	an	excellent	opportunity	for	defusion,	as	you’ll	see	in	this	transcript:
Client:
	(
frowning	at	the	worksheet
)	This	is	a	waste	of	time.	(
She	puts	her	pen
down.
)	I’ve	done	this	before.	I	write	goals	down,	but	I	never	follow
through	on	them.
Therapist:
	So	you’re	having	the	thought	that	this	is	going	to	be	just	like	all	the
other	times?
Client:
	It’s	not	just	a	thought.	It’s	true.
Therapist:
	Well,	I	could	try	to	debate	with	you	here—try	to	convince	you	that
the	thought’s	not	true.	Or	I	could	try	to	motivate	and	inspire	you.	Or
I	could	lecture	you	on	how	important	this	is.	Or	tell	you	not	to	think
that	way.	Or	tell	you	to	think	positively.	Do	you	think	any	of	those
things	would	be	useful?
Client:
	(
chuckles
)	No.
Therapist:
	So	let’s	just	take	a	look	at	this	from	the	observing	self.	Just	take	a
step	back	and	notice	what	your	thinking	self	is	telling	you.
Client:
	(
She	pauses,	observing	her	thoughts.
)	Just	the	same	as	before.	This
isn’t	going	to	work.	It’s	a	waste	of	time.
Therapist:
	So	if	you	let	those	thoughts	tell	you	what	to	do,	will	that	take	you
closer	to	the	life	you	want	to	live—or	further	away?
Client:
	Further	away.
Therapist:
	So	what’re	you	going	to	do	here?	Let	those	thoughts	bully	you
around	and	tell	you	what	you	can	and	can’t	do?	Or	do	something
that’s	likely	to	make	your	life	work?
Client:
	Hmm.	When	you	put	it	that	way	…	(
She	picks	up	the	pen	and	starts
writing.
)
Therapist:
	Now	as	you	keep	writing,	just	notice	what	your	mind’s	doing.
Notice	all	the	ways	it	tries	to	get	you	to	stop.
Client:
	(
She	stops	writing	again	and,	smiles.
)	It’s	saying	this	is	a	complete
waste	of	time.
Therapist:
	Good	stuff!	Now	see	if	you	can	get	your	mind	to	have	a	full-on
temper	tantrum—you	know,	the	full	works:	screaming,	shouting,
stamping	its	feet!
Client:
	(
smiling,	continuing	to	write
)	Oh	yeah	…	It’s	having	a	complete
meltdown	now.	A	real	doozy.
Practical	Tip
	You	can	reinforce	defusion	by	offering	your	client	a
range	of	alternative	responses	to	a	problematic	thought:	“I	can	debate	with
you	whether	it’s	true	or	false,	tell	you	not	to	think	that	way,	lecture	you,	tell
you	to	think	positively,	give	you	advice,	reassure	you.	Do	you	think	that
would	stop	your	mind	from	having	these	thoughts?”	Your	client	will	almost
always	say	no,	and	then	you	can	move	on	to	any	defusion	technique	your
client	has	previously	embraced,	for	example,	“So	why	not	let	Radio	Doom
and	Gloomkeep	broadcasting	and	invest	your	energy	in	doing	something
that	truly	matters	to	you?”
PUBLIC	COMMITMENTS
People	are	far	more	likely	to	follow	through	on	public	commitments	than
private	ones.	So	we	usually	ask	the	client	to	say	out	loud	exactly	what	he’s
committing	to.	As	many	people	feel	awkward	making	public	commitments,	I
like	to	give	a	rationale,	something	along	these	lines:
Therapist:
	What	I’m	about	to	ask	you	may	seem	a	bit	odd,	but	research	shows
that	when	people	make	public	commitments,	they’re	far	more	likely
to	keep	them.	So,	if	you’re	willing	to,	I’d	like	you	to	say	out	loud
exactly	what	it	is	you’re	committing	to—and	as	you	say	it,	just
notice	any	thoughts	and	feelings	that	arise.
Client:
	You	mean,	tell	you	what	I’ve	written?
Therapist:
	Yes,	please.	Say	it	out	loud,	like	you	really	mean	it.	And	notice
what	shows	up	in	your	mind	and	your	body.
Client:
	I	commit	to	taking	the	kids	to	the	park	on	Saturday	afternoon	to	play
baseball.
Therapist:
	Great.	You	looked	a	bit	uncomfortable	as	you	said	that.	What
feelings	showed	up?
Client:
	My	stomach.	It	knotted	up.
Therapist:
	And	did	your	mind	have	anything	unhelpful	to	say?
Client:
	You	bet.	I’m	too	busy	with	work.	I	don’t	have	time.	It’s	a	hassle.
Leave	it	till	next	month.
Therapist:
	So	are	you	willing	to	make	room	for	those	thoughts	and	feelings	in
order	to	do	what	matters?
Client:
	Yes.
When	 clients	 speak	 their	 commitments	 out	 aloud,	 they	 commonly
experience	uncomfortable	thoughts	and	feelings.	It’s	useful	to	inquire	about
their	private	experiences	and	ensure	that	they’re	willing	to	make	room	for
them.
THE	TINIEST	STEP?
A	very	useful	question,	once	you’ve	identified	a	life	domain	and	some	core
values,	is	this:	“What’s	the	smallest,	tiniest,	simplest,	easiest	step	you	can	take
in	the	next	twenty-four	hours	that	will	take	you	a	little	bit	further	in	that
direction?”
Learning	to	take	small	steps	is	important.	When	clients	get	too	focused	on
big	long-term	goals,	they’re	pulled	out	of	living	in	the	present;	they	get
sucked	into	the	mindset	of	“I’ll	be	happy	once	I’ve	achieved	that	goal.”	And,
of	course,	they	may	never	achieve	it,	or	it	may	take	much	longer	than	they
expected,	or	it	may	not	make	them	happy	even	if	they	do	achieve	it.
So	I	like	to	remind	clients	of	the	famous	saying	from	the	
Tao	Te	Ching
:
“The	journey	of	a	thousand	miles	begins	with	one	step.”	Living	our	values	is
a	never-ending	journey;	it	continues	until	the	moment	of	our	final	breath.	And
every	little	step	we	take,	no	matter	how	tiny,	is	a	valid	and	meaningful	part	of
that	journey.	(I	also	like	to	quote	Aesop:	“Little	by	little	does	the	trick.”)
To	show	you	how	values,	goals,	and	actions	come	together,	let’s	consider
Sarah—a	thirty-eight-year-old	nurse,	single	for	four	years	since	her	divorce.
Sarah	very	much	wanted	to	find	a	new	partner,	get	married,	and	have
children,	and	she	was	worried	that	she	would	soon	be	too	old	to	conceive.	Of
course	getting	married	and	having	kids	are	goals—they	can	be	crossed	off	the
list,	achieved,	done!—not	values.	So	using	the	worksheet	above,	Sarah
identified	two	life	domains	as	priority:	“intimate	partner”	and	“parenting.”	We
then	looked	at	her	values	in	each	domain.
Initially	Sarah	said	what	she	wanted	was	to	be	loved	and	cherished.	Now
these	are	common	desires	that	almost	everyone	has,	but	they	are	not	values;
values	are	about	how	we	want	to	behave,	not	what	we	want	to	get.	With
further	exploration	(and	plenty	of	work	around	accepting	the	intense	sadness
that	arose),	Sarah	identified	her	values	in	the	domain	of	“intimate	partner”	as
connecting,	being	caring,	being	loving,	being	supportive,	being	nurturing,
being	playful,	being	present,	being	emotionally	intimate,	and	being	sexually
active.	Under	“parenting”	her	values	were	almost	identical	(except	for	“being
sexually	active”).
Sarah	recognized	that	“marriage	and	kids”	were	not	realistic	as	immediate
goals	(next	twenty-four	hours)	or	short-term	goals	(next	few	days	and	weeks),
so	she	wrote	them	down	as	medium-	or	long-term	goals.
Next	she	looked	at	short-term	goals.	In	the	domain	of	“intimate	partner,”
she	set	goals	to	(a)	join	a	dating	agency	and	go	on	some	blind	dates,	and	(b)
attend	some	mixed-sex	Latin	dancing	classes.	In	the	domain	of	“parenting,”
her	goals	were	to	(a)	take	her	teenage	niece	out	for	a	day	trip	and	(b)	visit	a
couple	of	friends	who	had	young	children.
In	terms	of	immediate	goals,	Sarah	was	stumped.	Here’s	how	the	session
went:
Therapist:
	You’ve	identified	quite	a	few	important	values	here.	Which	seems
the	most	important?
Sarah:	Um.	I	think,	more	than	anything	else,	connecting	and	being	intimate.
Therapist:
	Okay,	so	what’s	a	small,	simple,	easy	thing	you	could	do	in	the
next	twenty-four	hours,	in	line	with	those	values?
Sarah:	I	don’t	know.
Therapist:
	No	idea?
Client:
	No.
Therapist:
	Well,	the	key	here	is	to	think	outside	the	box.	If	connection	matters
to	you,	there	are	hundreds	of	different	ways	to	do	it;	you	can
connect	with	animals,	plants,	people,	your	body,	your	religion.	And
the	same	for	being	intimate—there	are	all	sorts	of	different	ways
you	can	do	that,	including	being	intimate	with	yourself.
Sarah:	I	never	thought	about	it	that	way.
After	some	discussion	along	these	lines,	Sarah	identified	an	immediate	goal
of	having	a	long,	hot,	soothing	bath:	this	was	a	way	of	being	intimate	with
herself	and	connecting	with	her	body.
IMPOSSIBLE	GOALS
At	times,	clients	will	have	impossible	goals.	For	example,	Alex	was	a
forty-two-year-old	former	social	worker	on	long-term	disability	benefits.	He
was	referred	with	a	fifteen-year	history	of	chronic	PTSD,	major	depression,
and	chronic	pain	syndrome.	His	problems	had	started	fifteen	years	earlier
when	he	had	been	horrifically	assaulted,	resulting	in	severe	back	and	neck
injuries	that	required	multiple	operations	to	deal	with	those	injuries.
Prior	to	the	assault,	Alex	had	been	a	passionate	amateur	football	player;
now	he	could	barely	get	around	with	a	cane.	When	we	first	started	work	on
values	and	goals,	Alex	kept	talking	about	how	he	wanted	to	play	football
again,	even	though	many	surgeons	had	told	him	it	was	impossible.	I	said	to
him,	“Well,	here’s	the	thing,	Alex.	It’s	not	my	place	to	tell	you	what’s	possible
and	what’s	not.	But	can	we	agree	that	today,	right	now,	in	the	next	twenty-
four	hours,	playing	football	is	not	possible?”
Alex	agreed	with	that,	so	we	then	explored	his	values	underlying	the	goal
of	playing	football	again.	Initially	he	came	up	with	the	following:	winning
against	other	teams,	getting	respect,	having	a	social	life.	None	of	these	are
values:	they’re	not	desired	qualities	of	ongoing	action.	So	I	asked	him,
“Suppose	I	wave	a	magic	wand	so	you	instantly	achieve	all	these	goals:	you
play	football	again,	you	win	all	your	games,	you	get	lots	of	respect,	and	you
have	a	great	social	life.	Then,	how	would	you	act	differently	…	toward
yourself	and	your	body	and	other	people?	As	a	player,	what	sort	of	personal
qualities	would	you	like	to	have?	How	would	you	like	to	behave	toward	the
people	you	socialize	with?”
With	further	exploration	along	these	lines,	we	were	able	to	get	to	some	core
values:	being	active,	taking	care	of	his	health,	contributing	to	a	team,	being
sociable,	being	competitive,	being	a	“good	friend,”	connecting	with	others.	I
then	pointed	out	there	were	many	different	ways	he	could	act	on	these	values,
even	though	he	couldn’t	currently	play	football.	To	which	Alex	protested,
“But	that’s	not	the	same.”
Consider	for	a	moment,	before	reading	on:	How	would	you	have	responded
to	Alex’s	comment?
What	we’re	dealing	with	here	is	a	reality	gap:	a	large	gap	between	current
reality	and	desired	reality.	And	the	bigger	that	gap,	the	more	painful	the
feelings	that	will	arise.	So	naturally	we	need	to	validate	and	normalize	those
feelings,	to	compassionately	acknowledge	how	painful	they	are,	and	to	help
our	client	to	accept	them.
Therefore	my	response	to	Alex	was	this:
Therapist:
	Absolutely.	It’s	not	the	same.	It’s	not	the	same	thing	at	all.	Not
even	close.	And	when	there’s	a	huge	gap	between	what	you	want
and	what	you’ve	got,	that	hurts.	I	can	see	how	upset	you	are	right
now,	and	I	can	only	begin	to	imagine	how	much	you’re	suffering.
(
pause
)	And	in	my	experience,	when	people	are	hurting	the	way
that	you	are	right	now,	it’s	because	they’re	in	touch	with	something
really	important;	something	that	matters.	(
pause
)	So	suppose	I
could	give	you	a	choice	here.	One	option	is	that	you	learn	how	to
make	room	for	these	painful	feelings	and	how	to	drop	the	struggle
with	them	so	you	can	put	your	energy	into	doing	something	that’s
important,	something	that	truly	matters	to	you,	deep	in	your	heart—
so	you	can	stand	for	something	in	the	face	of	this	painful	reality.
The	other	option	is	to	get	all	bogged	down	in	these	painful	feelings
and	just	kind	of	give	up	trying,	and	put	your	life	on	hold.	Which
option	do	you	want	to	choose?
At	that	point,	Alex	experienced	a	huge	wave	of	sadness,	resentment,	and
fear,	so	we	worked	on	acceptance,	defusion,	and	self-compassion.	Alex
learned	to	accept	the	painful	feelings	related	to	his	losses,	and	to	defuse	from
the	thoughts	that	kept	dragging	him	into	bitterness	and	hopelessness—“I	can
never	have	the	life	I	want,”	“It’s	not	fair,”	“There’s	no	point	going	on.”
After	a	couple	more	sessions,	we	returned	to	Alex’s	values	and	started
setting	small	realistic	goals.	For	example,	two	of	his	core	values	were
“contribution”	and	“being	sociable.”	Instead	of	a	sports	team,	Alex	started
contributing	to	a	health	team:	the	nurses	at	his	local	“old	folks’”	home.	He
started	going	in	on	a	voluntary	basis	to	socialize	with	the	elderly	residents.	He
would	make	them	cups	of	tea,	chat	about	the	news,	and	even	play	chess	with
them	(which	was	acting	on	his	value	of	being	competitive).	He	found	this
very	satisfying,	even	though	it	was	a	million	miles	from	playing	football.
So,	to	summarize,	here’s	what	to	do	when	a	goal	is	impossible	or	a	long
way	off:
1
.	
Validate	the	pain	arising	from	the	reality	gap.
2
.	
Respond	to	the	pain	with	acceptance	and	defusion.
3
.	
Find	the	values	underlying	the	goal.
4
.	
Set	new	goals	based	on	those	underlying	values.
Barriers	to	Action—and	How	to	Deal	with	Them
If	clarifying	values	and	setting	goals	were	enough	to	ensure	valued	living,
the	task	of	ACT	therapists	would	be	a	lot	easier.	Unfortunately,	when	it	comes
to	making	positive	life	changes,	we	commonly	encounter	psychological
barriers.	The	most	common	of	these	are	summarized	by	the	acronym	FEAR:
F
	=	Fusion
E
	=	Excessive	goals
A
	=	Avoidance	of	discomfort
R
	=	Remoteness	from	values
Let’s	take	a	quick	look	at	each	of	these	barriers.
F	is	for	fusion.	When	we	set	out	to	make	change,	it’s	normal	for	our	mind	to
throw	up	“negative”	thoughts:	
I’m	too	busy,	I	can’t	do	it
,	
I’ll	fail,
	
It’s	too	hard,
and	so	on.	This	isn’t	a	problem	if	we	defuse	from	them,	but	if	we	fuse	with
those	thoughts,	they	can	prevent	us	from	moving	forward.
E	is	for	excessive	goals.	If	our	goals	exceed	our	resources,	we’ll	either	give
up	or	fail.	Necessary	resources	could	include	skills,	time,	money,	and	physical
health.
A	is	for	avoidance	of	discomfort.	Change	usually	gives	rise	to	uncomfortable
feelings—most	commonly	anxiety.	If	we’re	not	willing	to	accept	this
discomfort,	we	won’t	move	forward	(that	is,	we	stay	in	our	“comfort	zone”).
R	is	for	remoteness	from	values.	Why	are	we	bothering	to	put	in	all	this	hard
effort?	If	we	lose	touch	with	the	values	underlying	this	goal—if	it	doesn’t
seem	 meaningful	 or	 important—then	 we	 readily	 lose	 motivation.
“Remoteness	from	values”	commonly	presents	in	four	ways:	(1)	clients	can’t
or	won’t	access	their	values;	(2)	they	confuse	rules	and	morals	with	values;
(3)	they	pay	lip	service	to	values	but	don’t	truly	connect	with	them;	and/or	(4)
they	give	you	the	values	of	their	religion,	culture,	or	parents	rather	than	their
own.
(By	the	way:	the	above	version	of	the	FEAR	acronym	is	different	to	the
one	you’ll	find	in	other	ACT	textbooks;	I	changed	it	to	make	it	more
comprehensive.)
So	how	do	we	address	these	barriers?	Well,	the	antidote	to	FEAR	is	DARE:
D
	=	Defusion
A
	=	Acceptance	of	discomfort
R
	=	Realistic	goals
E
	=	Embracing	values
So	let’s	take	a	look	at	what’s	involved	in	order	to	DARE.
D	is	for	defusion.	We	identify	the	thoughts	that	hold	us	back	and	we	defuse
from	them.
A	is	for	acceptance	of	discomfort.	We	make	room	for	our	painful	thoughts	and
feelings,	not	because	we	like	them	or	want	them,	but	so	that	we	can	do	what
matters.
R	is	for	realistic	goals.	If	we	lack	the	necessary	resources,	we	have	two
options.	Option	1:	Create	a	new	goal	to	acquire	the	necessary	resources.	If	we
lack	necessary	skills,	our	new	goal	is	to	learn	them.	If	we	lack	money,	our
new	goal	may	be	to	borrow	it	or	save	it	up.	If	we	lack	physical	health,	our
new	goal	is	to	improve	it.	And	if	we	lack	time,	our	new	goal	is	to	rearrange
our	schedule	(which	may	require	us	to	give	up	other	activities).	Option	2:	If
it’s	not	possible	to	get	the	required	resources,	then	we	accept	the	limitations
of	reality	and	change	our	goal	to	adapt	in	the	best	way	possible.
E	is	for	embracing	values.	If	we’re	lacking	in	motivation,	let’s	reflect	for	a
moment	on	why	we’re	doing	this.	What’s	important	or	meaningful	about	this
action?	Does	it	truly	matter?	If	so,	why?
If	we	write	these	acronyms	on	a	business	card	for	our	clients	to	carry
around	in	a	purse	or	wallet,	we	provide	them	with	a	concrete	way	to	help
them	to	identify	their	barriers	and	respond	effectively.	These	acronyms	also
help	us	decide	what	to	do	in	therapy.	If	our	client	gets	stuck,	we	figure	out	the
barriers	using	FEAR,	and	then	we	target	them	with	DARE.
Note	that	both	of	these	acronyms	can	account	for	external	barriers.	If
there’s	an	external	barrier	to	action,	then	we’ll	be	dealing	with	the	E	of
FEAR:	our	goal	exceeds	our	resources.	And	we	respond	with	the	R	of	DARE:
we	set	a	realistic	new	goal,	either	to	overcome	the	barrier	(assuming	that’s
both	possible	and	workable)	or	to	accept	it	and	adapt	to	it.
REASON-GIVING
We’re	all	very	good	at	coming	up	with	reasons	for	why	we	can’t	or
shouldn’t	do	things	that	take	us	out	of	our	comfort	zone.	And	if	we	fuse	with
these	thoughts,	they’ll	hold	us	back.	There	are	many	ways	we	can	defuse	from
reason-giving	(as	with	any	other	category	of	thinking).	One	simple	way	is	to
name	it	and	anticipate	it,	as	we	see	in	this	transcript.
Therapist:
	You	know	our	mind	is	pretty	amazing.	It’s	not	only	a	problem-
solving	machine	and	a	judgment	factory,	it’s	also	a	reason-giving
machine.	As	soon	as	we	have	to	face	any	sort	of	challenge	and	step
out	of	our	comfort	zone,	our	mind	will	manufacture	a	whole	list	of
reasons	not	to	do	it:	
I’m	too	tired.	It’s	too	hard.
	
I’ll	fail.
	
It’s	too
expensive.	 It’ll	 take	 too	 long.
	
I’m	 too	 depressed.	 I	 don’t	 have
enough	confidence.
	
I’m	too	anxious.	Others	wouldn’t	approve.
	
I
don’t	deserve	it.
	
It’s	not	the	right	time.	I	shouldn’t	have	to	do	this.
It’ll	all	go	wrong.
	[
Modify	these	reasons	so	they’re	directly	relevant
to	 your	 client’s	 issue.
]	The	machine	never	stops—it	keeps	on
churning	out	reason	after	reason	after	reason.	Your	mind,	my	mind,
everybody’s	mind	produces	these	sorts	of	thoughts.	That’s	just	what
minds	do.	And	this	is	only	a	problem	if	we	let	these	thoughts	bully
us	around—if	we	let	them	dictate	what	we	can	and	can’t	do.	But	if
we	treat	them	the	same	way	as	all	our	other	unhelpful	thoughts—
see	them	for	what	they	are,	hold	them	lightly,	unhook	ourselves—
then	they	can’t	stop	us	from	doing	what	truly	matters.	So	what	sort
of	reasons	is	your	mind	giving	you	right	now	as	to	why	you	can’t	or
shouldn’t	do	what	we’ve	been	talking	about?	[
Elicit	 as	 many
reasons	as	possible.
]	Okay,	so	as	far	as	I	can	see,	these	are	all
perfectly	valid	reasons	not	to	take	action.	So	now	I	invite	you	to
take	a	good	honest	look	at	the	situation	and	consider	this	question:
if	you	don’t	take	any	action	here—if	you	just	stop	trying,	give	up,
stay	put,	do	more	of	the	same—will	that	enrich	and	enhance	your
life	in	the	long	run?	[
Elicit	an	answer;	usually	the	answer	will	be
no.
)	So	then,	are	you	willing	to	take	action,	even	though	your	mind
can	and	will	give	you	all	sorts	of	perfectly	valid	reasons	not	to	do
it?
If	your	client	says	“yes,”	you	can	now	use	all	manner	of	defusion
techniques.	You	can	silently	name	the	process:	“Aha!	Here’s	reason-giving!”
You	can	say	to	yourself,	“I’m	having	the	thought	that	I	can’t	do	this	because
I’m	too	tired.”	You	can	say	to	yourself,	“Thanks,	mind.	Good	reason-giving.”
You	can	sing	the	reasons,	write	them	on	cards,	observe	them	dispassionately,
treat	them	as	a	special	broadcast	from	Radio	Doom	and	Gloom,	and	so	on.
If	 your	 client	 says	 no,	 you	 can	 say—very	 slowly,	 gently,	 and
compassionately:
Therapist:
	Well,	here’s	the	thing.	If	you’re	waiting	till	the	day	your	mind
stops	giving	you	reasons,	you’ll	probably	be	waiting	forever
because	that’s	what	minds	do.	They	give	you	reasons	not	to	take
action.	So	just	imagine	coming	back	to	see	me	in	ten	years’	time	…
and	you	tell	me	that	nothing	has	changed	in	your	life	…	nothing	…
that	the	last	ten	years	have	been	just	more	of	the	same.	You’ve	been
waiting	ten	years	for	the	day	your	mind	stopped	giving	reasons	…
and	nothing	has	changed.	(
pause
)	Is	that	the	future	you	truly	want?”
Your	client	is	almost	certain	to	now	say	no,	in	which	case	you	once	again
can	ask:
Therapist:
	So	are	you	willing	to	take	action,	even	though	your	mind	can	give
you	all	sorts	of	perfectly	valid	reasons	not	to	do	so?
One	last	strategy	to	consider	is	something	I	call	“the	kidnap	question”:
Therapist:
	Okay,	so	you’ve	just	given	me	six	or	seven	perfectly	valid	reasons
not	to	do	this.	Now,	if	you’re	willing	to,	I’d	like	you	to	imagine
something.	Imagine	that	the	person	you	love	most	on	this	planet
was	kidnapped.	And	the	deal	is,	unless	you	take	this	action	we’ve
been	talking	about,	you’ll	never	see	this	person	again.	Would	you
take	this	action,	even	though	your	mind	can	give	you	all	sorts	of
perfectly	valid	reasons	not	to	do	it?”	[
Elicit	an	answer;	your	client
is	bound	to	say	yes.
]	Okay.	So	at	the	moment,	it’s	like	this:	the	rich,
meaningful	life	that	you	would	ideally	like	to	have	has	been
kidnapped,	and	you’ll	never	get	to	see	that	life	unless	you	take
action.	Are	you	willing	to	take	this	action,	even	though	your	mind
gives	you	all	sorts	of	reasons	not	to	do	it?
THE	WILLINGNESS	AND	ACTION	PLAN
We	can	reduce	the	impact	of	psychological	barriers	by	anticipating	them.	A
simple	way	to	do	this	is	to	use	the	Willingness	and	Action	Plan	below.	(It’s
also	downloadable	free	from	
www.actmadesimple.com
.)
Part	1	of	the	form	specifies	values,	goals,	and	actions.	Part	2	asks	clients	to
predict	their	own	psychological	barriers.	Being	forewarned	is	forearmed,	and
it	increases	the	chances	that	they’ll	respond	with	acceptance	and	defusion.
(Be	sure	to	ask	your	client	to	include	as	much	reason-giving	as	possible	in	the
section	on	thoughts.)	Part	3	breaks	the	goal	down	into	small	doable	steps,	and
also	includes	a	section	for	any	useful	self-talk—for	example,	“The	journey	of
a	thousand	miles	begins	with	one	step”	or	“It’s	okay	to	make	mistakes.”
Once	this	form	is	completed,	ask	your	client	to	read	parts	1	and	2	out	loud
in	 session	 as	 a	 public	 commitment.	 Again,	 you	 can	 do	 all	 this
conversationally	without	using	forms,	but	a	written	record	acts	as	a	powerful
reminder.	You	could	also	print	out	a	few	copies	and	give	them	to	your	client
for	ongoing	use.
BREAKING	COMMITMENTS
Everyone	breaks	commitments	at	times.	This	is	part	of	being	human.	Often
our	client	will	be	quick	to	raise	the	issue	of	failure:	“What	if	I	fail?”	“I’ve
tried	doing	this	before,	but	I	never	stick	to	it.”	If	our	client	doesn’t	raise	this
issue,	then	we’ll	need	to	raise	it	ourselves.	Here’s	an	example:
Therapist:
	It’s	a	given	that	from	time	to	time	you’ll	break	a	commitment.
That’s	called	being	a	real	human,	not	a	fictitious	superhero.	It’s
unrealistic	to	expect	that	we’ll	always	live	by	our	values	and	follow
through	on	our	commitments.	What	is	realistic	is	to	get	better	at	it.
We	can	get	better	at	staying	on	track,	faster	at	catching	ourselves
when	we	go	offtrack,	and	better	at	getting	back	on	track	again.	And
when	we	do	go	offtrack,	what	helps	is	being	kind	and	accepting
toward	ourselves:	we	accept	the	painful	thoughts	and	feelings,	then
reconnect	with	our	values,	and	get	moving	again.	What	doesn’t	help
is	beating	ourselves	up.	I	mean,	if	beating	yourself	up	was	a	good
way	to	change	your	behavior,	wouldn’t	you	be	perfect	by	now?
It’s	also	useful	to	talk	to	clients	about	the	two	main	commitment	patterns:
The	Two	Commitment	Patterns:
Pattern	1:
	Make	a	commitment,	break	a	commitment,	give
up.
Pattern	2:
	Make	a	commitment,	break	a	commitment,	lick
your	wounds,	pick	yourself	up,	learn	from	the	experience,
get	back	on	track,	make	another	commitment.
The	first	pattern	leads	to	getting	stuck.	The	second	leads	to	continued
growth.	You	can	ask	clients	to	identify	their	pattern—and	if	it’s	pattern	1,	ask
them	to	honestly	assess	it	in	terms	of	workability.
Basically	we	want	our	client	to	build	bigger	and	bigger	patterns	of	valued
action,	extending	into	every	area	of	her	life.	And	in	the	process,	we	want	her
to	become	her	own	ACT	therapist:	identifying	her	own	FEAR	and	responding
with	DARE.
Practical	TipThere	are	two	very	common	pitfalls	for	therapists	in	this	stage
of	the	work.	The	first	is	being	too	pushy.	If	we	try	to	harangue,	coerce,	or
push	our	clients	into	action,	it	will	probably	backfire.	The	second	is	being	too
wishy-washy.	If	we	don’t	actively	encourage	our	client	to	set	specific	goals,
make	a	public	commitment,	and	confront	her	psychological	barriers,	then	she
may	well	not	follow	through.
Homework	and	the	Next	Session
For	homework,	your	client	takes	the	action	that	he	committed	to	in	the
session.	It’s	important	to	anticipate	possible	barriers	and	discuss	effective
responses.	The	FEAR/DARE	acronyms	are	very	useful,	and	you	can
accentuate	their	effectiveness	with	the	worksheet	From	FEAR	to	DARE
below.
Chapter	13.	Getting	Unstuck
Workability:	Our	Best	Friend
Here’s	my	guarantee	to	you.	As	you	start	working	with	ACT,	both	you	and
your	clients	will	get	stuck.	Repeatedly.	I	guarantee	this	will	happen	or	your
money	back!	Fortunately	ACT	provides	us	with	an	incredibly	powerful	tool
for	getting	unstuck:	workability.	Kirk	Strosahl,	one	of	the	pioneers	of	ACT,
says	it	this	way:	“When	we’re	doing	ACT,	workability	is	our	best	friend.”
From	a	stance	of	workability,	we	never	need	to	judge,	criticize,	or	attack	a
client’s	self-defeating	behaviors,	nor	do	we	need	to	convince	or	persuade	her
to	stop.	Instead	we	ask	her	to	look	honestly	and	openly	at	her	current	behavior
and	its	long-term	effects	on	her	life,	and	to	assess	whether	her	actions	are
helping	her	to	grow	as	a	human	being	and	live	a	vital,	meaningful	life—or
not.	We	may	ask	questions	such	as	these:	“Is	what	you’re	doing	working	in
the	long	run	to	make	your	life	richer	and	fuller?”	“Is	this	taking	you	closer	to
the	life	you	really	want?”	“Is	this	helping	you	to	be	the	person	you	want	to
be?”
However,	we	need	to	be	very	careful	here:	it’s	easy	for	us	to	start
“bullying”	our	clients.	Bullying	means	that	we	have	already	decided	what	will
work	for	the	client	and	what	won’t	work	(Strosahl,	2004).	When	we	fuse	with
our	own	ideas	about	what	is	best	or	right	for	our	client,	we	start	imposing	our
own	agenda.	Our	client	may	then	start	saying	the	things	we	want	to	hear	in
order	to	appease	us.	If	this	happens,	the	exercise	is	empty	because	the	client	is
not	genuinely	taking	responsibility	for	his	own	life.	Strosahl	warns	us:	“In
order	to	use	the	workability	strategy,	you	have	to	be	relentlessly	pragmatic
and	non-judgmental	and	to	truly	mean	it.	This	is	not	a	game,	a	trick	or	a	form
of	therapeutic	manipulation”	(Strosahl,	2004,	p.	226).	Keeping	this	in	mind,
let’s	look	now	at	some	of	the	many	ways	workability	can	help	us	out.
Helping	Us	with	Creative	Hopelessness
Workability	enables	us	to	do	“mini”	creative	hopelessness	interventions	at
any	time	in	any	session.	Whatever	the	problematic	behavior	is,	we	can	always
ask,	“So	when	you	do	that,	what	effect	does	it	have	on	your	life	in	the	long
run?”	This	is	more	effective	if	we	first	normalize	the	behavior:	“It’s
completely	natural	that	you	would	do	this,	given	your	past	life	experience.
Lots	of	people	would	do	the	very	same	thing	under	similar	circumstances.
The	question	is,	if	you	keep	on	doing	it,	will	it	make	your	life	richer	and	fuller
—or	will	it	do	the	opposite?”
Practical	Tip
	When	talking	of	workability,	we	don’t	have	to	use	the
terms	“rich,	full,	and	meaningful	life”	or	“living	by	your	values.”	There	are
many	ways	to	communicate	the	concept	of	mindful,	valued	living.	We	can
talk	of	vitality,	a	life	worth	living,	a	life	that	grabs	you,	a	better	life,	being	the
person	you	want	to	be,	doing	what’s	important/meaningful,	doing	what
matters	to	you,	doing	what	you	care	about,	enhancing	or	enriching	life,
thriving,	flourishing,	and	so	on.
Helping	Us	with	Defusion
Workability	enables	rapid	defusion,	and	it’s	particularly	useful	when	a
client	insists	that	a	thought	is	true.	We	can	say,	“I	won’t	argue	with	you	over
whether	it’s	true	or	not.	What	I’d	like	you	to	do	is	to	take	a	good	look	at	what
happens	when	you	get	all	caught	up	in	this	thought.”	Then	we	can	ask,	“If	you
give	this	thought	all	your	attention	and	let	it	dictate	what	you	do,	what
happens	to	your	life	in	the	long	run?”	or	“Does	getting	caught	up	in	this
thought	help	you	to	be	the	person	you	want	to	be?	Does	it	help	you	to	do	the
things	you	want	to	do?”
This	is	particularly	useful	when	our	client	starts	insisting	change	is
impossible.	For	example,	a	client	with	an	addiction	may	say,	“I	know	this
won’t	work	for	me.	I’ve	tried	before.	I’ve	got	no	control	over	it.”	We	can
respond,	“Okay,	so	your	mind	says,	
This	won’t	work.	I’ve	got	no	control.
	Fair
enough.	That’s	the	sort	of	stuff	that	minds	say.	I	won’t	argue	with	that.	I	just
want	you	to	consider	something.	If	we	go	along	with	that—if	we	let	your
mind	dictate	what	happens	in	this	room—then	where	do	we	go	from	here?	Do
we	stop	the	session	and	give	up?”	We	could	then	go	on	to	say,	“I	fully	expect
your	mind	will	keep	telling	you	that	this	therapy	won’t	work	and	you	have	no
control.	I	don’t	know	any	way,	other	than	major	brain	surgery,	to	stop	that
from	happening.	So	can	we	let	your	mind	say	whatever	it	wants	and	give	this
a	go	anyway?”
This	strategy	is	also	very	useful	when	clients	insist	that	nasty	negative	self-
judgments	are	true—for	example,	“But	it’s	true.	I	am	fat/ugly/stupid/a	loser.”
We	can	say,	“When	your	mind	says	this	stuff	to	you,	does	it	help	if	you	get	all
caught	up	in	it	or	hold	on	to	it?	Does	buying	into	these	thoughts—giving	them
all	your	attention,	allowing	them	to	dictate	what	you	do—does	that	make	your
life	richer,	fuller,	and	more	meaningful?	If	not,	how	about	we	practice
learning	to	let	them	come	and	go	without	holding	on	to	them?”
Helping	Us	with	Clients	Who	Are	Making	Progress
If	what	the	client	is	doing	is	“workable,”	then	we	can	reinforce	this
behavior	by	increasing	awareness	around	it.	For	example,	we	may	ask
questions	such	as	these:	“What’s	it	like	when	you	act	in	this	way?	What
happens	to	your	life?	What	happens	to	your	sense	of	vitality?	How	could	you
do	more	of	this?”	It	can	also	be	useful	to	ask,	“How	did	you	do	that?	How	did
you	make	that	happen?	What	did	you	do	differently?	What	did	you	have	to
make	room	for?	Did	your	mind	try	to	interfere—and	if	so,	how	did	you
respond?	What	does	this	tell	you	about	what	works	in	your	life?”
Helping	Us	to	Catch	Ourselves
Because	we’re	fallible	human	beings,	it’s	inevitable	that	at	times	we’ll	try
to	persuade,	convince,	debate,	or	argue	with	our	clients.	And	when	we
respond	in	this	way,	we	aren’t	doing	ACT.	So	whenever	I	catch	myself	doing
this,	I	promptly	apologize.	I	say,	“I’m	really	sorry.	I	just	realized	I’ve	been
trying	to	convince	you	here,	and	that’s	not	what	I	want	this	to	be	about.	This
is	not	a	place	for	me	to	try	to	impose	my	beliefs	on	you	and	tell	you	what	to
do	with	your	life.	It’s	a	place	for	us	to	work	together,	to	discover	what	works
in	your	life.	So	can	we	please	just	rewind	to	before	I	started	debating	with
you?	Let’s	just	bring	this	back	to	your	life	and	your	experience	rather	than	my
beliefs.	And	the	question	I’d	like	you	to	consider	is	this:	regardless	of	what
anyone	else	thinks	(including	me),	if	you	keep	doing	what	you’re	doing,	is	it
working	in	the	long	run	to	make	your	life	better?	If	it	is,	then	by	all	means
keep	doing	it,	and	let’s	focus	on	something	else.	But	if	it’s	not,	how	about	we
take	a	good	honest	look	at	it—except	this	time	we’ll	do	that	without	me	trying
to	convince	you	of	anything?”
Helping	Us	to	Find	Our	Footing
When	we’re	“lost”	in	a	session	or	wondering	where	to	go	to	next	in
therapy,	we	can	always	come	back	to	workability.	We	can	ask,	“On	a	scale	of
0	to	10,	how	well	is	your	life	working?	If	10	meansthat	the	way	you’re
spending	each	day	gives	you	a	real	sense	of	vitality	and	fulfillment	and	0
means	that	the	way	you’re	spending	each	day	makes	life	seem	pointless,
meaningless,	and	not	worth	living	at	all,	where	are	you	on	that	scale?”
If	a	client	scores	highly,	then	let’s	talk	about	when	to	end	therapy.	If	a	client
scores	low—for	example,	3	or	4—we	could	ask,	“What	would	have	to	happen
to	get	to	a	5?	What’s	getting	in	the	way	of	that?”	His	answer	will	either	give
us	information	about	further	goals	or	reveal	something	about	psychological
barriers.
Helping	Us	with	“I	Don’t	Know!”
At	times,	we’ll	ask	clients	important	questions	and	they’ll	answer,	“I	don’t
know.”	For	example,	this	often	happens	early	on	with	values	work.	If	we
suspect	that	the	function	of	“I	don’t	know”	is	to	avoid	the	discomfort	that
discussing	values	often	elicits,	then	we	can	bring	in	workability	in	a	variety	of
different	ways:	“How	is	it	working	for	you	so	far,	going	through	life	not
knowing	what	matters	to	you?”	“If	we	stop	the	conversation	right	there,	with
your	very	first	answer	of	‘I	don’t	know,’	then	where	would	that	leave	you?”
“If	it	could	make	a	real	difference	in	your	life,	would	you	be	willing	to	spend
some	time	on	this?	Would	you	be	willing	to	stick	with	the	question	and
explore	it	even	though	no	answer	immediately	comes	to	mind?”	From	here,
we	can	dance	into	any	number	of	values	interventions—from	formal
worksheets	to	imagining	your	eightieth	birthday.	Alternatively,	we	can	move
into	acceptance	and	defusion	interventions	in	order	to	deal	with	the	painful
thoughts	and	feelings	we’ve	elicited.
Helping	Us	with	“I’ve	Got	No	Choice!”
Often	our	most	challenging	clients	will	tell	us	they	have	no	choice	or	no
control	over	their	actions.	They	will	insist	that	when	strong	urges	show	up—
to	commit	suicide,	drink	alcohol,	take	drugs,	and	so	on—they	have	no	choice
but	to	“give	in.”	Other	clients	may	insist	that	they’re	powerless	or	hopeless	or
incapable	of	making	change,	or	they	may	say	things	such	as,	“Whenever	I	try
to	improve	my	life,	it	always	goes	wrong;	I	always	fail	or	get	hurt.”	We	would
first	validate	how	much	they	have	suffered:	“Clearly	this	issue	has	created	a
lot	of	pain	and	difficulty	for	you.	And	you’ve	tried	hard,	and	so	far	nothing
has	worked.”	Then	we	would	say,	“And	now	you	have	a	choice	to	make.	One
choice	is	to	hold	on	tightly	to	
I	have	no	choice,	I	have	no	control,	There’s
nothing	I	can	do—
	and	just	give	up	trying,	and	carry	on	living	the	way	you
are.	The	other	choice	is	to	take	action	that	moves	you	in	a	valued	direction,
even	though	you’re	having	the	thought	that	it’s	pointless	and	hopeless.	Which
of	these	two	choices	is	guaranteed	to	keep	you	stuck	and	stop	your	life	from
improving?	Which	of	these	two	choices	stands	the	best	chance	of	improving
your	life?”
Helping	Us	with	“But	It	Works!”
Some	clients	will	insist	that	their	self-defeating	behavior	works	for	them	in
the	long	run.	Here	are	two	classic	examples:	“Worrying	helps	me	prepare	for
the	worst”	and	“I	like	getting	stoned.	It’s	the	only	way	I	can	relax.”	We	need
to	validate	that,	yes,	there	are	indeed	some	real	benefits	to	these	strategies,
and	at	the	same	time,	there	are	other	ways	to	obtain	those	benefits	that	would
be	far	more	workable.	I	use	a	metaphor	about	a	rickety	bicycle	to	convey	this.
THE	RICKETY	BICYCLE	METAPHOR
Therapist:
	You	can	cycle	from	New	York	to	Mexico	on	a	rickety	old	bicycle
with	bad	suspension	and	a	worn-out	seat,	and	it	will	eventually	get
you	there.	But	what	condition	will	you	be	in	by	the	time	you	arrive?
There	are	many	more	effective	ways	to	make	that	journey:	cars,
buses,	trains,	planes.	When	you	(
Name	the	client’s	issue	here:	for
example,	 get	 stoned,	 do	 all	 this	 worrying
),	that’s	like	riding	a
rickety	bicycle.	Would	you	like	to	learn	an	alternative	that	will	get
you	to	your	destination	in	much	better	condition?
After	using	the	Rickety	Bicycle	Metaphor,	we	then	teach	the	necessary
skills	(or	we	help	the	client	access	resources	for	learning	them).	For	example,
if	our	client	wants	to	“prepare	for	the	worst,”	we	can	teach	him	strategic
planning	and	problem	solving.	If	our	client	wants	to	relax	and	marijuana	is
the	only	way	she	knows	to	do	so,	we	can	teach	her	relaxation	skills	(while
being	clear	they	are	not	the	same	as	mindfulness	skills).
Overcoming	Resistance
Resistance	is	a	state,	not	a	trait.	In	the	right	context,	anyone	would	be	resistant
to	therapy.	Suppose	you	were	being	treated	by	a	“witch	doctor”	in	some	third
world	country.	If	he	told	you	there	was	an	evil	spirit	in	your	body	and	the	only
way	to	get	rid	of	it	was	to	eat	a	live	squid,	would	you	be	resistant?
Resistance	in	therapy	generally	boils	down	to	a	few	key	factors:	treatment
mismatch,	secondary	gains,	the	therapeutic	relationship,	and	FEAR.	Let’s	take
a	look	at	each	of	these	now.
Treatment	Mismatch
Did	you	adequately	consent	with	your	client?	Did	you	explain	what	ACT
involves?	Was	he	expecting	an	“easy	ride”?	Did	she	just	want	someone	to
listen	to	her	without	expecting	to	do	much	work?	Was	he	expecting	something
very	different,	such	as	long-term	psychoanalysis?	Not	everybody	is	open	to
ACT,	and	we	may	need	to	refer	clients	on	or	work	with	a	different	model.
This	issue	is	largely	avoided	by	giving	adequate	information	when	obtaining
informed	consent	(see	chapter	5).
Secondary	Gains
Are	there	benefits	for	the	client	(whether	conscious	or	unconscious)	if	she
“stays	stuck,”	such	as	proceeds	from	a	legal	settlement,	or	care	and	attention
from	others	while	she’s	in	the	sick	role?	To	address	the	issue	of	secondary
gains,	we	need	to	compassionately	bring	it	into	the	client’s	awareness	and
nonjudgmentally	explore	it.	We	may	need	to	do	a	cost-benefit	analysis,
framed	in	terms	of	workability—for	example,	we	might	say,	“It	seems	that
staying	stuck	works	in	the	short	run	to	gain	benefits	X,	Y,	and	Z,	but	does	it
work	in	the	long	run	to	make	life	rich	and	full?”	or	“I’m	willing	to	be	wrong
about	this,	but	here’s	how	I	see	it.	If	you	don’t	make	any	changes	here,	there
are	some	genuine	short-term	benefits	for	you—such	as	A,	B,	and	C.	What	I’d
like	you	to	do	is	weigh	these	benefits	up	against	the	long-term	costs	of	staying
stuck.”
Therapeutic	Relationship
A	strong	therapeutic	relationship	is	essential	for	effective	therapy.	Is	there
room	for	improvement	here?	Check	in	with	yourself:	Have	you	fused	with
unhelpful	beliefs,	judgments,	or	assumptions	about	this	client?	Are	you
moving	too	fast	or	too	slow?	Are	you	being	too	pushy	or	too	passive?	Too
serious	or	too	playful?	Do	you	need	to	validate	his	experience	more	or	show
more	compassion?	Do	you	need	to	be	more	present,	open,	and	accepting?	Do
you	need	to	provide	more	rationale	for	the	client	as	to	why	you’re
encouraging	her	to	make	these	changes	or	practice	these	skills?	Are	you
yourself	fused	and	avoidant	in	session:	skating	around	important	issues
instead	of	approaching	them	or	getting	lost	in	your	own	internal	dialogue?	In
chapter	14,	we	will	explore	the	therapeutic	relationship	in	more	detail;	suffice
it	to	say	for	now,	the	best	way	to	build	and	strengthen	the	therapeutic
relationship	is	for	us	to	embody	ACT	during	our	sessions.
FEAR
In	the	last	chapter,	we	discussed	FEAR:	fusion,	excessive	goals,	avoidance
of	discomfort,	and	remoteness	from	values.	All	these	factors	can	play	a	major
role	in	resistance.	The	key	is	to	identify	them	and	then	target	them	with
DARE:	defusion,	acceptance	of	discomfort,	realistic	goals,	and	embracing
values.
Resistance	Is	Fertile
When	we	encounter	resistance	in	our	clients—or	perhaps	it’s	better	to
describe	it	as	“avoidance	of	making	changes”—most	of	us	tend	to	get
frustrated	or	irritated,	or	we	doubt	our	own	abilities,	blame	the	client,	or
blame	ourselves.	While	this	is	normal,	it	isn’t	particularly	helpful.	A	better
alternative	is	simply	to	apply	ACT	to	this	issue	itself.	(I	often	say	that	ACT
reframes	your	entire	life	because	every	problem	you	encounter	becomes	an
opportunity	to	get	better	at	ACT.)
In	other	words,	whenever	a	client	seems	stuck,	our	first	step	is	to	look
mindfully	at	what’s	happening,	look	at	the	situation	with	openness	and
curiosity,	and	notice	the	thoughts	and	feelings	showing	up.	We	might	say
something	like,	“Why	don’t	we	just	take	a	step	back	and	notice	what’s
happening	here?”	Then	nonjudgmentally	explore	the	FEAR	factors	that	are
(almost	certainly)	involved.
Practical	Tip
	Psychological	flexibility	is	the	capacity	to	be	present,
open	up,	and	do	what	matters.	So	if	your	client	starts	to	close	off	or	shut
down	 while	 the	 session	 is	 focused	 on	 opening	 up	 (defusion	 and
acceptance)	or	on	doing	what	matters	(values	and	committed	action),	then
your	best	option	is	to	focus	on	being	present.	Ask	your	client	to	notice
what’s	happening;	to	notice	her	thoughts	and	feelings;	and	to	come	back	to
the	room	and	get	present	with	you.	Fusion	and	avoidance	tend	to	“wither
and	fade”	when	we’re	fully	in	the	present	moment.
Acceptance	of	Being	Stuck
There	will	be	times	that	no	matter	what	we	try,	our	client	will	remain	stuck.
Haven’t	you	ever	experienced	this	in	your	own	life?	Despite	all	your	wisdom,
knowledge,	resourcefulness,	and	experience,	you	somehow	found	yourself
stuck:	you	were	unwilling	or	unable	to	take	the	action	that	would	really	make
a	difference	in	your	life?	At	these	times,	our	default	is	to	beat	ourselves	up,
which	clearly	doesn’t	help.	Beating	ourselves	up	for	getting	stuck	is	about	as
useful	as	rubbing	salt	into	fresh	wounds.	A	more	life-enhancing	response	is	to
turn	these	painful	situations	into	opportunities	to	develop	self-acceptance	and
self-compassion.
We	can	ask	our	clients	questions	like	these:	“Can	you	accept	yourself	as	a
human	being	even	though	you	are	temporarily	stuck?”	and	“Can	you	be	kind
and	caring	toward	yourself	instead	of	beating	yourself	up?”	Section	7	of	the
Acceptance	of	Emotions	Exercise	(see	chapter	8)	is	a	lovely	exercise	to
practice	here	for	developing	self-compassion.
And	notice	the	paradox:	if	we	can	use	these	situations	to	develop	self-
acceptance	and	self-compassion,	then	we’re	still	growing	and	developing
useful	life	skills	even	though	we	may	be	“stuck”	on	this	particular	issue.
Homework	for	You
Play	around	with	the	concept	of	workability.	Keep	it	in	the
back	of	your	mind	and	use	it	as	a	resource	for	innovation	in
your	work.	Play	around	with	different	ways	of	talking	about
it.
Start	looking	at	your	own	behavior	through	the	lens	of
workability	and	notice	what	effect	that	has.	In	particular,
look	at	what	you	do	in	your	closest	relationships.	Instead	of
getting	caught	up	in	right/wrong	or	should/shouldn’t	(as
most	of	us	do	at	times),	start	looking	in	a	defused	and
accepting	way	at	how	workable	your	behavior	is	and
whether	there’s	any	way	you	can	improve	on	it.
Think	of	one	or	two	clients	who	seem	stuck	or	resistant.
Identify	the	factors	that	may	be	contributing	to	their
resistance	and	brainstorm	ways	that	you	might	respond.
Practical	 Tip
	 Whenever	 our	 clients	 seem	 stuck,	 resistant,	 or
unmotivated,	look	for	FEAR	factors	and	respond	with	DARE.	If	a	search	for
FEAR	 factors	 doesn’t	 reveal	 the	 barriers,	 then	 consider	 treatment
mismatch,	secondary	gains,	or	the	therapeutic	relationship.
Summary
The	whole	ACT	model	rests	on	the	concept	of	workability.	Again	and	again,
we	ask	our	clients	to	assess	whether	their	actions	are	giving	them	meaning,
fulfillment,	and	vitality—or	struggle	and	suffering?	When	we	rely	on
workability	for	motivation,	we	never	have	to	coerce,	persuade,	or	convince
our	clients	to	change;	we	simply	open	their	eyes	to	the	consequences	of	their
actions	and	allow	them	to	choose	their	own	direction.	And	sometimes,	despite
our	best	efforts	to	help	them	get	moving,	our	clients	will	stay	stuck—in	which
case,	we	can	at	least	provide	them	with	a	safe,	compassionate	space	in	which
they	can	rest.
Chapter	14.	I	and	Thou
The	Therapeutic	Relationship
In	just	about	every	model	of	therapy	or	coaching,	the	therapeutic	relationship
is	considered	important—and	rightly	so.	In	ACT,	we	especially	emphasize
this	relationship.	As	a	therapist	or	coach,	we	aim	to	embody	the	entire	ACT
model	in	session:	to	be	mindful,	nonjudgmental,	respectful,	compassionate,
centered,	open,	receptive,	engaged,	warm,	and	genuine.	We	regard	the	client
as	an	equal:	a	fellow	human	being	who,	just	like	us,	gets	caught	up	in	his
mind	and	ends	up	struggling	with	life.	This	attitude	is	very	much	summarized
by	the	Two	Mountains	Metaphor	(see	chapter	5).
Being	Mindful
ACT	is	a	very	active	therapy	that	places	much	less	emphasis	on	supportive
listening	than	most	other	models.	However,	even	a	few	minutes	of	truly
mindful,	genuinely	compassionate	listening	can	be	incredibly	powerful—far
more	so	than	an	entire	hour	of	disengaged	listening.
One	of	the	greatest	gifts	we	can	give	other	humans	is	to	make	them	the
center	of	our	attention	in	an	atmosphere	of	complete	acceptance,	openness,
and	compassion.	So	we	listen	to	our	clients	carefully,	kindly,	genuinely—with
an	open	heart	and	an	open	mind.	We	listen	compassionately	to	their	struggles.
We	notice	and	validate	their	pain—and	acknowledge	how	they’ve	suffered.
We	ask	them	to	be	willingly	vulnerable.	And	we	create	a	compassionate,
nonjudgmental	space	where	this	is	possible.	Through	this	mindful,	caring
interaction,	a	strong,	trusting,	and	open	relationship	is	forged.
In	each	and	every	session,	we	have	the	opportunity	to	bear	witness	to	the
pain	and	suffering	of	our	client	in	a	manner	that	perhaps	no	one	else	has	ever
done.	We	take	the	time	to	listen	completely,	carefully,	and	open-mindedly;	to
notice	our	client’s	body	language	and	facial	expressions;	to	respond	genuinely
and	empathetically;	and	to	validate	her	experience	in	the	process.	If	we	catch
ourselves	“tuning	out,”	not	paying	full	attention,	getting	caught	up	in	our
thoughts,	then	the	moment	we	realize	it,	we	can	gently	acknowledge	it	and
bring	our	attention	back	to	our	fellow	human	being.	In	this	way,	every	session
becomes	a	mindfulness	practice	in	and	of	itself.
Asking	Permission
“Is	it	okay	if	…	?”	“Could	I	ask	you	to	…	?”	“Would	you	be	willing	to	…
?”—these	are	all	useful	ways	to	ask	the	client’s	permission.	This	is	simply
showing	respect.	It’s	a	key	ingredient	for	building	and	maintaining	rapport,
especially	when	we’re	asking	our	clients	to	do	exercises	that	are	likely	to
bring	up	painful	thoughts	and	feelings.	The	more	painful	the	experience	is
likely	to	be,	the	more	essential	it	is	to	know	we	have	genuine	permission—
and	not	just	an	automatic	yes	response.
At	times,	it’s	also	useful	to	say,	“You	don’t	have	to	do	this.	I	wouldn’t	want
you	to	go	along	with	it	just	because	I’ve	suggested	it.”	It’s	important,	too,	to
make	sure	the	client	understands	the	rationale	behind	the	exercise.	If	he
doesn’t,	then	take	the	time	to	explain	it.
Saying	“I’m	Sorry”
When	we	screw	up,	make	a	mistake,	offend,	upset,	or	invalidate	a	client,
then	the	moment	we	realize	it,	let’s	take	action:	acknowledge	it,	admit	it,	and
give	a	genuine,	heartfelt	apology.	We’re	modeling	something	very	useful	each
time	we	do	this;	in	many	intimate	relationships,	there’s	a	notable	paucity	of
apologizing!
At	times,	even	the	most	experienced	of	ACT	therapists	will	find	themselves
lecturing,	coercing,	convincing,	debating	with,	or	trying	to	persuade	their
clients.	When	we’re	doing	this,	we	aren’t	doing	ACT.	So	the	moment	we
catch	ourselves	doing	this,	it’s	useful	to	acknowledge	it	and	to	apologize.	I
say	something	like,	“I’m	really	sorry.	I’ve	just	realized	what	I’ve	been	doing
here.	I’ve	been	trying	to	convince	you	of	something.	You	didn’t	come	here	so
that	I	could	force	my	belief	systems	on	you.	Can	we	please	rewind	here—go
back	to	the	point	before	I	started	trying	to	convince	you—and	start	again	from
there?”
Being	Playful
Playfulness,	irreverence,	and	humor	can	play	an	important	part	in
enhancing	rapport.	This	often	comes	into	its	own	when	working	with
defusion.	When	laughter	arises	spontaneously	in	session,	it’s	generally	a	good
sign.	On	the	other	hand,	watch	out	for	insensitivity	and	invalidation.	When
someone	is	sharing	a	heartbreaking	story	of	pain	and	suffering,	playfulness
would	be	inappropriate.	And	if	our	client’s	in	terrible	distress,	we	certainly
wouldn’t	be	using	zany	defusion	techniques.
Practicing	Self-Disclosure
While	we	don’t	have	to	self-disclose,	ACT	advocates	that	we	do	so	if	and
when	it’s	likely	to	be	beneficial	to	the	client	in	the	service	of	normalization,
validation,	 promoting	 self-acceptance,	 or	 enhancing	 the	 therapeutic
relationship.
The	ACT	stance	is	that	therapy	involves	an	intimate	relationship.	However,
intimacy	is	a	two-way	street;	it	requires	openness	from	both	parties.	If	the
therapist	is	a	“blank	slate”	and	the	client	knows	nothing	of	her	inner	world—
nothing	about	what	she	values	or	cares	about,	or	what	she	truly	feels	and
thinks—then	clearly	they	do	not	have	an	intimate	relationship.	When	our
clients	come	into	therapy,	they’re	in	a	vulnerable	position,	which	makes	for	a
very	unequal	relationship.	However,	if	we	as	therapists	deliberately	and
openly	share	our	own	values	and	vulnerabilities,	that	helps	to	establish	a
powerful	bond	with	our	clients.
Obviously	that	doesn’t	mean	we	“dump	on	them”	or	say,	“Hey,	you	think
you’ve	got	problems—listen	to	mine!”	We	use	self-disclosure	judiciously—
when	it’s	likely	to	normalize	and	validate	a	client’s	experience,	deepen	the
therapeutic	alliance,	or	model	something	useful.	Here	are	some	forms	of	self-
disclosure	that	could	be	helpful	in	the	right	context.
“I	have	to	confess,	that’s	thrown	me	…”	When	your	client	has	said	something
that	has	thrown	you,	stunned	you,	knocked	you	off	your	feet,	it’s	often	useful
to	admit	it.	You	may	then	like	to	suggest	a	couple	of	minutes	of	mindful
breathing	or	similar	exercise	so	you	can	both	center	yourselves.
“I	feel	disconnected	from	you”	or	“I	feel	as	if	you’re	not	fully	present	right
now.”	If	you	sense	your	client	dissociating,	disconnecting,	withdrawing,
detaching,	or	wandering	off	inside	her	own	mind,	it’s	often	helpful	to	draw
attention	to	it—and	to	highlight	what	happens	to	your	relationship	with	the
client	during	these	moments.
“I’m	noticing	a	couple	of	different	thoughts	here	…”	At	times,	my	mind
suggests	several	different	directions	I	could	take	the	session	in—all	of	them
valid.	It’s	often	useful	to	share	these	thoughts	and	gauge	the	client’s	response.
At	other	times,	my	mind	makes	several	different	judgments	about	the	same
situation.	Again,	in	the	right	context,	this	can	be	useful	to	share.
“I’m	noticing	I	feel	a	bit	…”	In	the	right	context,	it	can	be	very	useful	to	share
emotional	reactions.
Confronting	Problematic	Behaviors
From	time	to	time,	we	all	have	clients	who	behave	“problematically”
during	the	session—for	example,	they	may	endlessly	rehash	the	same	old
story	or	continually	blame	everyone	else	for	their	problems	in	life	without
ever	looking	at	their	own	role.	When	this	happens,	most	of	us	have	a	tendency
to	grit	our	teeth	and	try	and	put	up	with	it	rather	than	openly	address	it.
Why	do	we	do	this?	Usually	because	we	either	fuse	with	thoughts	like	“It
would	be	rude	of	me	to	interrupt”	or	“If	I	say	something	about	it,	she’ll	get
upset	with	me”—or	we	experience	feelings	of	anxiety	that	we’re	not	willing
to	make	room	for.	At	these	times,	it’s	very	useful	to	explicitly	model	ACT.
We	could	say	something	like,	“I’m	noticing	something	happening	here,	and	I
want	to	bring	it	to	your	attention.	My	mind’s	telling	me	you’re	going	to	be
upset	or	offended	by	what	I	say,	and	I’m	noticing	quite	a	lot	of	anxiety	in	my
body,	and	a	strong	urge	just	to	sit	here	and	not	say	anything.	However,	I’m
committed	to	helping	you	create	the	best	life	you	can	possibly	have.	And	if	I
sit	here	and	say	nothing,	then	I’ll	be	neglecting	those	values.	So	I’m	going	to
do	what	matters	here,	even	though	my	heart	is	racing—I’m	going	to	tell	you
what	I’m	noticing.”
Notice	how,	in	doing	this,	we	have	explicitly	modeled	five	of	the	six	core
ACT	processes:	defusion,	acceptance,	values,	action,	and	contacting	the
present;	self-as-context	is	implicit	but	not	explicit.	And	by	now,	we’ll	have
our	client’s	full	attention!	Then,	with	an	attitude	of	openness	and	curiosity,
defused	from	any	judgments	or	criticisms,	we	describe	the	behavior	we’re
noticing	and	point	to	the	fact	that	it’s	preventing	useful	work	in	the	session.
From	there,	we	may	explore	the	function	of	the	behavior—“Can	I	ask	what
you’re	hoping	to	achieve	by	doing	X?”—or	whether	it	plays	out	in	other
relationships	and,	if	so,	what	are	the	consequences.	We	may	also	inquire
about	the	client’s	thoughts	and	feelings	in	response	to	our	observation—and
do	some	work	around	acceptance	and	defusion	if	necessary.
Declaring	Our	Values
In	the	homework	section	at	the	end	of	chapter	11,	I	asked	you	to	reflect	on
your	values	as	a	therapist.	If	you	haven’t	done	so,	please	go	back	and	reflect
on	those	questions.	When	we	go	into	a	session	consciously	guided	and
motivated	by	our	core	values,	we’ll	do	a	different	sort	of	therapy	than	when
we’re	on	automatic	pilot	or	fused	with	thoughts	like	
Here	 we	 go	 again;
another	day,	another	dollar!
	or	
This	is	going	to	be	a	tough	one.
ACT	advocates	that	we	declare	our	values	to	our	clients.	For	example,	“I
want	you	to	know,	I’m	in	this	room	working	with	you	for	one	sole	purpose:	to
help	you	create	a	better	life,	a	life	that	you	feel	is	worth	living”	or	“I’m
committed	to	helping	you	turn	your	life	around	and	take	it	in	a	direction	that
adds	meaning,	purpose,	and	fulfillment.”	When	said	genuinely,	this	is	a
powerful	message	that	unites	therapist	and	client	in	a	common—and
incredibly	worthwhile—cause.
Slowing	Down	and	Leaning	In
“Slow	down	and	lean	in”	is	a	phrase	I	picked	up	from	a	workshop	with
psychologist	Robyn	Walser.	When	we	get	stressed	or	anxious	in	response	to
what’s	happening	in	session,	most	of	us	tend	to	speed	up—talk	more,	talk
louder,	give	advice,	start	lecturing,	and	so	on—or	we	lean	back	—disengage,
tune	 out,	 withdraw.	 Obviously	 this	 isn’t	 helpful	 for	 the	 therapeutic
relationship.	So	aim	to	do	the	opposite:	slow	down	and	lean	in!	Notice	your
thoughts	and	feelings,	notice	your	tendency	to	speed	up	and	lean	out,	connect
with	your	values,	and	then	lean	in	(literally)	and	slow	down.	Talk	less,	talk
slower,	and	pause	frequently.
Sitting	with	It
A	major	challenge	for	most	ACT	therapists	is	letting	go	of	the	need	to	fix
the	client’s	problems.	And	yet,	the	more	we	take	on	the	role	of	problem	fixer,
the	more	we	disempower	our	client.	In	ACT,	we	help	clients	cultivate	enough
psychological	flexibility	to	effectively	contact	their	own	problem-solving
resources—and	if	problem-solving	skills	are	lacking,	we’ll	teach	them.
However,	there	are	all	sorts	of	problems	in	life	that	can’t	be	“solved”	or
“fixed”—the	loss	of	a	loved	one,	the	pain	of	rejection	or	failure,	the	heartache
of	loneliness,	the	inevitability	of	aging,	infirmity,	and	illness.	In	such
situations,	we	help	clients	develop	the	ability	to	step	out	of	problem-solving
mode	altogether	and	into	the	psychological	space	of	mindfulness	and
acceptance.	This	is	useful	whenever	(a)	problems	cannot	be	solved,	or	(b)
when	problem-solving	attempts	create	even	bigger	problems.
Therefore,	we	need	to	learn	the	ability	to	“sit	with	it”:	to	let	the	situation	be
as	it	is	and	allow	our	client	to	have	his	thoughts	and	feelings	without	rushing
in	to	“rescue”	him.	This	means	that	very	often	we’ll	need	to	make	room	for
our	own	feelings	of	anxiety,	our	own	impatience,	and	our	own	urges	to	rush
in,	fix	it,	solve	it,	or	say	the	right	thing.
Of	course,	that’s	not	the	same	as	allowing	the	client	to	wallow	in	her
suffering;	rather	we	aim	to	create	a	space	of	acceptance	and	defusion—a
space	within	which	both	client	and	therapist	can	be	present	with	their
thoughts	and	feelings	without	fighting	them,	without	being	swept	away	by
them,	and	without	needing	to	take	any	immediate	action.	This	is,	if	you	like,
“a	breathing	space.”	(No	wonder	so	many	mindfulness	practices	from
different	traditions	are	centered	around	the	breath.)	From	a	space	of
mindfulness,	we	can	then	make	a	wise	choice	by	taking	the	entire	situation
into	account,	connecting	with	our	values,	and	engaging	in	conscious	action.At
times,	to	help	myself	along	with	this,	I	may	say	to	the	client,	“I’m	feeling	a
strong	urge	right	now	to	try	and	fix	this	for	you.	My	mind’s	telling	me	all
sorts	of	things	to	say	to	you—bits	of	advice,	things	you	could	do,	blah,	blah,
blah.	The	challenge	for	both	of	us	here	is	to	see	if	we	can	just	sit	with	this
stuff—just	make	some	room	for	all	these	thoughts	and	feelings	and	urges
showing	up—without	rushing	in	to	try	and	fix	it.”
(Of	course,	if	there	are	practical	skills	that	clients	would	benefit	from
learning—skills	that	will	help	them	to	solve	those	problems	in	their	lives	that
can
	be	solved	through	overt	action—then	ACT	advocates	that	we	either	teach
clients	those	skills	or	point	them	in	the	right	direction	to	learn	them.)
Defusing	from	Our	Own	Judgments
Of	course	we	all	aim	to	be	nonjudgmental,	and	we	may	achieve	that—for	a
while.	But	sooner	or	later,	judgments	will	happen.	Our	mind	is	a	well-oiled
judgment	machine;	it	won’t	stop	judging	for	long.	So,	when	our	judgments
about	our	clients	do	pop	up,	the	challenge	is	to	recognize	them	and	defuse
from	them,	and	to	let	them	come	and	go	without	getting	caught	up	in	them.	If
we	realize	a	judgment	has	hooked	us,	we	can	silently	say,	
Aha!	A	judgment!
,
then	gently	refocus	on	our	client.
Revealing	Yourself	as	a	Novice
When	it	comes	to	doing	ACT,	do	you	ever	feel	your	heart	racing	or	your
stomach	knotting?	Do	you	ever	have	thoughts	like	
I	don’t	know	if	I	can	do	this
or	
What	if	my	client	“freaks	out”?
	Or	maybe	you	think,	
I’ll	fumble	my	words,
I’ll	screw	it	up,	This	is	too	hard,	or	I’ll	do	it	wrong.
	If	so,	good.	This	shows
you	that	you’re	a	normal	human	being.	Normal	humans	typically	feel	anxious
whenever	they	move	out	of	their	comfort	zone.	However,	if	you	start	fusing
with	ideas	that	you’ve	got	to	do	this	stuff	perfectly	right	from	the	word	go	or
else	your	clients	will	react	negatively,	you’re	going	to	make	life	very	hard	for
yourself.	So	if	you’re	a	total	ACT	newbie,	I’d	encourage	you	to	take	the
pressure	off	yourself	by	simply	admitting	it.	You	could	say	something	like,
“Can	I	be	totally	honest	with	you?	I’m	a	bit	nervous	about	telling	you	this;	my
mind’s	telling	me	that	you	might	lose	some	respect	for	me.	The	truth	is	I’m
still	a	bit	of	a	newcomer	to	this	ACT	stuff.	I	really	like	the	model,	I’ve	found
it	very	helpful	in	my	life,	and	obviously	I	think	it’s	going	to	be	useful	for	you
or	I	wouldn’t	recommend	it.	However,	because	I’m	relatively	new	to	it,	from
time	to	time	I	might	stumble	or	get	a	bit	tongue-tied.	And	for	some	of	the
longer	exercises,	I	may	even	need	to	pull	out	a	book	and	use	the	scripts	to
read	from.	Would	you	be	okay	with	that?”
Obviously	you	don’t	
have
	to	disclose	this	(and	whatever	you	do,	don’t	say
any	part	of	it	that	isn’t	true),	but	many	therapists	find	it	gives	them	permission
to	be	imperfect	or	to	read	from	a	script	if	desired.	Furthermore,	you’re
modeling	openness,	willingness,	and	self-acceptance,	and	your	self-disclosure
helps	to	establish	a	more	intimate	therapeutic	relationship.
Apply	ACT	to	Yourself
Hopefully	you	can	see	that	everything	in	this	chapter	follows	quite	naturally
from	applying	ACT	to	yourself	as	a	therapist	or	coach.	And	obviously	this
holds	true	for	every	relationship	in	your	life:	the	more	you	act	from	a	space	of
mindfulness	and	values,	the	healthier	your	relationships	will	be.	So	why	leave
ACT	for	the	therapy	room?	Why	not	spend	some	time	now	reflecting	on	your
most	meaningful	relationships	and	think	about	how	ACT	principles	can
enrich	and	enhance	them?	And	then	put	it	into	practice	and	see	how	it	works.
You	may	be	surprised!
Chapter	15.	The	Therapist’s	Journey
From	Chunky	and	Clunky	to	Fluid	and	Flexible
When	therapists	are	new	to	ACT,	we	tend	to	slice	the	model	up	and	center
each	session	around	a	major	“chunk”	of	it—much	as	I’ve	done	in	chapters	6
to	12	of	this	book.	For	example,	we	might	do	a	session	with	a	major	focus	on
defusion,	then	another	centered	around	acceptance,	and	another	with	an
emphasis	on	the	observing	self,	and	so	on.	Typically	as	we	become	familiar
with	the	model	and	realize	how	the	six	core	processes	all	interconnect	and
complement	each	other,	our	therapy	becomes	less	“chunky”	and	more
“blended.”	We	learn	to	“dance	around	the	hexaflex,”	working	explicitly	with
several	processes	in	each	session	(and	implicitly	with	all	processes).	Our
therapy	becomes	more	fluid,	more	flexible,	more	creative.	We	start	to	modify
and	adapt	tools,	techniques,	and	metaphors,	creating	new	ones	of	our	own	(or
borrowing	them	from	our	clients).
Hopefully	you’ve	already	started	to	appreciate	the	interconnectedness	of
this	model.	To	get	a	better	sense	of	it,	spend	some	time	studying	the	ACT
hexaflex	diagram	(see	chapter	1)	and	identify	how	each	of	the	six	components
interacts	with	all	the	others.	Also,	as	you	reread	this	book	or	move	on	to	other
ACT	textbooks,	notice	how	virtually	every	intervention	contains	several
overlapping	core	processes.	For	example,	suppose	you	ask	a	client,	“Can	you
just	sit	with	this	feeling	for	a	moment?	Just	notice	where	it’s	most	intense.
Then	take	a	step	back	and	look	at	it	from	the	observing	self.”	Here	you	have
three	processes	in	one	brief	intervention:	present	moment,	self-as-context,	and
acceptance.	(If	you	look	more	closely,	you’ll	see	that	values,	committed
action,	and	defusion	are	also	involved	in	this	exercise,	but	they	are	less
obvious.	Can	you	spot	them?	First,	in	ACT,	acceptance	is	always	in	the
service	of	valued	living,	so	this	exercise	is	in	some	way	linked	to	the	client’s
values.	Second,	doing	the	exercise	is,	in	itself,	a	committed	action.	Third,	as
we	fully	contact	our	experience	in	the	present	moment,	there	is	always	some
defusion	that	happens.)
The	journey	from	“chunky,	clunky”	ACT	to	“fluid,	flexible”	ACT	requires
time,	practice,	patience,	persistence,	and	reflection.	We’ll	screw	up	again	and
again.	We’ll	get	it	wrong.	Our	minds	will	beat	us	up	for	being	lousy
therapists.	But	if	we	each	bring	an	attitude	of	openness	and	curiosity	to	our
mistakes—What	did	I	do	that	was	ineffective?	What	did	I	miss?	What	did	I
fuse	with?	What	could	I	do	differently	next	time?—we	can	learn	valuable
lessons	from	them.	(And	we	may	like	to	recall	the	words	of	Sir	Winston
Churchill:	“Success	is	the	ability	to	go	from	failure	to	failure	without	loss	of
enthusiasm.”)
What	Can	We	Bring	In	from	Previous	Training?
One	of	the	beautiful	things	about	doing	ACT	is	that	it	enables	us	to	bring	in	a
vast	wealth	of	experience	and	knowledge	from	our	previous	training	in	other
models.	Look	once	more	at	the	diagram	in	figure	15.1:
You	can	basically	use	anything	from	any	other	model	that	helps	the	client
move	in	the	direction	of	workability.	Take	a	few	moments	to	think	about	your
previous	training	and	how	you	can	fruitfully	use	it.	What	do	you	know	that
can	help	clients	to:
clarify	their	values	and	connect	with	a	sense	of	meaning	or
purpose?
be	present,	conscious,	aware,	open,	connected	to	their
experience,	centered,	or	grounded?
set	goals	and	break	them	down	into	actions?
increase	self-awareness	around	the	short-term	and	long-term
effects	of	their	behavior?
be	aware	of	and	accept	their	thoughts	and	feelings?
be	aware	of	their	thoughts,	detach	from	their	thoughts,	let	go
of	their	thoughts,	or	see	their	thoughts	just	as	thoughts?
connect	with	a	transcendent	sense	of	self	such	as	“the	silent
witness,”	“the	observing	self,”	“metacognitive	awareness,”
“pure	consciousness,”	or	“the	‘I’	that	notices”?
be	compassionate	and	accepting	toward	themselves	or
others?
make	effective	behavioral	changes,	or	learn	new	life-
enhancing	skills?
make	life	as	rich,	full	and	meaningful	as	possible?
Hopefully	you	can	see	that	there’s	a	wealth	of	knowledge	you	already	have
that	you	can	bring	to	your	ACT	work.	What	you	need	to	be	wary	of	is
bringing	in	theories	or	techniques	intended	primarily	to	avoid	or	get	rid	of
unwanted	private	experiences;	these	simply	do	not	fit	into	the	ACT	model.
Examples	include	the	challenging	and	disputing	of	cognitions,	visualizations
to	dissolve	unwanted	feelings,	thought	stopping,	and	distraction	techniques.
Ask	yourself	these	questions:	What	is	the	purpose	of	this	technique?	Is	its
aim	to	attack,	suppress,	avoid,	reduce,	or	get	rid	of	an	unwanted	private
experience?	If	so,	it’s	not	ACT-consistent.	Of	course,	that	doesn’t	mean	you
can’t	use	it	in	therapy;	it	just	means	(a)	that	it’s	not	ACT,	and	(b)	if	you’re
doing	ACT	and	also	trying	to	incorporate	this	technique,	you	risk	sending
conflicting	messages	and	undermining	acceptance.
Where	to	Next?
ACT	is	a	big	model.	While	you	can	certainly	start	using	it	straight	away	and
immediately	get	positive	results	in	your	work,	most	therapists	find	that	it
takes	at	least	a	year	of	devoted	practice,	reading,	and	learning	to	get	a	good
handle	on	both	ACT	theory	and	practice	and	to	implement	it	fluidly	and
flexibly.	So	take	your	time—enjoy	the	journey,	don’t	rush	it.	Remember
Aesop’s	famous	words:	“Little	by	little	does	the	trick.”
In	terms	of	further	learning,	I	recommend	that	as	soon	as	possible	you
attend	an	experiential	ACT	workshop.	Reading	books,	listening	to	CDs,	and
watching	DVDs	are	valuable,	but	they	can’t	compare	to	actually	attending
live	training	and	applying	these	six	core	processes	to	yourself.	In	appendix	2
of	this	book,	I’ll	talk	about	where	you	can	find	training	and	supervision,	and
I’ll	also	recommend	a	variety	of	books,	CDs,	and	DVDs	that	can	take	you
into	ACT	in	more	depth.
Parting	Words
The	hardest	part	of	writing	this	book	was	choosing	what	to	leave	out.	There	is
so	much	more	I’d	like	to	share	with	you,	but	if	I	did,	this	book	would	be	ten
times	the	size	it	is	now!	So	with	great	reluctance,	I’ll	leave	you	now	with	a
few	parting	words.
Be	yourself
If	you	try	to	do	ACT	interventions	by	parroting	them	word	for	word	from
books,	there’s	a	good	chance	they’ll	come	out	stilted	or	artificial.	Modify	and
adapt;	use	your	own	words	and	your	own	style;	be	creative	and	innovative	if
you	wish	to.	VERY	IMPORTANT:	if	anything	I	suggest	in	this	book	doesn’t
suit	you,	either	modify	it	or	leave	it	out.	If	you	read	a	few	ACT	books,	and/or
attend	a	few	different	workshops/demonstrations,	you’ll	see	wildly	different
ways	of	doing	ACT	as	well	as	a	vast	array	of	different	styles	and	techniques.
That	is	because	ACT	is	a	process-based	model,	not	a	technique-based	model.
So	the	way	that	you	do	ACT	with	your	clients	will	inevitably	be	different	than
the	way	that	others	do	it.	(Isn’t	it	great	we	can	all	be	individuals?)
At	the	same	time,	make	sure	you	attune	and	adapt	to	your	clients’	needs.
For	example,	your	style	may	be	to	do	brief	therapy,	but	there’s	no	virtue	in
moving	quickly	if	your	client	is	not	ready	for	it	or	feels	invalidated	by	it.
Likewise,	there’s	no	virtue	in	moving	slowly	or	“hanging	back”	when	your
client	is	ready	and	eager	for	change	and	willing	to	do	what’s	necessary.
Practice,	Practice,	Practice
Whoever	said	“Practice	makes	perfect”	was	lying!	But	practice	does	lead	to
improvement.	So	if	you	haven’t	done	any	of	the	homework	in	this	book,
please	take	a	look	at	what’s	stopping	you.	Have	you	fused	with	thoughts	such
as	
Too	hard,	Too	busy,	Do	it	later
?	Or	are	you	trying	to	avoid	the	inevitable
feelings	of	anxiety	that	come	when	you	take	risks,	face	challenges,	or	try	out
new	behaviors?	Have	a	look	at	your	barriers	in	terms	of	FEAR—and	respond
with	DARE.	Remember,	the	more	you	apply	ACT	in	your	own	life	to	deal
with	your	own	issues,	the	more	naturally	it	will	come	to	you	in	the	therapy	or
coaching	room.
Make	Mistakes
I’ve	said	it	before	and	I’ll	say	it	again:	you	will	make	mistakes	and	screw
up.	This	is	an	inevitable	part	of	learning.	So	when	it	happens,	practice	ACT
on	yourself.	Thank	your	mind	for	the	“lousy	therapist”	story	or	the	“too	hard”
story.	Breathe	into	your	frustration,	anxiety,	disappointment,	and	make	room
for	it.	Have	compassion	for	yourself.
Then	reflect	on	what	you’ve	done	and	learn	from	it	so	that	you	and	others
can	benefit	from	the	experience.
Come	Back	to	Your	Values
And	again	and	again,	come	back	to	your	values.	Connect	with	why	you
moved	into	this	profession	in	the	first	place:	your	desire	to	help	others,	your
desire	to	make	a	difference,	your	desire	to	make	the	world	a	better	place.	And
take	the	time	to	appreciate	the	privilege	of	our	work:	the	unique	opportunity
we	have	to	see	deeply	into	the	hearts	and	souls	of	others,	and	to	help	them
connect	with	those	healing	places	inside	themselves.
Appendix	1.	Case	Conceptualization	Made
Simple
This	is	a	very	basic	guide	to	case	conceptualization.	(There	are	far	more
sophisticated	tools	available;	this	one	is	designed	to	get	you	“up	and	running”
quickly.)	You	can	download	this	sheet	from	
www.actmadesimple.com
,	and	I
encourage	you	to	print	out	twenty	copies	and	use	one	for	each	of	your	next
twenty	sessions.	I	guarantee	that	doing	so	will	give	you	a	big	boost	in	terms
of	understanding	and	applying	this	model.
A	QUICK	GUIDE	TO	ACT	CASE	CONCEPTUALIZATION
1
.	
What	valued	direction	does	the	client	want	to	move	in?
(What	domain	of	life	and	what	values	seem	most	important
to	this	client?	Does	she	have	any	values-congruent	goals?)
2
.	
What	stands	in	the	client’s	way?	
(Identify	the	barriers	to
valued	living:	fusion,	avoidance,	and	unworkable	action.)
1
.	
What	is	he	fusing	with?	
(Identify	 problematic	 fusion,
including	reasons,	rules,	judgments,	past,	future,	and	self-
description.)
What	is	she	avoiding?	
(Identify	 thoughts,	 feelings,
memories,	urges,	sensations,	and	emotions	that	this
client	is	trying	to	avoid	or	get	rid	of.)
2
.	
What	unworkable	actions	is	he	taking?	
(What	is	the	client
doing	that	makes	his	life	worse	or	keeps	him	stuck?)
You	can	use	the	diagram	below	to	help	you	plan	your	next	session.	Write
down	any	metaphors,	exercises,	questions,	techniques,	or	worksheets	that	you
could	use	in	the	next	session	to	help	your	client	make	a	workable	shift.
Appendix	2.	Resources
There	are	now	a	wealth	of	resources	for	ongoing	learning	and	training	in
ACT.	Here	are	a	few	ideas	to	get	you	started.
Section	A:	Resources	by	Dr.	Russ	Harris
Books
Harris,	Russ,	
ACT	with	Love
	(Oakland,	CA:	New	Harbinger,	2009)
ACT	with	Love
	is	an	inspiring	and	empowering	self-help	book	that	applies
the	principles	of	ACT	to	common	relationship	issues,	and	details	how	to
move	from	conflict,	struggle,	and	disconnection	to	forgiveness,	acceptance,
intimacy,	and	genuine	loving.	It	also	functions	as	a	step-by-step	clinical	guide
for	therapists	wishing	to	use	ACT	for	relationship	problems,	and	is	linked	to
its	own	resource-packed	website:	
www.act-with-love.com
.
Harris,	Russ,	
The	 Happiness	 Trap
	(Wollombi,	NSW,	Australia:	Exisle
Publishing,	2007)
The	Happiness	Trap
	translates	ACT	into	simple	everyday	language	and
practical	user-friendly	exercises.	It	is	a	self-help	book	written	for	everyone
and	anyone,	applicable	to	everything	from	work	stress	to	major	depression.
It’s	widely	used	by	ACT	therapists	and	their	clients	all	around	the	world,	and
is	 currently	 translated	 into	 twelve	 different	 languages.	 A	 website
—
www.thehappinesstrap.com
—offers	many	free	resources	to	use	with	the
book.
CDs	and	MP3s
Mindfulness	Skills:	Volume	1
	&	
Mindfulness	Skills:	Volume	2
Available	as	either	CDs	or	downloadable	MP3	files,	these	volumes	cover	a
wide	range	of	mindfulness	exercises	for	use	by	you	or	with	your	clients.	You
can	order	them	via	
www.actmadesimple.com
	(or	if	you	live	in	Australia,	via
www.actmindfully.com.au
).
Online	Resources
This	 book	 is	 linked	 to	 the	 ACT	 Made	 Simple	 website	 a
www.actmadesimple.com
.	On	this	site,	you’ll	find	many	free	resources,
including	downloadable	copies	of	all	the	handouts	in	this	book.	You’ll	also
find	some	valuable	online	training	in	the	form	of	E-courses	and	webinars.
Workshops
Russ	runs	ACT	training	workshops	around	the	world.	For	details	of
Australian	workshops,	visit	
www.actmindfully.com.au
.	For	workshops	in
other	countries,	you’ll	find	information	on	
www.actmadesimple.com
.
Newsletter
The	
Happiness	Trap	Newsletter
	is	a	regular,	free,	e-mail	newsletter,	packed
with	useful	information,	tools,	and	tips	relating	to	ACT.	You	can	register	for	it
under	the	main	menu	at	any	of	the	websites	mentioned	above.
Section	B:	General	Resources
ACT	Textbooks	and	Self-Help	Books
A	wide	range	of	ACT	textbooks	and	self-help	books	now	exists	with	the
majority	of	them	published	by	New	Harbinger.	Visit	the	New	Harbinger
website	at	
www.newharbinger.com
,	or	go	to	
www.amazon.com
	(or	some
other	large	website	that	sells	a	wide	range	of	books)	and	do	a	search	for	titles
on	“acceptance	and	commitment	therapy.”	These	textbooks	are	all	very	good,
and	they	cover	the	application	of	ACT	to	a	wide	range	of	issues	and
conditions,	from	chronic	pain	and	PTSD	to	depression	and	anxiety	disorders.
These	three	books	stand	out	as	particularly	relevant	to	new	ACT	practitioners:
Hayes,	Steven	C.,	Kirk	Strosahl,	and	Kelly	Wilson,	
Acceptance	 and
Commitment	Therapy:	An	Experiential	Approach	to	Behavior	Change
	(New
York:	Guilford	Press,	1999)
This	is	the	ground-breaking	theoretical	and	philosophical	text	that	first
introduced	ACT	to	the	world,	and	you’ll	find	it	widely	cited	in	every	other
textbook	on	ACT.
Luoma,	Jason	B.,	Steven	C.	Hayes,	and	Robyn	D.	Walser,	
Learning	ACT
(Oakland,	CA:	New	Harbinger,	2007).
This	step-by-step,	skills-training	manual	for	ACT	therapists	lives	up	to	its
description	as	“the	most	comprehensive	guide	to	utilizing	ACT	in	your
clinical	practice.”
Ramnerö,	Jonas,	and	Niklas	Törneke,	
The	 ABCs	 of	 Human	 Behavior:
Behavioral	 Principles	 for	 the	 Practicing	 Clinician
	(Oakland,	CA:	New
Harbinger,	2008)
This	is	an	excellent	book	on	the	science,	theory,	and	philosophy	underlying
ACT:	functional	contextualism,	applied	behavioral	analysis,	and	relational
frame	theory	(RFT).
DVDs
You	can	also	buy	DVDs	showing	how	to	do	ACT	with	clients:	the	series	is
collectively	known	as	
ACT	In	Action
	by	Steven	C.	Hayes	(Oakland,	CA:	New
Harbinger,	2008).
Professional	Organization:	ACBS:	Association	for	Contextual	Behavioral
Science
Membership	in	ACBS	includes	the	following:
Opportunities	to	participate	in	the	online	ACT	and/or	RFT
communities,	where	you	can	share	ideas	and	receive	advice
from	ACT	therapists	and/or	RFT	researchers	all	around	the
world.
Extensive	resources	for	clinicians,	including	articles,	videos,
podcasts,	handouts,	protocols,	papers,	and	even	PowerPoint
presentations	on	ACT/RFT.
Opportunity	to	list	yourself	as	an	ACT	therapist	on	the
official	worldwide	ACT	website.
Help	in	finding	an	ACT	therapist	or	a	supervisor,	or	an	ACT
workshop	near	you.
And	much	more	…
Consider	joining	ACBS,	which	the	parent	organization	of	ACT	and	RFT.
ACBS	membership	operates	on	a	system	called	“voluntary	dues.”	That	means
you	pay	whatever	you	think	it’s	worth.	(There	is	a	minimum	fee	of	$1	to	join.)
If	you’re	not	sure	you	want	to	join,	take	a	look	at	what	ACBS	has	to	offer	at
contextualpsychology.org
.
RFT	Tutorial
If	you	want	to	learn	about	RFT,	the	post-Skinnerian	behavioral	theory	of
language	and	cognition	that	underlies	ACT,	then	a	good	starting	point	is	the
free	online	tutorial	available	at	
contextualpsychology.org/rft_tutorial
.
References
Bach,	P.,	&	Hayes,	S.	C.	(2002).	The	use	of	acceptance	and	commitment	therapy	to	prevent	the	rehospitalization	of	psychotic
patients:	A	randomized	controlled	trial.	
Journal	of	Consulting	&	Clinical	Psychology,	70
,	1129–1139.
Bach,	P.,	&	Moran,	D.	J.	(2008).	
ACT	in	Practice
.	Oakland,	CA:	New	Harbinger.
Bond,	F.	W.,	&	Bunce,	D.	(2000).	Mediators	of	change	in	emotion-focused	and	problem-focused	worksite	stress	management
interventions.	
Journal	of	Occupational	Health	Psychology,	5
(1),	156–163.
Brann,	P.,	Gopold,	M.,	Guymer,	E.,	Morton,	J.,	&	Snowdon,	S.	(2007–09).	Forty-session	acceptance	and	commitment	therapy
group	for	public-sector	mental	health	service	clients	with	four	or	more	criteria	of	borderline	personality	disorder.	A	program
of	Spectrum:	The	Borderline	Personality	Disorder	Service	for	Victoria	(Melbourne,	Victoria,	Australia).
Branstetter,	A.	D.,	Wilson,	K.	G.,	Hildebrandt,	M.,	&	Mutch,	D.	(2004,	November).	Improving	psychological	adjustment	among
cancer	patients:	ACT	and	CBT.	Paper	presented	at	the	meeting	of	the	Association	for	Advancement	of	Behavior	Therapy,
New	Orleans,	LA.
Brown,	R.	A.,	Palm,	K.	M.,	Strong,	D.	R.,	Lejuez,	C.	W.,	Kahler,	C.	W.,	Zvolensky,	M.	J.,	et	al.,	(2008).	Distress	tolerance
treatment	for	early-lapse	smokers:	Rationale,	program	description,	and	preliminary	findings.	Behavior	Modification,	32(3),
302–332.
Dahl,	J.,	Wilson,	K.	G.,	&	Nilsson,	A.	(2004).	Acceptance	and	commitment	therapy	and	the	treatment	of	persons	at	risk	for	long-
term	disability	resulting	from	stress	and	pain	symptoms:	A	preliminary	randomized	trial.	
Behavior	Therapy,	35
(4),	785–801.
Dalrymple,	K.	L.,	&	Herbert,	J.	D.	(2007).	Acceptance	and	commitment	therapy	for	generalized	social	anxiety	disorder:	A	pilot
study.	Behavior	Modification,	31,	543–568.
Eifert,	G.,	&	Forsyth,	J.	P.	(2005).	
Acceptance	and	commitment	therapy	for	anxiety	disorders.
	Oakland,	CA:	New	Harbinger.
Feldner,	M.,	Zvolensky,	M.,	Eifert,	G.,	&	Spira,	A.	(2003).	Emotional	avoidance:	An	experimental	test	of	individual	differences
and	response	suppression	using	biological	challenge.	
Behaviour	Research	and	Therapy,	41
(4),	403–411.
Frankl,	V.	(1959).	
Man’s	search	for	meaning
.	New	York:	Simon	&	Schuster.
Gaudiano,	B.	A.,	&	Herbert,	J.	D.	(2006).	Acute	treatment	of	inpatients	with	psychotic	symptoms	using	acceptance	and
commitment	therapy:	Pilot	results.	Behaviour	Research	and	Therapy,	44(3),	415–437.
Gifford,	E.	V.,	Kohlenberg,	B.	S.,	Hayes,	S.	C.,	Antonuccio,	D.	O.,	Piasecki,	M.	M.,	Rasmussen-Hall,	M.	L.,	et	al.	(2004).
Acceptance	theory–based	treatment	for	smoking	cessation:	An	initial	trial	of	acceptance	and	commitment	therapy.	
Behavior
Therapy,	35
,	689–706.
Gratz,	K.	L.,	&	Gunderson,	J.	G.	(2006).	Preliminary	data	on	an	acceptance-based	emotion	regulation	group	intervention	for
deliberate	self-harm	among	women	with	borderline	personality	disorder.	
Behavior	Therapy,	37
(1),	25–35.
Gregg,	J.	A.,	Callaghan,	G.	M.,	Hayes,	S.	C.,	&	Glenn-Lawson,	J.	L.	(2007).	Improving	diabetes	self-management	through
acceptance,	mindfulness,	and	values:	A	randomized	controlled	trial.	Journal	of	Consulting	and	Clinical	Psychology,	75(2),
336–343.
Harris,	R.	(2006).	Exercise	from	Russ	Harris’s	Introductory	ACT	Workshop	handout.
Harris,	R.	(2007).	
The	happiness	trap:	Stop	struggling,	start	living.
	Wollombi,	NSW,	Australia:	Exisle	Publishing.
Harris,	R.	(2008a).	ACT	in	a	Nutshell.	E-course	from	
thehappinesstrap.com
.
Harris,	R.	(2008b).	An	Interview	with	Steven	Hayes.	
The	Happiness	Trap	Newsletter,
	November	2008.
Harris,	R.	(2009).	
ACT	with	Love
.	Oakland,	CA:	New	Harbinger.
Hayes,	S.	C.,	Barnes-Holmes,	D.,	&	Roche,	B.	(Eds.).	(2001).	
Relational	frame	theory:	A	post-Skinnerian	account	of	human
language	and	cognition
.	New	York:	Kluwer	Academic/	Plenum	Publishers.
Hayes,	S.	C.,	Bissett,	R.,	Roget,	N.,	Padilla,	M.,	Kohlenberg,	B.	S.,	Fisher,	G.,	et	al.	(2004).	The	impact	of	acceptance	and
commitment	training	and	multicultural	training	on	the	stigmatizing	attitudes	and	professional	burnout	of	substance	abuse
counselors.	
Behavior	Therapy	35
(4),	821–835.
Hayes,	S.	C.,	Bond,	F.	W.,	Barnes-Holmes,	D.,	&	Austin,	J.	(2006).	
Acceptance	and	mindfulness	at	work
.	New	York:	The	Haworth
Press.
Hayes,	S.	[C.],	Masuda,	A.,	Bissett,	R.,	Luoma,	J.,	&	Guerrero,	L.	F.	(2004).	DBT,	FAP,	and	ACT:	How	empirically	oriented	are
the	new	behavior	therapy	technologies?	
Behavior	Therapy,	35
,	35–54.
Hayes,	S.	C.,	Strosahl,	K.	D.,	&	Wilson,	K.	G.	(1999).	
Acceptance	and	commitment	therapy:	An	experiential	approach	to
behavior	change.
	New	York:	Guilford	Press.
Hayes,	S.	C.,	Wilson,	K.	W.,	Gifford,	E.	V.,	Follette,	V.	M.,	&	Strosahl,	K.	(1996).	Experiential	avoidance	and	behavioral
disorders:	A	functional	dimensional	approach	to	diagnosis	and	treatment.	Journal	of	Consulting	and	Clinical	Psychology,
64(6),	1152–1168.
Kabat-Zinn,	J.	(1990).	
Full	catastrophe	living
.	New	York:	Dell	Publishing.
Lindsley,	O.	R.	(1968).	Training	parents	and	teachers	to	precisely	manage	children’s	behavior.	Paper	presented	at	the	C.	S.	Mott
Foundation	Children’s	Health	Center,	Flint,	MI.
Lundgren,	T.,	Dahl,	J.,	Yardi,	N.,	&	Melin,	J.	(2008).	Acceptance	and	commitment	therapy	and	yoga	for	drug	refractory	epilepsy:
A	randomized	controlled	trial.	Epilepsy	and	Behavior,	13(1),	102–108.
Mandela,	N.(1994).	
Long	walk	to	freedom
.	London:	Time	Warner	Book	Group.
Ossman,	W.	A.,	Wilson,	K.	G.,	Storaasli,	R.	D.,	&	McNeill,	J.	W.	(2006).	A	preliminary	investigation	of	the	use	of	acceptance	and
commitment	therapy	in	group	treatment	for	social	phobia.	
International	Journal	of	Psychology	and	Psychological	Therapy,
6,
	397-416.
Ramnerö,	J.,	and	N.	Törneke.	(2008).	
The	ABCs	of	human	behavior:	Behavioral	principles	for	the	practicing	clinician
.	Oakland,
CA:	New	Harbinger.
Robinson,	P.	(2008).	Integrating	acceptance	and	commitment	therapy	into	primary	pediatric	care.	In	L.	A.	Greco	&	S.	C.	Hayes
(Eds.),	Acceptance	and	mindfulness	treatments	for	children	and	adolescents	(pp.	237–261).	Oakland,	CA:	New	Harbinger.
Strosahl,	K.	D.	(2004).	ACT	with	the	multi-problem	client.	In	Steven	C.	Hayes	&	Kirk	D.	Strosahl	(Eds.),	
A	practical	guide	to
acceptance	and	commitment	therapy
	(pp.	209–244).	Oakland,	CA:	New	Harbinger.
Strosahl,	K.	D.	(2005,	July).	Workshop	on	ACT	as	a	brief	therapy.	Presented	at	the	ACT	Summer	Institute,	Philadelphia,	PA.
Strosahl,	K.	D.,	Hayes,	S.	C.,	Wilson,	K.	G.,	&	Gifford,	E.V.	(2004).	An	ACT	primer.	In	Steven	C.	Hayes	and	Kirk	D.	Strosahl
(Eds.),	
A	practical	guide	to	acceptance	and	commitment	therapy
	(pp.	31–58).	Oakland,	CA:	New	Harbinger.
Tapper,	K.,	Shaw,	C.,	Ilsley,	J.,	Hill,	A.	J.,	Bond,	F.	W.,	&	Moore,	L.	(2009).	Exploratory	randomised	controlled	trial	of	a
mindfulness-based	weight	loss	intervention	for	women.	Appetite,	52,	396–404.
Titchener,	E.	B.	(1916).	
A	textbook	of	psychology.
	New	York:	MacMillan.
Twohig,	M.	P.,	Hayes,	S.	C.,	&	Masuda,	A.	(2006).	Increasing	willingness	to	experience	obsessions:	Acceptance	and	commitment
therapy	as	a	treatment	for	obsessive-compulsive	disorder.	Behavior	Therapy,	37(1),	3–13.
Walser,	R.	D.,	&	Westrup,	D.	(2007).	
Acceptance	and	commitment	therapy	for	the	treatment	of	post-traumatic	stress	disorder	and
trauma-related	problems.
	Oakland,	CA:	New	Harbinger.
Wegner,	D.	M.,	Erber,	R.,	&	Zanakos,	S.	(1993).	Ironic	processes	in	the	mental	control	of	mood	and	mood-related	thought.
Journal	of	Personality	&	Social	Psychology,	65
(6),	1093–1104.
Wenzlaff,	R.	M.,	&	Wegner,	D.	M.	(2000).	Thought	suppression.	
Annual	Review	of	Psychology,	51
,	59–91.
Zettle,	R.	D.	(2003).	Acceptance	and	commitment	therapy	vs.	systematic	desensitization	in	treatment	of	mathematics	anxiety.	The
Psychological	Record,	53(2),	197–215.
Zettle,	R.	D.	(2007).	
ACT	for	depression.
	Oakland,	CA:	New	Harbinger.
