2
3
Copyright © 2014 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved. Except
as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication
may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, including, but not limited
to, the process of scanning and digitization, or stored in a database or retrieval system,
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Electronic edition published 2014.
ISBN: 978-1-4338-1679-6 (electronic edition).
Published by
American Psychological Association
750 First Street, NE
Washington, DC 20002
www.apa.org
To order
APA Order Department
P.O. Box 92984
Washington, DC 20090-2984
Tel: (800) 374-2721; Direct: (202) 336-5510
Fax: (202) 336-5502; TDD/TTY: (202) 336-6123
Online: 
www.apa.org/pubs/books
E-mail: 
order@apa.org
In the U.K., Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, copies may be ordered from
American Psychological Association
3 Henrietta Street
Covent Garden, London
WC2E 8LU England
Cover Designer: Minker Design, Sarasota, FL
Cover art: 
Breton Girls Dancing, Pont-Aven,
 Collection of Mr. and Mrs. Paul Mellon,
Photograph Copyright 2001 Board of Trustees, National Gallery of Art, Washington,
1888, oil on canvas, .730 × .927 (28¾ × 36½); framed: .613 × .1.060 × .035 (24⅛ × 41¾
× ⅜). Reprinted with permission.
The opinions and statements published are the responsibility of the authors, and such
opinions and statements do not necessarily represent the policies of the American
Psychological Association.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hill, Clara E., 1948-
 Helping skills : facilitating exploration, insight, and action / Clara E. Hill. — Fourth
4
edition.
   pages cm
 Includes bibliographical references.
 ISBN-13: 978-1-4338-1678-9
 ISBN-10: 1-4338-1678-4
 1.
 
Counseling. 2.
 
Counseling psychology. 3.
 
Helping behavior.
 
I. Title.
BF636.6.H55 2014
158.3—dc23
2013033731
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A CIP record is available from the British Library.
Fourth Edition
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14345-000
5
To my husband, Jim Gormally,
my fellow traveler in the process of learning helping skills;
to my children, Kevin and Katie, who have tested my helping skills;
and to my students, who have taught me how to teach helping skills.
6
Contents
PREFACE
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I
Overview
Chapter 1.
 
Introduction to Helping
What Is Helping?
Is Psychotherapy Effective?
Facilitative Aspects of Helping
Problematic Aspects of Helping
When Do People Seek Help From Others?
On Becoming a Helper
Overview of This Book
DVDs
Concluding Comments
What Do You Think?
Chapter 2.
 
An Overview of the Helping Process
Assumptions Underlying the Three-Stage Model
The Three-Stage Model
Facilitative Conditions
A Model for the Process and Outcome of Helping
Concluding Comments
What Do You Think?
Chapter 3.
 
Ethical Issues in Helping
General Ethical Principles
Ethical Issues for Beginning Helpers
Working Through an Ethical Dilemma
Concluding Comments
What Do You Think?
Chapter 4.
 
Self-Awareness
Self-Knowledge and Self-Insight
State of Heightened Self-Focus
What Do You Think?
Chapter 5.
 
Cultural Awareness
7
Defining Culture
Dimensions of Culture
Cultural Issues in the Helping Process
Ethical Behavior Related to Culture
Becoming a Culturally Competent Helper
Difficulties Helpers Have Related to Cultural Issues
My Own Experiences of Culture
What Do You Think?
II
Exploration Stage
Chapter 6.
 
Overview of the Exploration Stage
Theoretical Background: Rogers's Client-Centered Theory
Goals for the Exploration Stage
Exploration Stage Skills
Concluding Comments
What Do You Think?
Chapter 7.
 
Skills for Attending, Listening, and Observing
Overview of Attending, Listening, and Observing
Cultural Issues in Attending, Listening, and Observing
Relax and Be Natural but Professional
Nonverbal Behaviors That Facilitate Attending
Paraverbal Behaviors That Facilitate Attending
Behaviors That Facilitate Active Listening and Observing
Examples of Inappropriate and Appropriate Attending,
Listening, and Observing
Difficulties Helpers Experience in Attending, Listening, and
Observing
Concluding Comments
What Do You Think?
Chapter 8.
 
Skills for Exploring Thoughts and Narratives
Rationale for Exploring Thoughts and Narratives
Restatements and Summaries
Open Questions and Probes for Thoughts
Closed Questions About Thoughts
Disclosures of Similarities
A Comparison of Skills for Exploring Thoughts
What Do You Think?
Chapter 9.
 
Skills for Exploring Feelings
Rationale for Exploring Feelings
Cultural Considerations in Working With Feelings
8
Reflection of Feelings
Disclosure of Feelings
Open Questions and Probes About Feelings
Focusing
A Comparison of Skills for Exploring Feelings
What Do You Think?
Chapter 10.
 
Integrating the Skills of the Exploration Stage
Choosing Goals to Facilitate Exploration
Choosing Skills to Match the Goals and Intentions
Implementing the Skills of the Exploration Stage
The Process of the Exploration Stage
Cultural Considerations
Difficulties Implementing the Exploration Stage
Coping Strategies for Managing Difficulties
Example of the Exploration Stage
What Do You Think?
III
Insight Stage
Chapter 11.
 
Overview of the Insight Stage
What Is Insight?
Theoretical Background: Psychoanalytic Theory
Developing Conceptualizations About Client Dynamics
Goals and Skills of the Insight Stage
Concluding Comments
What Do You Think?
Chapter 12.
 
Skills for Challenging Clients and Fostering Awareness
Rationale for Using Challenges
Theoretical Perspectives on Challenges
Types of Challenges
Guidelines for Presenting Challenges
Difficulties Helpers Experience Using Challenges
What Do You Think?
Chapter 13.
 
Skills for Facilitating Insight
Open Questions and Probes for Insight
Interpretations
Disclosures of Insight
What Do You Think?
Chapter 14.
 
Skills for Immediacy
Types of Immediacy
Rationale for Using Immediacy
9
Guidelines for Using Immediacy
Example of Immediacy
Difficulties Helpers Have in Using Immediacy
What Do You Think?
Chapter 15.
 
Integrating the Skills of the Insight Stage
Steps for Integrating Insight Skills
Caveats About Using Insight Skills
Cultural Considerations
Difficulties Helpers Might Experience in the Insight Stage
Strategies for Overcoming Difficulties in Implementing the
Insight Stage
Example of an Extended Interaction in the Insight Stage
What Do You Think?
IV
Action Stage
Chapter 16.
 
Overview of the Action Stage
Rationale for the Action Stage
Deterrents to Action
Philosophical Underpinnings
Markers for Knowing When to Move to Action
Theoretical Background: Behavioral and Cognitive Theories
Goals of the Action Stage
Skills of the Action Stage
What Do You Think?
Chapter 17.
 
Steps for Working With Four Action Tasks
Relaxation
Behavior Change
Behavioral Rehearsal
Decision Making
What Do You Think?
Chapter 18.
 
Integrating the Skills of the Action Stage
Implementing the Action Skills
Difficulties Helpers Might Experience in the Action Stage
Strategies for Overcoming the Difficulties
What Do You Think?
V
Integration
Chapter 19. Putting It All Together: Working With Clients in the Three-Stage Model
Session Management
10
Dealing With Difficult Clients and Clinical Situations
Example of an Extended Interaction
Concluding Comments
What Do You Think?
GLOSSARY
REFERENCES
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
FEEDBACK FORM
11
Preface
M
y interest in training helpers has developed from teaching helping skills
classes to undergraduate and graduate students for more than 40 years. When I
first taught these courses, I felt frustrated in trying to find the right textbook
that would embody my philosophy of helping and address the needs of my
students. Few, if any, helping skills texts integrate the importance of affect,
cognition, and behavior in the process of change. Some concentrate on feelings
while disregarding the role of challenge and action in facilitating critical life
changes, whereas others highlight insight at the expense of affective exploration
and behavior change. Several popular texts focus solely on a problem-solving
approach, which neglects the critical role of affect in helping clients express,
understand, and alter that with which they are dissatisfied in their lives. Other
books do not provide the crucial theoretical and empirical foundation for the
helping skills. To address these limitations, I used the knowledge garnered from
my experiences as a student, teacher, counselor, supervisor, and researcher to
write a book that teaches helpers to assist clients in exploring their feelings and
thoughts, gaining new insights about their problems, and moving toward
positive behavior changes.
My Philosophy of Helping
This text introduces an integrated model that is grounded in practice, theory,
and research. Grounding the model in practice and theory is important to take
advantage of the work of accomplished clinicians and theoreticians who have
articulated a rich theoretical knowledge base. Rogers, Freud, Bowlby, M.
Erikson, Mahler, Skinner, Ellis, Beck, and others have provided brilliant insights
into the nature of human beings, the mechanisms of change in counseling and
therapy, and the techniques for assisting individuals to achieve their potential
and accomplish their goals. The three-stage model is grounded in the
contributions of these sage theorists, and readers are introduced to the salient
aspects of their work.
The model involves three stages: exploration, insight, and action. The
12
exploration stage is based on client-centered theory (e.g., Rogers, 1942, 1951,
1957, 1959). Psychoanalytic and interpersonal theories (e.g., Freud, 1940/1949;
Teyber, 2006; Yalom, 1980) form the foundation for the insight stage. The
action stage is based on behavioral (e.g., Goldfried & Davison, 1994; Kazdin,
2013; Watson & Tharp, 2006) theories. These major theories are integrated in
this three-stage model because all have proven to be effective in helping clients
(see Wampold, 2001).
The helping process can be conceptualized as involving moment-by-
moment interaction sequences (Hill, 1992). Helpers develop intentions for how
they want to help clients. These intentions are based on what they know about
clients and what they hope to accomplish with clients at a given time. With
these intentions in mind, helpers select verbal and nonverbal skills with which to
intervene. In turn, clients react to the interventions in ways that influence how
they then choose to behave with helpers. Thus, helping involves not only the
overt behaviors but also the cognitive processes of helpers (i.e., intentions) and
clients (i.e., reactions). Awareness of intentions assists helpers in selecting
effective interventions. In addition, attention to the clients’ reactions to the
interventions can aid helpers in planning future interventions.
Finally, I sought to write a book that both supports students’ development
as helpers and provides challenges to facilitate the development of helping skills.
Becoming an effective helper is an exciting and challenging process. For some,
this undertaking can be life changing. Many students are fascinated by the
process of becoming helpers, and they pose thoughtful questions as they struggle
to learn the skills and develop confidence in their ability to assist others. Because
the focus of this book is on helpers (not clients), I pose many questions that
relate to the helpers’ development and concomitant feelings and thoughts.
What This Text Does Not Provide
It seems necessary to clarify the focus of this book by also indicating what this
text does not provide. It is beyond the scope of this book to provide information
about counseling children, families, or clients who have serious emotional or
psychological difficulties. Although the helping skills taught in this book are
crucial and form the foundation for work with all these groups, helpers will need
much more extensive and specialized training before they will be qualified to
work with these groups.
Furthermore, I do not address the diagnosis of psychological problems or
identify characteristics of psychopathology, which are two important topics that
require extensive additional training. I encourage helpers to pursue additional
training in assessment and psychopathology after developing a working
13
knowledge of basic helping skills. I believe that all helpers, even those working
with healthy populations, should be able to recognize serious psychological
disorders. This level of knowledge aids helpers in making appropriate referrals
and working only with clients they have been trained to assist.
Goals for This Book
I have several goals for this book. After reading it, students should be able to
articulate the principles of the integrated three-stage model of helping as well as
the theoretical and research foundations underlying this model. They should
demonstrate an understanding of the interactional sequences of helping,
including the intentions that helpers have for interventions with clients, the
helping skills that are commensurate with these intentions, the possible reactions
and behaviors demonstrated by clients, and the means through which helpers
evaluate the interventions used. In addition, readers should gain a better
understanding of themselves in relation to becoming helpers, including their
thoughts about helping as well as their strengths and areas for continued growth.
Finally, I hope to instill enthusiasm for the process of learning to help others—
an enterprise that is certain to provide countless challenges and rewards
throughout a lifetime.
Changes in the Fourth Edition
I continue to modify the model as I teach and do research on helping skills. I
have also obtained extensive feedback from students about what they find
helpful. The model feels like a living thing because of how I continually find
ways to improve it. The fourth edition of this book differs from the first three
editions in several ways:
I have added a separate chapter on self-awareness. Although covered
before, I wanted to highlight this topic given its importance for helper
growth.
I have also added a separate chapter on cultural awareness. Students
have been hungry for more information about the role of culture in the
helping process. Although we are at an early stage in terms of
understanding culture, we need to be aware of its role and sensitive to
different reactions of clients based on their cultural backgrounds.
I have added a greater variety of methods that helpers can use to
challenge in the chapter on that topic.
14
I continue to try to make the action stage clearer and easier to use.
A summary of a specific research study has been added to each chapter,
with highlights about how the results enhance our understanding of
the role of helping skills in the helping process.
There is now a glossary of the key words so that readers can refer to it
when confused by some of the jargon. Much of learning any new
system involves learning the language, so we want to make this as easy
as possible.
Resources
As with the previous editions, this fourth edition of 
Helping Skills
 offers a Web-
based “Instructor and Student Resource Guide”
(
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
), the student portion of which features a
dozen Web Forms (in downloadable PDFs) that are referred to throughout this
text to assist students in evaluating their helping skills and helper–client sessions.
The Web Forms page also includes an Emotion Words Checklist—a
downloadable version of this edition’s 
Exhibit 9.2
 (see 
Chapter 9
)—that
students have found helpful to have handy in a printed format for easy reference
during the exploration stage of a helper–client relationship. In addition, the
student resources section of the 
Helping Skills
 Web site includes downloadable
versions of the Labs for various chapters, as well as Practice Exercises for each of
the skills chapters of the book.
In addition, two DVDs are available to demonstrate the model. 
Helping
Skills in Practice: A Three-Stage Model
 was created to illustrate the three stages of
working with a client struggling with concerns related to childhood, eating, and
self-esteem. 
Dream Work in Practice
 was created to illustrate the three stages with
a client who had a troubling recurrent dream. Both DVDs are available from the
American Psychological Association.
15
Acknowledgments
I
 am grateful to the following students who worked with me extensively in
researching different aspects of the different editions of this book: Jennifer
Dahne, Judith Gerstenblith, Jennifer Jeffery, and Eric Spiegel.
I am also grateful to the many people who have read selected chapters or all
of the book and provided valuable feedback on at least one of the editions:
Rebecca Adams, Margaret Barott, Kevin Cramer, Elizabeth Doschek, Jessica
England, Lisa Flores, Suzanne Friedman, Judy Gerstenblith, Melissa Goates,
Julie Goldberg, Jim Gormally, Allison Grolnick, Kelly Hennessey, Beth
Haverkamp, Jeff Hayes, Debby Herbenick, Pamela Highlen, Merris
Hollingworth, Gloria Huh, Skyler Jackson, Ian Kellems, Kathryn Kline, Sarah
Knox, Misty Kolchakian, Jim Lichtenberg, Rayna Markin, John Norcross,
Kathy O’Brien, Sheetal Patel, David Petersen, Jennifer Robinson, Missy
Roffman, Katherine Ross, Pat Spangler, Jessica Stahl, Nicole Taylor, Barbara
Thompson, Linda Tipton, Terry Tracey, Jonathan Walker, Heather Walton,
and Elizabeth Nutt Williams. There are also numerous anonymous reviewers
who have read and reviewed the book for the American Psychological
Association and provided invaluable feedback.
I have profited considerably from the editorial feedback, guidance, and
encouragement of Beth Beisel, Dan Brachtesende, Amy Clarke, Beth Hatch,
Phuong Huynh, Linda McCarter, Peter Pavilionis, and Susan Reynolds—all
from the American Psychological Association Books program—on the various
editions of the book.
I am most indebted to the many students in my undergraduate course in
helping skills and graduate course in theories and strategies of counseling over
the past several years. They have taught me a tremendous amount about how to
teach helping skills with their willingness to challenge my ideas, offering
thoughtful perspectives on the process of becoming helpers and providing
examples for the text. I tried out all the chapters and the lab exercises on many
classes before including them in the book. Finally, and with much gratitude, I
recognize and acknowledge my therapists, professors, and supervisors, who
served as wonderful models for how to use helping skills and provided much
encouragement throughout my process of becoming a helper. I particularly want
to acknowledge Bill Anthony (who studied with Robert Carkhuff), from whom
16
I first learned helping skills many years ago in graduate school. I clearly recall the
heady times of coming to believe that I could help clients if I applied the helping
skills.
17
18
Nothing in life is achieved without effort, daring to take risks, and often some suffering.
—Erich Fromm
Angeli was a stellar student and athlete. She was president of her high school class and
had been accepted into an elite eastern university. By any standard, she was an
exceptional and talented individual with much promise. However, after arriving at
college, Angeli began to feel sad. Much to the dismay of her family, teachers, and
friends, she lost interest in interacting with others, studying for her classes, and
attending track practice. Angeli’s track coach encouraged her to meet with a helper, who
helped Angeli explore her feelings and gain understanding of the issues underlying her
sadness and inactivity. Angeli felt supported, cared for, and challenged by her helper.
The helping relationship enabled her to express, understand, struggle with, and
overcome the feelings of inadequacy, loneliness, and loss that emerged when she left
home for college.
A
s you read about Angeli and think about what it would be like to be her
helper, you may have contradictory thoughts and feelings. You may feel
confident that you could help someone like Angeli because you have listened to
and advised friends and family members about similar problems. But you may
also feel anxiety about knowing how to help her explore her feelings, gain
understanding, and work to get back her confidence.
If you are interested in learning more about the skills that would help you
work with someone like Angeli, you have come to the right place. The first
purpose of this book is to provide you with a theoretical framework that you can
use to approach the helping process. The second purpose is to teach you specific
skills to use in sessions with clients to help them explore, gain insight, and make
changes in their lives. The third purpose is to get you started in the process of
coming to think of yourself as a helper.
This chapter provides an introduction to the helping process, defines
helping, and reviews facilitative and problematic aspects of helping. I talk about
what makes people seek out professional helpers, and that leads naturally to a
19
discussion about the effectiveness of helping. Next, I introduce the idea of
becoming a helper, specifically exploring the healthy and unhealthy motivators
for helping other people. Finally, I describe the organization of the book and
discuss how it can best be used.
Welcome aboard! I hope you enjoy learning and using helping skills as
much as I have.
What Is
 
Helping?
Helping
 is a broad and generic term that includes the assistance provided by a
variety of individuals, such as friends, family, counselors, psychotherapists, and
human service providers. I use this broad term (rather than the more specific
terms 
counseling
 and 
psychotherapy
) because not everyone learning these skills is
in a program that offers training and credentialing to become a mental health
professional. Of course, these same skills are used by counselors and
psychotherapists, but you cannot call yourself a counselor or psychotherapist
until you have had further training, practice, and supervision and pass a
credentialing examination.
Throughout this book, then, the term 
helper
 refers to the individual
providing assistance, and the term 
client
 refers to the person receiving support.
Helping
 can be defined as one person assisting another in exploring feelings,
gaining insight, and making changes in his or her life. Helpers and clients work
together to achieve these outcomes, with helpers guiding the process and clients
deciding what, when, and how they want to change.
When I talk in this book about trainees who are learning helping skills
practicing with each other or with volunteer clients, I refer to the process as
helping.
 In contrast, when I talk about clients seeking help from professionals, I
use instead the terms 
counseling
 (or 
counselor
) and 
psychotherapy
 (or 
therapist
 or
psychotherapist
).
Students often ask about the differences between counseling and
psychotherapy. At times, the two are differentiated by length of treatment
(counseling may have fewer sessions than does psychotherapy), by clientele
(counseling is more often used with relatively “healthy” individuals who have
issues with adjustment, whereas psychotherapy serves those who have more
serious pathology or unresolved conflicts), by qualifications of the provider
(counselors may have master’s or doctoral degrees, whereas psychotherapists
tend to be doctoral-level practitioners), and by types of problems presented in
sessions (counseling may deal with development and life transition issues,
whereas psychotherapy may address more serious psychological disturbances).
However, in fact, I know of no empirical evidence that counseling and
20
psychotherapy can be distinguished in terms of the processes or outcomes.
Is Psychotherapy Effective?
Investigators have overwhelmingly concluded that psychotherapy is generally
helpful. Most clients improve by the end of psychotherapy. Specifically,
Wampold (2001), in his review of the literature, found that the average client
who was in psychotherapy was psychologically healthier than were 79% of
untreated individuals. Wampold concluded that “psychotherapy is remarkably
efficacious” (p. 71).
Once researchers established conclusively that psychotherapy in general is
indeed helpful, they began to examine the relative effectiveness of different types
of therapy. To date, hundreds of studies have compared different types of
treatment (e.g., client-centered, psychodynamic, cognitive–behavioral,
experiential), but no one type of therapy has been found to be more effective
than others (Lambert, 2013; Wampold, 2001; Wampold et al., 1997).
Wampold noted, however, that the treatments studied were all sanctioned forms
of treatment rather than fringe or quack forms of treatment, so these results may
not hold for nonmainstream treatments. Similarly, no differences have been
found between individual and group treatments (Piper, 2008; M. L. Smith,
Glass, & Miller, 1980). The findings from this area of research have been
humorously summarized using the dodo bird verdict from 
Alice in Wonderland:
“Everyone has won and all must have prizes” (Carroll, 1865/1962, p. 412).
It is probably hard to understand how therapies that are so different can all
lead to the same outcomes. Many different reasons have been proposed for the
lack of differences across approaches. The most currently popular explanation is
that factors involved in all types of mainstream approaches (i.e., common
factors) lead to positive outcomes. Frank and Frank (1991) discussed six factors
that are common across psychotherapies: the therapeutic relationship,
instillation of hope, new learning experiences, emotional arousal, enhancement
of mastery or self-efficacy, and opportunities for practice. Thus, although
therapists from different orientations espouse different philosophies and use
somewhat different skills, the most important factor may be what therapists do
in common.
Another explanation for the lack of differences among psychotherapeutic
approaches is that client and therapist factors explain more of the variance than
do treatment types (again, see Wampold, 2001). Thus, differences among
therapists and clients may be more important than the approach used.
Yet another explanation (and one that I personally prefer) is that our
research is still at a rather primitive state and that our tools for examining the
21
process and outcome of therapy are not sophisticated enough to pick up the
differences between approaches. It is quite possible that all approaches can be
helpful and lead to similar outcomes but do so through different mechanisms.
For example, experiential therapy might heal through allowing deep immersion
into feelings, which then leads the client to change thoughts and behaviors. By
contrast, cognitive–behavioral therapy might begin with changes in thoughts
and behaviors, which in turn lead to a change in emotions. Furthermore,
different therapists and clients may prefer approaches that fit with their
worldviews and personality styles.
Another interesting line of research involves how many psychotherapy
sessions are needed to reduce psychological distress and return the client to
normal psychological functioning (e.g., Grissom, Lyons, & Lutz, 2002;
Howard, Lueger, Maling, & Martinovich, 1993; Kopta, Howard, Lowry, &
Beutler, 1994). In their reviews of a large number of studies, these researchers
proposed three phases of the psychotherapeutic recovery process. In the first
phase, clients change rapidly in terms of feeling subjectively better. In the
second, slower phase, there is a remediation of symptoms such as depression and
anxiety. In the third and slowest phase, there is rehabilitation of troublesome,
maladaptive behaviors that interfere with life functioning in areas such as family
and work. Clients with minimal distress improve fairly quickly, whereas clients
with chronic characterological problems (i.e., innate, severe, ongoing, and
difficult-to-treat disorders) require the greatest number of sessions to return to
normal functioning.
In his review, Lambert (2013) found that 50% of clients who were in the
dysfunctional range at the beginning of therapy achieved clinically significant
change after 20 sessions of therapy. He noted, however, that it takes more than
50 sessions for 75% of initially dysfunctional clients to reach clinically
significant change. It is interesting that positive mental health is rarely
mentioned in these studies but is an important index of outcome.
Facilitative Aspects of Helping
There are a number of ways in which helping can be facilitative. For people in
emotional pain, helping can provide 
support and relief.
 For example, Jillian and
Jesse went to couples counseling because Jillian had been involved in a sexual
relationship with a colleague. Both Jillian and Jesse were extremely hurt and felt
angry with each other. Positive changes in their relationship came after months
of working on communication skills, receiving assistance in exploring feelings,
understanding the factors related to the affair, and learning how to work
proactively to improve their relationship. After several sessions, Jillian and Jesse
22
were able to communicate their feelings more openly, grieve the loss of trust in
their relationship, and move toward rebuilding their lives as a cohesive and
caring couple. They felt that their therapist had been supportive, and they felt
relief from the problems for which they sought therapy.
Through the process of helping, clients can also 
gain insight,
 such that they
come to understand themselves in new ways. For example, in her book about
serving as a psychologist in Iraq, Kraft (2007) described the process of therapy
working with a soldier who could not walk even though the medical doctors
found no physiological reason for this inability (a condition called 
conversion
hysteria
). After establishing a good relationship with the soldier, Kraft was able
to help the soldier talk about losing a friend who died trying to shield him from
danger. Once the soldier gained insight into the reason for his symptom, he was
able to walk again. It is interesting to note that many of Freud’s first patients
similarly had conversion hysteria and were healed through catharsis and insight.
In addition, helping can assist individuals in dealing with 
existential concerns
(i.e., who am I, where am I going, and what do I want out of life?). As Socrates
said, “The unexamined life is not worth living.” Helping can promote proactive
involvement in life when these questions are asked, reflected on, and answered.
For example, Max was referred for helping because of failing grades, poor peer
relationships, and generalized sadness. After several sessions, Max began to
address critical questions regarding how he might live his life, the fears he often
confronts within himself, and the salience of his relationships with others.
Helping provided him with an opportunity to look within himself, discover
what was important, and then make decisions about how to change his
unhealthy behaviors.
Moreover, clients can 
learn skills
 needed to live more effectively and reach
their potential. These skills may include learning how to communicate with
others, practicing ways to resolve conflicts, becoming more assertive, identifying
decision-making strategies, studying more effectively, learning to relax, or
changing unhealthy habits (e.g., rarely exercising; having unprotected,
anonymous sex). Often, these skills can alleviate the powerlessness that
individuals feel when they are unable to communicate their emotions directly
and can assist clients in engaging more fully in their lives.
Helping can also assist individuals in 
making decisions
 about the direction of
their lives. The most effective helpers have the ability to assist individuals in
determining goals that are consistent with their dreams, values, and abilities. For
example, Mai Lin came to counseling because she was uncertain about whether
she should move far away from her family and end her relationship with her
live-in boyfriend. She described her current situation and asked the helper to tell
her what the best path for her would be. After dealing with her anger and
frustration at the helper for not providing the answers, Mai Lin was able to
explore her unwillingness to take responsibility for the direction of her life and
23
her reluctance to address the questions that plagued her. She contemplated her
fear of taking action and of making wrong decisions and connected this with
feelings of helplessness she had experienced as a child of a battered woman.
Further exploration of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors provided her with the
desire to make small decisions (with the support and encouragement of her
helper). Soon, Mai Lin was able to progress to more challenging decisions (e.g.,
ending her romantic relationship, moving across the country alone to explore
her independence and to understand herself better).
An additional facilitative aspect of helping involves helpers 
providing
feedback
 about how clients appear to others, information that others might
hesitate to provide. For example, a client who is having difficulty maintaining
relationships may be able to hear (from the helper) that he appears dependent
and needy in sessions and may want to examine whether these behaviors are
present in other relationships. When phrased in a gentle manner, honest
feedback can sometimes be extremely helpful in motivating individuals to
change.
Helping also can enable a client to 
experience a healthy, nondamaging,
intimate relationship with another person.
 Sometimes the helping process involves
a corrective relational experience (something like reparenting) in that a caring
relationship with a helper alleviates some of the hurtful and unhealthy
interactions experienced with important figures early in life. For example,
Kondja came to helping because she felt depressed and lacked direction in her
life. She believed that her mother did not want her as a child, and she cried
when she saw mothers and daughters who were connected and loving with one
another. Kondja had been in a series of relationships in which she felt ignored,
alone, uncared for, and discounted. During the helping process, Kondja
experienced the helper as unconditionally accepting, actively listening, and
genuinely caring. The development of a supportive relationship with a helper
assisted Kondja in healing past wounds, drinking less alcohol to numb her
feelings, and developing healthy relationships in which she valued herself
enough to ensure that her needs were met.
Finally, effective helping teaches clients to 
function on their own.
 Similar to
the way children grow up and leave their parents, clients also need to leave their
helpers after engaging in the helping process. Perhaps some of you have tried to
teach another person to skate: You hold the person up, and she or he hangs on
while making a first attempt at skating. In time, the person begins to skate
alone. The steps that the learner makes on his or her own are rewarding not only
for the learner but also for you as the teacher. The same is true with helping:
Providing the initial support and teaching the skills are most effective when
individuals internalize the messages and take off on their own.
24
Problematic Aspects of Helping
Although helping is usually beneficial, there are a few potentially problematic
aspects. Sometimes helping can provide 
just enough relief to enable people to stay
in maladaptive situations or relationships.
 For example, battered women’s shelters
provide needed safety and security to abused women and their children.
However, some shelter workers have observed that occasionally they provide just
enough assistance to enable women to return to the abusive situation. When the
workers in one shelter confronted this “enabling” in themselves and discussed
these behaviors with the residents, some of the battered women were able to
identify their pattern of seeking shelter during the abusive periods and returning
home in the “honeymoon” period. Without this insight, helping could have
enabled some of the women to continue in a potentially deadly cycle.
Another potential problem is that helping can create 
dependency
 if clients
rely too much on their helpers for support and feel unable to explore feelings or
make changes in their lives without assistance from the helper. For example,
Kathleen might decline a spontaneous invitation to join her new partner’s family
on Cape Cod for a week because her helper is on vacation and unavailable for
consultation. Helpers sometimes facilitate dependency by providing clients with
“the answers” to their problems (e.g., if her helper told Kathleen not to go to
Cape Cod). Effective helpers understand that providing the answers does not
typically help clients; rather, most clients need to participate actively in a process
whereby they uncover new insights and discover which actions feel best for
themselves. This strategy works because only clients fully know the situations,
experience the associated feelings, and have the best answers to the presenting
problems. In addition, advising others may be problematic when the solution
does not fit with what they want or think they need. Many of us have made
suggestions to family members or friends about how to handle difficult
situations, only to find that our advice was not exactly what they wanted to hear.
For example, a helper advised a client to stay away from her boyfriend who
broke up with her because he was not good enough for her. Although the client
was eager at the time to hear about how rotten the boyfriend was, she resented
the helper’s critical words about her sweetheart when they later got back
together.
In addition, 
helpers’ personal issues sometimes place them at risk for
encouraging dependency in those they assist.
 For helpers who are lonely and
isolated, their clients’ dependency may fulfill personal needs that are not being
met elsewhere. Helpers who have not developed a network of social support and
personal relationships may be at special risk of encouraging their clients to rely
extensively on them.
Another problematic aspect of helping emerges when 
helpers unduly impose
25
personal or societal values on their clients
 (McWhirter, 1994). Although all of us
have values that shape who we are, the goal of helping is to encourage clients to
explore and choose their own values. Examples of undue influence are when a
helping professional attempts to alter the sexual orientation of people who are
lesbian, gay, or bisexual (Haldeman, 2002); advises parents to raise their
children in a certain religion because the helper believes that problems in
families result from children not having a strong religious foundation; or states
that women should not work outside the home because they take jobs away
from qualified men who have families to raise. These examples all involve the
helper attempting to force his or her values on the client.
Values can also be imposed at a more subtle level. In an investigation of
Carl Rogers providing therapy, Truax (1966) found that in fact Rogers was
more reinforcing of some client behaviors than others. For example, Rogers
responded with more empathy and warmth when the client expressed insight,
but with less empathy and warmth when the client was ambiguous. In other
words, even Rogers, who worked hard to be accepting and empathic,
demonstrated that he valued certain client behaviors over others. These results
show that it is difficult to leave our biases behind.
It can also be problematic when 
helpers work outside their areas of competence
(e.g., working with someone who has substance abuse but not having knowledge
about that area). Similarly, helpers sometimes try to force clients to explore
difficult topics, such as sexual abuse, without making sure that clients feel safe
and have the necessary emotional regulation skills to explore such topics. Finally,
it can be difficult when helpers are paired with clients with whom they do not
“click.” As in friendships, one needs to have a certain “clicking” with one’s
helper to feel comfortable enough to talk about one’s problems. Without that
matching, clients can become discouraged and actually feel more distressed
because they might feel that no one can understand and help them.
When Do People Seek Help From Others?
Two factors seem to be necessary for people to seek help (Gross & McMullen,
1983). First, a person must become aware that she or he is in pain or is facing a
difficult situation and then must perceive her or his feelings or situation as being
problematic. Obviously, the perception of pain varies from person to person,
such that what is unbearable for one person is easily tolerated or ignored by
another person.
Second, the pain must be greater than the perceived barriers to seeking help.
Sometimes the barriers involve practical considerations, such as the time or
money required to obtain help; but often the obstacles are emotional and can
26
include fears about exploring problems deeply or concerns about the opinions of
others regarding people who seek therapy.
Many people hesitate to seek professional help (Gross & McMullen, 1983)
because they feel embarrassed or ashamed about asking for assistance or believe
that seeking help constitutes emotional weakness or inadequacy (Shapiro, 1984).
Many Americans, for example, believe that individuals should rely solely on
themselves and that all problems should be solved individually. Given these
beliefs, it is not surprising that researchers have found that people seek help first
from friends and family members and only last from professionals (Snyder, Hill,
& Derksen, 1972; Tinsley, de St. Aubin, & Brown, 1982; Webster & Fretz,
1978).
Some people are concerned about talking with others because they feel that
no one else can possibly understand their situation (e.g., Thomas thought that
no one could understand his experience growing up in a religious cult). Others
fear a punitive response or a value judgment regarding their thoughts, feelings,
or actions (e.g., Candace felt that she would be judged for having had two
abortions). Furthermore, some people may be concerned that they will be
labeled 
mentally ill
 and thus be subject to the many negative stereotypes and
stigma associated with this label (Hill et al., 2012; D. Sue, Sue, & Sue, 1994).
Some clients may be hesitant to seek therapy because they rely on their
insurance companies to pay for therapy: They may be concerned that the stigma
associated with receiving therapy could have negative ramifications for obtaining
insurance or employment in the future.
For example, Conchita came to her first session of psychotherapy because
she was experiencing multiple stressors: Her mother had committed suicide 3
years earlier, her sister had been diagnosed with depression, she was failing all of
her courses (previously, she had been an 
A
 student), her first serious boyfriend
had broken up with her, and she was pregnant. For some time, Conchita had
felt that she should handle her problems by herself because she feared what
others might think of her if they knew that she needed to see a therapist.
Moreover, she was on a limited budget and was reluctant to pay for therapy.
However, Conchita had begun to feel that she could no longer cope with her
problems by herself. Her brother had gone to a therapist and felt better, so she
thought that going to a therapist might work for her. Thus, Conchita sought
help because she perceived herself as having problems and she believed that the
potential benefits associated with therapy (e.g., emotional support, assistance
with coping) outweighed the costs (e.g., financial expense, perceived stigma).
Individuals in considerable pain who are able to admit their need for
psychological assistance have made significant progress toward obtaining the
help they need. Support from friends and family can provide the encouragement
these individuals need to contact trained helpers (Gourash, 1978). For example,
Joe was reluctant to seek help after his wife of 40 years died. His friends and
27
children encouraged him to attend a support group for adults who had lost their
partners. Although initially reluctant, Joe was so upset about his loss that he
agreed to participate in the group sessions if his daughters would accompany
him. The support his family and friends provided enabled Joe to access the help
that he needed.
Helpers can work to change negative attitudes about seeking professional
psychological assistance in our society. We can begin by seeking help ourselves
and encouraging others to seek help when needed. We can also work to initiate
and support legislation for additional mental health benefits. In addition, we can
work to educate the public by publicizing information about mental health
treatments. Finally, we can do research to discover more about the process and
outcome of helping endeavors and disseminate these research findings to the
public.
On Becoming a Helper
The model I promote in this fourth edition of 
Helping Skills
 describes three
components to being a successful helper: helping skills, self-awareness, and a
facilitative attitude. See 
Figure 1.1
 for the connections among these three
components.
28
FIGURE 1.1
Components needed for effective helping.
I propose first of all, however, that the “wannabe helper” begins with a
natural inclination toward helping. She or he has taken on a helping role in
many situations early in life, friends and family find him or her to be helpful,
and she or he has emotional intelligence along with a passion for helping others.
As a part of helping others, the wannabe helper has naturally learned
communication skills that are helpful, although the person may not be aware of
how she or he comes across to others and can sharpen the skills.
This natural inclination is augmented by learning and practicing helping
skills until they become an integral part of who we are, even when those
behaviors initially feel awkward and forced. Many effective helpers have stories
about their initial attempts at assisting others. For example, when one person
first started studying helping behaviors, her father was undergoing heart surgery.
She spoke with him every day and asked him how he was feeling. After weeks of
this, he asked her whether she really wanted to know how he was feeling.
“Finally!” she thought, “he’ll share his innermost feelings with me.” Her father
said he was feeling as though he liked her a lot more before she began studying
helping skills.
Many of your friends and family may have similar reactions as you begin to
learn helping skills. This may initially be discouraging, but it may help to know
that most effective helpers practice these behaviors for many years before
comfortably integrating them into their interactions with clients. In fact, some
helpers discover that during the process of becoming a helper, their helping skills
and confidence get worse before they get better. This down-and-up pattern
29
makes sense given that trainees learn that not all of their old communication
styles work, and they feel temporarily awkward until the new patterns become
integrated into their own personal style. Similarly, Goldfried (2012) talked
about how, when learning a new behavior, people move from unconscious
incompetence (i.e., they are not aware of what they do not know or cannot do)
to conscious incompetence (i.e., they become aware that they are not very good
at the skills and thus their confidence dips) to conscious competence (i.e., they
become skilled but behave in a self-conscious manner) to unconscious
competence (i.e., the skills recede into the background, and they have increased
self-efficacy).
In addition to the natural inclination and knowledge of skills, helpers must
have self-awareness. 
Chapter 4
 describes self-awareness as both a trait (i.e., self-
knowledge and self-insight about general personality characteristics or
motivations) and a state (i.e., an in-the-moment understanding of what one is
feeling and perceiving). Self-awareness is crucial so that helpers know what is
going on inside themselves and can then separate out how they are reacting to
clients. Otherwise, helpers might act out on impulses and reactions of which
they are unaware and harm clients. Hence, self-awareness seems to be a
foundation for effective interventions.
Similarly, having a facilitative attitude toward the specific client in the
specific moment is a necessary foundation. Facilitative attitudes include
empathy, warmth, genuineness, compassion, and nonjudgmentalness. These
facilitative conditions are not something that helpers possess generally but rather
are something that helpers feel in the moment toward specific people. These
facilitative conditions naturally fluctuate across and within clients.
This model suggests that some people are more oriented than others toward
becoming helpers. These people then work to gain general self-knowledge about
who they are as people and as helpers, and they work to become more skilled as
helpers. And then within a specific session with a client, they work to become
aware of feelings and perceptions, and they strive to have a facilitative attitude.
In other words, it is not enough just to know the skills, because skills
implemented without self-awareness and facilitative attitudes would be noxious
and unhelpful. Likewise, having just self-awareness and a facilitative attitude
would be nice, but it would not be very helpful, because the person would not
know how to communicate and intervene with clients. Thus, helpers need to be
self-aware so as not to inappropriately use clients, they need to genuinely care
about the client, and they need to know how to use helping skills to help clients.
Overview of This Book
30
ORGANIZATION
The 
second chapter
 in 
Part I
 of this book provides an overview of the helping
process in terms of the three-stage model and a description of the components of
helping. 
Chapter 3
 provides an overview of ethical issues involved in helping.
Chapter 4
 involves a discussion of self-awareness (including both self-knowledge
and in-the-moment awareness). 
Chapter 5
 introduces the important topic of
cultural awareness.
Parts II
, 
III
, and 
IV
 present more description of the exploration, insight,
and action stages, respectively. In each part, an overview chapter highlights the
theoretical foundation and the goals of the stage. The chapters that follow the
overview chapter focus on skills that can be used to accomplish specific goals
within the given stage. At the end of each part, a chapter addresses the
integration of the skills taught for that stage and presents clinical issues that arise
in implementing the stage. Finally, 
Part V
 involves integrating the skills into
ideas for how to conduct sessions with clients. Issues that arise in helping
sessions (e.g., beginning a session, termination) are discussed.
Please note that a lot of examples are used throughout the book to make the
points come to life. Some examples are based on real people (names have been
changed to protect the identities of those involved); other examples are
completely fictitious, created to illustrate a given point.
RESEARCH SUMMARIES
In each of the chapters, there is a special section summarizing the results of an
applicable research investigation. Given the importance of an evidence base for
helping, some knowledge of research studies is valuable. I encourage readers to
study these research summaries carefully and think about the evidence. In
addition, given that the establishment of an empirical foundation is in its
infancy, I strongly encourage readers to conduct research of their own so that we
can have evidence about how to modify psychotherapy and training.
EXPERIENTIAL COMPONENT
Reading about helping skills is important, but reading alone will not make you
an effective helper. Many students have said that when they did the reading, the
skills sounded easy, but when they tried to actually practice doing the skills, they
came to realize how difficult it is to use them and use them effectively.
Acquiring extensive knowledge about helping, although important, is only
the first step in your journey toward helping others. Probably the best way for
you to learn the skills is first to read and study the text and then try to apply
what you have learned by answering questions about the material and by
participating in practice helping exercises and lab experiences. The following
sections describe the ways in which you can use this book to maximize your
31
growth as a helper.
What Do You Think?
Several questions are provided at the end of each chapter to stimulate your
thinking about the text material. I strongly feel that it is important for students
to debate the issues raised in this book rather than slavishly accepting everything
written here. There are few hard-and-fast “truths” or rules related to helping
skills; rather, many of the issues are matters of taste, style, or art, and trainees
need to think for themselves about how they want to be as helpers. I encourage
you to contemplate each question and discuss your answers with your
classmates.
Practice Exercises
Practice exercises provide readers with the opportunity to think about and
formulate responses to hypothetical client situations before practicing the skills
in the lab setting. You can practice by downloading the PDF of the practice
exercise from the student resources area of the 
Helping Skills
 (4th ed.) website
(
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
), writing down an intervention for each
client situation on the Practice Exercise sheet, and then comparing your answers
with the suggestions for possible responses (remembering that these are just
suggestions).
Laboratories
The companion website for this book (
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
)
contains downloadable lab exercises so that beginning helpers can practice
helping skills in dyads or small groups. These labs are ones that I have used over
the years in both my undergraduate- and graduate-level helping skills classes, so
they have been tested and seem to work (although of course, instructors should
feel free to modify these labs to fit their own preferences and situations). You
can download the labs from the student resources area of the website.
During labs, helpers are asked to practice the skills with peers who act as
clients presenting real or role-played problems. Observers take careful notes and
attend to the helper’s ability to deliver a particular skill, so that they can provide
feedback to the helper. Thus, everyone has an opportunity to experience the
roles of helper, client, and observer for each skill. At the end of each lab in the
personal reflections section, students are asked to think about their ongoing
development as helpers.
Disclosure During Lab Exercises
The success of the lab experiences depends partly on the participants’ willingness
32
to reveal information about personal topics. It is preferable for participants to
discuss personal topics for two reasons. First, helpers have difficulty learning
what is effective when “clients” are not responding genuinely. Second, “clients”
often are unable to provide useful feedback to helpers about what is helpful and
how the interventions feel if they are not discussing real problems. When role-
playing, “clients” are often more involved in trying to think of how the person
they are pretending to be might feel or behave than in immersing themselves in
the immediate experience.
As clients, however, students should disclose only about easy, safe topics.
Students should never disclose about deep topics, even if they are comfortable
disclosing, because their classmates will not be comfortable trying to help them,
and it takes the focus too much off the helper learning helping skills and on the
helper trying to help the client. At times, students might start talking about an
issue they think is safe but then become uncomfortable, either because of the
depth of the topic or because they do not feel comfortable with the helper. I
stress that students always have the right (without jeopardy or prejudice) to
indicate that they choose not to explore a particular issue further.
At this point, it may be helpful to note that the “Ethical Principles of
Psychologists and Code of Conduct” (American Psychological Association,
2010, Standard 7.04) indicates that
psychologists do not require students or supervisees to disclose personal information in
course- or program-related activities, either orally or in writing, regarding sexual history,
history of abuse and neglect, psychological treatment and relationships with parents, peers
and spouses or significant others except if (1) the program or training facility has clearly
identified this requirement in its admissions and program materials or (2) the information is
necessary to evaluate or obtain assistance for students whose personal problems could
reasonably be judged to be preventing them from performing their training- or professionally
related activities in a competent manner or posing a threat to the students or others. (p. 9)
This guideline was established to educate people about the perils of
requiring disclosure. Thus, although I recommend easy, safe, nondeep disclosure
because it typically facilitates the training process, I urge both instructors and
students to be alert for possible negative effects.
If students are not willing to disclose personal information, they can role-
play a hypothetical client. In such cases, they should not reveal whether the
problem is role-played or real—in this way no one ever knows whether the
person is actually disclosing or whether the problem is role-played, thus
preserving confidentiality.
Exhibit 1.1
 provides topics that students have discussed. Although a topic
may be “safe” for many people, it may not be comfortable for an individual
student, so trainees must think about what they want to discuss. Students may
want to refer to this list throughout the semester when a topic is needed for the
lab exercises.
33
EXHIBIT 1.1
Topics for Volunteer Clients to Talk About in the Labs
Ideal Topics
Anxieties about learning helping skills
Worries about performance of helping skills
Academic issues (e.g., studying, test anxiety)
Career; future plans
Choosing a major or graduate program
Pets
Problems at work
Public-speaking anxiety
Roommate issues
Romantic relationships
Feelings about technology
Happy childhood memories
Hobbies and extracurricular activities
Problems with health
Relatively Safe Topics Depending on Client
Minor family issues
Autonomy–independence struggles
Minor relationship concerns
High school experiences
Personal views on alcohol and drugs
Existential concerns (e.g., Who am I? What is the meaning of life, death?)
Financial difficulties
Problems with physical appearance
Moral dilemmas
Topics to Be Avoided
Substance abuse
Fears about going crazy
Traumas (e.g., sexual or physical abuse, rape, victimization, child abuse, serious medical
condition)
Serious problems in romantic relationships
Shameful feelings
Serious family disputes
Sex
Sexual abuse
Suicidal thoughts
Murderous thoughts
Confidentiality During Lab Exercises
34
Although practice sessions might seem somewhat artificial, the information
shared is personal and should be treated in a confidential manner. Helpers
should not disclose information shared in practice sessions without the
permission of the client. Specifically, helpers should only discuss the material
presented in helping sessions with their supervisors and classmates, and then
only when it relates to developing their helping skills. When one respects clients,
they typically respond by sharing personal information and delving into their
thoughts and feelings. Confidentiality of shared information thus provides a
foundation for respectful interactions with others (see extended discussion of
ethical issues related to confidentiality in 
Chapter 3
).
Benefits of Being a Volunteer Client
The primary focus of the lab experiences is on the helper learning the helping
skills. However, students often report that it is beneficial to talk about their
concerns when they participate in the client role and that the experience of being
a client provided them with firsthand exposure as to how it feels to receive the
various helping skills. Moreover, students often develop empathy with their
clients after having experienced what is involved in being a client. Being a
participant in counseling allows students to experience “the other side” of
helping and to gain respect for the courage clients exhibit when they share their
concerns with their helpers. In addition, beginning helpers often report that
watching their helpers provide helping skills can teach them about effective (and
ineffective) helping techniques.
I stress, though, that being a client in practice helping sessions should not
be used as a substitute for seeking counseling or therapy. Students experiencing
personal distress should seek help from a trained and qualified counselor or
therapist. University counseling centers or health services often provide
counseling services for college students at little or no cost and offer an excellent
opportunity for students to learn more about themselves and address salient
issues.
Problems Related to Practicing Skills With Friends During the Labs
Another important issue involves the recognition that problems can occur when
practicing helping skills with classmates who are friends or acquaintances.
During helping sessions with friends, it is a good idea for helpers to pretend that
they know nothing about their friend and respond only to what the “client”
actually reveals during the helping session. Although it is challenging to discount
relevant information, students in my classes have found the lab exercises easier to
perform if they consider only information provided in the practice helping
session. For example, Nancy was practicing her helping skills with her friend,
Katrina, who was bemoaning the fact that her partner had not called her in 2
35
weeks. Although Nancy knew that Katrina’s partner had not called because
Katrina had dated someone else, she focused only on Katrina’s expressed feelings
related to not having contact with her partner. In 
Chapter 3
, I focus more on
ethical issues related to using helping skills with friends outside the lab setting.
Providing Feedback to Peers
Providing feedback is an essential component of training. Helpers appreciate
positive feedback because learning helping skills is challenging, and they
appreciate encouragement when they are on the right track. However, they also
need and want feedback that helps them change and improve their helping
skills. It is enjoyable to have people tell us that we are doing a terrific job as
helpers, but we also need observers to provide concrete recommendations for
how we might improve our skills. Students often feel cheated if they consistently
receive only positive feedback yet also feel wounded if they receive too many
critical comments.
Claiborn, Goodyear, and Horner (2002) recommended providing positive
feedback first and then providing only one piece of constructive feedback. It is
less overwhelming and more feasible to focus on making one change in a given
lab experience rather than trying to fix everything at once. For example, the
observer might say,
You used good attending and listening skills; I particularly liked that you had good steady
eye contact, leaned forward while you were listening, and did not interrupt. One thing I
noticed though that you might think about is that you asked a lot of questions in one
speaking turn, making it hard for the client to know which one to respond to.
Note that the feedback should be stated in behavioral terms (e.g., “You were
looking away a lot and playing with your hair”) rather than in broad and
nonspecific terms (e.g., “You did not connect with the client”). Having clear,
concrete feedback gives the helper specific ideas for how to change.
The best source of feedback is the client who experienced the helper’s
interventions firsthand and experienced whether or not these interventions were
helpful. The next best source of feedback is from observers who have watched
the practice session and see from the outside what was happening. It can be
beneficial for helpers to hear that different people have different responses to the
same intervention, thus emphasizing that there is no one right way to intervene.
DVDs
A new feature of the third edition of the book was an accompanying DVD,
Helping Skills in Practice: A Three-Stage Model.
 For this fourth edition, we have
also produced a DVD of the helping skills model applied to dream work, 
Dream
36
Work in Practice.
 These DVDs can be used to illustrate the three stages of the
helping-skills model. Modeling has been shown to be an effective training tool
(see review by Hill & Lent, 2006), probably because it brings the written word
to life. It is important to remember though that the DVDs provide only two
examples of how to do the three stages. How you implement the three stages
will depend on your style and the needs of the particular client.
Concluding Comments
You are about to embark on an exciting and challenging journey toward
becoming a helper. Although learning helping skills takes time, knowledge, and
a lot of practice, the rewards for integrating helping skills in your personal and
professional repertoire are plentiful. I hope to help you reach your destination of
learning helping skills by focusing on the development of these skills while
providing a theoretical and research foundation for helping behaviors, as well as
by providing exercises to practice these skills.
Effective helping requires practice, and even experienced helpers often
return to the basics to review and refresh skills. To become a good helper, you
will need to continue practicing after this course. It takes many years to become
an expert counselor or therapist (see also Orlinsky & Ronnestad, 2005; Skovholt
& Jennings, 2004), so I encourage you to pursue professional training, and
practice, practice, practice.
I want to end this section by giving a metaphor that a Korean student used.
She likened this book to a Korean bowl of 
bibimbap,
 a dish of rice with various
sautéed and seasoned vegetables and meats that is made by each person as
everyone sits around the table. Each person at the table may construct a slightly
different bowl of 
bibimbap,
 but all might be delicious. Similarly, as you go
through each chapter of the book, you will throw different skills and ideas into
your bowl of 
bibimbap.
 You may agree more with some skills and ideas than
with others, and so you will throw more of these into your bowl (theory).
Ingredients that you do not like, you will not throw in, but you might consider
them more at some other time when you are again constructing your theory. At
the end, you mix all the ingredients together, and you have the beginnings of a
cohesive theory of helping.
I hope this book assists you in learning helping skills and exploring your
potential for, and interest in, becoming an effective helper. Good luck! And
enjoy constructing and sampling your bowl of 
bibimbap.
What Do You Think?
37
Think of a time when you felt helped by someone. What did that
person do that was helpful to you?
Now remember a time when you needed help and the person you
turned to was not at all helpful. What did she or he do to make this
experience unhelpful?
Describe how society perceives those who seek professional help.
How could you help decrease the stigma attached to help-seeking in
our society?
Write a brief job description for a helper. Include personal
characteristics, required training, and job responsibilities. Now,
evaluate yourself in comparison with the description that you
developed.
What would it take for you to seek professional help? Address the
benefits and costs you associate with seeking assistance.
Debate why people want to become helpers.
Identify several current situations in your life in which helping skills
could be used.
In your opinion, what are the top three characteristics of an effective
helper?
38
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Effects of Helping Skills Training
Citation:
 Hill, C. E., Roffman, M., Stahl, J., Friedman, S., Hummel, A., & Wallace, C.
(2008). Helping skills training for undergraduates: Outcomes and predictors of outcomes.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 55,
 359–370.
Rationale:
 We need to know if helping skills training is effective. Do students actually learn
the skills? What predicts who benefits most from training?
Method:
 Undergraduate students from three semester-long helping skills classes (involving
weekly 2-hour lecture/skills demonstrations along with weekly 2-hour labs where students
practiced skills) participated. Students completed ability measures (self-rated empathy, self-
rated perfectionism, and grade-point average) at the beginning of the class so that we could
use these as predictors of who would benefit from training. After every weekly lab, students
completed measures of their confidence in using the helping skills effectively. At the
beginning of the semester and two thirds of the way through the semester, students
completed 20-minute helping sessions with classmates and also completed postsession
measures assessing the helpfulness of these sessions. At the end of the semester, students
reported their current self-efficacy as well as how they felt about their self-efficacy for using
helping skills at the beginning of the semester.
Interesting Findings:
Students reported an increase in confidence about using the helping skills across the course of the semester,
although there was a dip in confidence during the time they were learning insight skills.
As helpers in the helping sessions, students used more exploration skills (e.g., restatements, reflections of feelings)
and rated the quality better in the second helping session than in the first helping session.
Similarly, as volunteer clients, students indicated that their helpers used more exploration skills, rated the quality
of sessions higher, and rated helpers as more empathic in the second helping session than in the first helping
session.
On the basis of codings of transcripts, helpers used more exploration skills and fewer words in the second session
than in the first session.
At the end of the semester, helpers rated themselves as having higher self-efficacy for using the helping skills than
they had at the beginning of the semester.
Self-rated empathy, self-rated perfectionism, and grade-point average were not associated with outcome of
training.
Conclusions:
Helping skills training appears to be effective in terms of students learning exploration skills, becoming more
empathic, talking less in sessions, conducting better sessions, and feeling a sense of self-efficacy for using the skills.
Insight skills are more challenging to learn than are exploration and action skills.
We were not able to predict who benefited from training on the basis of the self-report measures used.
Performance-based measures (e.g., ratings of how prospective helpers behave in helping-like settings) might be
better predictors.
Implications for Training:
It seems justified to train students in helping skills.
BONUS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
39
MATERIALS
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
40
We ought to respect the effect we have on others. We know by our own experience how
much others affect our lives, and we must remember that we in turn must have the
same effect on others.
—George Eliot
A
 theoretical foundation is important for providing an overall picture of the
goals of helping. It also enables helpers to make decisions about how to conduct
helping sessions.
We all have theories and philosophies that guide our behavior, although we
are often not aware of these theories because we have not explicitly examined
them. In this chapter, I present the personal philosophy of human development
and the helping process that I have developed over the years. I hope this
presentation will help each of you think through your beliefs and thus help you
continue to develop your personal philosophy.
The theoretical foundation that I propose in this book is based on an
integration of several major approaches. Given that no differences have been
found among the major theoretical orientations in terms of their effects on
outcome (see Wampold, 2001) and because I find value in all the approaches, I
integrate the best of these approaches in a philosophically consistent way that fits
with my personal style and values. Thus, the three-stage model moves from
exploration (based on client-centered therapy) to insight (based on
psychoanalytic therapy) to action (based on behavioral therapy).
Assumptions Underlying the Three-Stage
Model
41
I believe that people are born with varied potential in the psychological,
intellectual, physical, temperamental, and interpersonal domains. Thus, some
people are genetically more intelligent, attractive, physically strong, active,
verbally articulate, and mechanically adept than are other people. In terms of
temperament, some people are by nature more active, whereas others are more
phlegmatic or slow to warm up. In terms of morality, I do not believe that
people are either inherently good (as Carl Rogers postulated) or inherently
governed by instinctual urges (as Sigmund Freud postulated) at birth. Instead,
once again, I believe that people have certain biological predispositions at birth
and have a tendency toward fulfilling these potentials. How they are developed
depends largely on the environment, to which I turn next.
The environment can enhance or thwart the innate movement toward
survival and development. Healthy environments provide basic biological needs
(e.g., food, shelter) and emotional needs (e.g., relationships characterized by
acceptance, love, support, encouragement, recognition, and appropriate
challenges). No environment is perfect, but the environment needs to be “good
enough” to allow children to grow and develop. In contrast, when negative
things happen in a child’s environment, the child’s development is thwarted. A
child growing up in the midst of war and terrorist attacks has a different view of
life than does a child growing up during peace. Furthermore, either too much
gratification or too much deprivation stunts children’s growth, but an adequate
good-enough amount of support allows children to develop naturally to fulfill
their potential. So resiliency, or the ability to adapt, is both biologically and
environmentally determined.
Early experiences, particularly in terms of attachment to caregivers, are
crucial in laying the foundation for personality. Infants need to be nurtured by
caretakers to have a firm foundation for interpersonal relationships and self-
esteem. If these attachment needs are not met, children become anxious or
avoidant of human contact (Bowlby, 1969, 1988).
People develop defenses to cope with anxiety, particularly during childhood,
when they have less control over their personal destinies (e.g., a child might
learn to withdraw to defend against dominating parents). A moderate level of
defenses is adaptive because one needs strategies to cope with life. These defenses
become problematic, however, when the individual cannot discriminate when it
is appropriate to use defenses. For example, if a child who was abused avoids all
adults, she or he cannot form benevolent relationships with caring people.
Although I strongly believe in the influence of early experiences, I also
believe that we look toward the future in determining what we want out of life.
Thus, we have existential goals, such as figuring out the meaning of life and
determining what we want to accomplish during our lives, that guide our
behavior.
I also believe that people have some degree of control over their lives and
42
over their choices about how they behave. Within limits of what is available, one
makes choices that alter the course of one’s life. For example, although
friendliness is influenced by personality (e.g., introversion vs. extroversion) and
previous experiences with meeting people, a person still has some range of
choices about how she or he acts with others in a new situation. Thus,
determinism is balanced by free will. Furthermore, I believe that free will can be
enhanced if individuals gain insight into their background, needs, and desires.
Understanding enables one to have more control over one’s fate. One can never
have complete control over fate, but one can have some influence through
awareness and conscious effort.
In the United States, there is a strong emphasis on individualism and self-
determination, which often works to the detriment of people who have limited
control over their lives. In that regard, I cringe to hear the phrase that if people
just work hard, they can be successful. From my many years of working in
psychology, I know that most people cannot become wealthy, beautiful, and
successful because of many factors in their biology, upbringing, and
environmental constraints. We can work hard but cannot always achieve
everything we want to because of internal and external constraints.
I also propose that emotions, cognitions, and behaviors are all key
components of personality that are intertwined and operate in combination with
one another. Mind and body cannot be separated. How people think influences
how they feel and behave (e.g., if a person thinks that others are out to get him,
he will feel afraid and back away when another person approaches). How people
feel has an impact on how they think and behave (e.g., if a person feels happy,
she is likely to seek out other people and think that they will like her). Finally,
how people behave affects how they think about themselves and how they feel
(e.g., if a person studies hard and gets good grades, he or she is likely to feel
efficacious and have high self-esteem). Thus, any treatment approach must focus
on all three aspects of human existence (emotions, cognitions, and behaviors) to
help people change.
In summary, I believe that people are influenced by both their biology and
their environment, particularly early experiences that contribute to the
development of attachment to others and self-esteem. Furthermore, although
people are influenced by past experiences, they have some choice and free will
and an impetus to make a difference and have meaning in their lives. It is also
important to recognize that people develop defenses as strategies for coping with
the demands of the world.
I believe that people can change within limits. They cannot discard past
learning or biological predispositions, but they can come to understand
themselves more, live with themselves, have self-compassion, and accept
themselves. They can develop more adaptive behaviors, thoughts, and feelings.
People can adjust to their inner potential, make the best of what they have, and
43
make choices about how they want to live their lives within the limits imposed
by biology, early experiences, and external circumstances. These assumptions
lead to an optimistic, but cautious, view about the possibility of change.
I should emphasize that my philosophy and assumptions are clearly
influenced by my culture. I was born and raised in the United States, where
there is a strong emphasis on individualism and determinism. Had I been born
and raised in another culture, I might well have put more emphasis on harmony
and collectivism. Readers from other cultures should be aware of my biases and
think carefully about the components of this model that fit for them given their
cultural context.
The Three-Stage Model
In this section, I focus on the skills taught in this model. But recall that I
outlined in Chapter 1 that the skills must be intertwined with self-awareness and
facilitative attitudes to yield a productive helping process.
The helping process involves taking clients “down and into” understanding
themselves more and then “up and out” into the world, better able to cope with
problems (Carkhuff, 1969; Carkhuff & Anthony, 1979). Thus, as 
Figure 2.1
illustrates, the helping process involves beginning with exploration, moving to
insight, and then moving to action. In the next section, I list the goals and skills
relevant to each stage and then describe what occurs in that stage. See 
Exhibit
2.1
 for an overview of the stages, goals, and skills.
44
FIGURE 2.1
The three-stage model of helping.
45
EXHIBIT 2.1
Goals and Skills for the Three Stages
It is important to state early on that the stages are not rigid. Helpers do not
need to spend a specific amount of time in each stage, and in fact, in actual
helping, the stages often blur together such that it is hard to know what stage a
helper is in. For training purposes, however, it is useful to think about the
different goals that we have at different times during sessions. Thus, the three-
stage model is a useful philosophical framework to use in understanding the
goals of the overall process, but one need not strictly adhere to a set structure in
using this model.
EXPLORATION STAGE
In the exploration stage, one goal is to attend nonverbally to clients and listen
carefully to everything they say. Helpers attend to and listen through nonverbal
behaviors (e.g., appropriate eye contact, head nods), minimal encouragers (e.g.,
“mm-hmm”), paying attention, and not interrupting. Another goal is to
encourage clients to explore thoughts, which helpers implement through
questions/probes for thoughts and restatements. A third goal is to encourage
exploration of feelings, which helpers do through questions/probes for feelings,
reflections of feelings, and disclosures of feelings.
Exploration is crucial to give clients an opportunity to express their
emotions and to think through the complexity of their problems. Having
another person act as a sounding board or mirror is often helpful because it
allows clients to open up; it is much easier to examine one’s concerns when
another person is actively listening. When clients think about issues by
themselves, they often become blocked by their defenses and anxieties rather
than gaining insight and making changes.
The exploration stage also provides helpers an opportunity to learn more
46
about their clients. Helpers cannot assume that they know clients’ feelings or
problems, even when they are similar in age, race, gender, religion, or sexual
orientation. For example, Jennifer—who was similar in age, race, and gender to
her helper—disclosed that she had just become engaged. The helper had just
recently gotten married and was very happy in her relationship, so she assumed
that Jennifer felt similarly and started congratulating her. Jennifer, however,
broke down in tears and ran out of the room. Fortunately, the helper realized
her mistake, called Jennifer and apologized, and asked her to return for another
session. It turned out that Jennifer felt pressured to get engaged and, in fact, felt
quite ambivalent about the relationship. When the helper could listen without
assumptions, she was able to learn how Jennifer truly felt.
INSIGHT STAGE
The first goal of the insight stage is to foster awareness, which helpers do
primarily through challenges. The second goal is to facilitate insight, which
helpers do through questions/probes for insight, interpretations, and disclosures
of insights. The final goal is to work on the therapeutic relationship, which
helpers do through immediacy (talking in the here-and-now about the
therapeutic relationship).
In the insight stage, helpers collaborate with clients to help them achieve
new understandings about themselves, their thoughts, their feelings, and their
behaviors. They also work to help clients attain new awareness of and take
responsibility for how they perpetuate their problems. Insight is important
because it helps clients see things in a new light and enables them to take
appropriate responsibility and control over problems.
In contrast to the purely client-centered stance in the exploration stage,
helpers work more actively with clients in the insight stage to construct meaning
together. In addition, helpers provide clients with feedback about their behaviors
in sessions and assist clients in understanding how these behaviors have
developed and the function they now serve. By understanding how they are
perceived by their helpers, clients are often better able to understand how other
people react to them. Helpers and clients also sometimes work through
problems that arise in the therapeutic relationship, helping clients have a
corrective relational experience, modeling how to interact with others more
effectively, and working together to attain insight into relationships. Thus, the
relationship itself can be a focus of learning in the insight stage.
ACTION STAGE
The overall goal of the action stage is to help clients explore the idea of changing
and then implement action plans. The major skills for this stage are open
questions/probes for action, giving information, process advisement, direct
47
guidance, and disclosure of strategies. More important, there are four major
types of action plans (relaxation, behavior change, behavioral rehearsal, and
decision making), each of which is implemented through several steps and
several skills.
When clients have some understanding, it is usually easier for them to
change. For example, it was easier for Jacques to take a chance on getting
involved in another relationship once he understood that he became scared of
getting close to others because of his punitive relationship with his mother.
Thus, understanding, however imperfect, guides future behavior. Insight may
also lead to long-lasting change because it provides clients with a template for
making sense out of events and helps them make better choices.
Together, helpers and clients explore the idea of changing, determine
whether or not clients want to change, and explore the meaning of change. They
also might consider possible changes and help the client make decisions about
which changes to pursue. In some cases, helpers teach clients skills needed to
make changes. They also might help clients develop strategies for trying new
behaviors and asking for feedback from others outside the helping relationship.
In addition, helpers and clients continually evaluate the outcome of action plans
and make modifications to assist clients in obtaining the desired outcomes. As in
the first two stages, the process is collaborative. Helpers continue to ask clients
to talk about their feelings related to changing. Again, helpers are not experts
but are guides who assist clients in exploring thoughts and feelings about action
and about making positive changes in their lives.
Psychoanalytic theorists have often assumed that insight naturally leads to
action and thus that helpers do not have to be concerned with encouraging
clients to think about making specific changes. For some clients, this may be
true. However, clients often do not have the skills to behave differently, have
defenses that block them from making changes, and have obstacles in the real
world that make it hard to change. Therefore, they may need help to make the
changes occur. By putting their new ways of thinking into practice, clients are
able to consolidate the changes in their thinking that occurred in the exploration
and insight stages. Without action, changes in thinking (insights) are typically
short-lived.
RELATIONSHIP AMONG THE THREE STAGES
The exploration stage lays the foundation for clients to understand their
motivations and take responsibility for changing. Both helpers and clients need
an adequate understanding of the scope and dynamics of the clients’ problems
before developing an action plan. Unlike radio and television talk show
psychologists who listen for three sentences and then advise clients, helpers rely
on careful, thoughtful listening and probing to help clients fully explore their
48
problems and gain new insights.
Thus, each of the stages in the model is important in the helping process.
Thorough exploration sets the stage for the client to gain insight, and deep
insight prepares the path for the client to make good decisions about action.
Furthermore, making changes encourages the client to begin exploration of
other problems.
It is important to note that all the skills are used in all three stages but to
varying degrees. 
Figure 2.2
 shows that exploration skills are used most in the
exploration stage but are also used quite frequently in the other two stages.
Insight and action skills are used mostly within their own stages but are
sometimes used in the other stages.
49
FIGURE 2.2
Approximate amount of skills used in each stage of the model.
Although it sounds straightforward to move from the exploration stage to
the insight stage and then to the action stage, the process rarely flows so
smoothly with real clients, and stages are not always as differentiated and
sequential as they seem to be when reading about them (
Figure 2.3
 shows some
of the variations on the basic model). Within sessions, helpers and clients
sometimes move back and forth among the stages. For example, helpers often
have to return to exploring new facets of a client’s problem during the insight
and action stages. Furthermore, attaining insight often forces a client to explore
newly recognized feelings and thoughts. Realizing that a client is reluctant to
change in the action stage might necessitate more exploration and insight about
obstacles.
50
FIGURE 2.3
Alternate paths for the three-stage model of helping.
Sometimes action needs to be taken after minimal exploration. For
example, a client may be in crisis and need specific help immediately (e.g.,
discuss plans for the next 24 hours, have the number of a hotline). Or a client
who has medical problems caused by anorexia might first need to learn to eat in
a healthy manner and only later might be ready and able to explore motives
underlying his or her eating disorder. In other cases, clients cannot really explore
until they have been taught to relax. Other clients cannot handle insight and are
resistant to having anyone “poke around in their heads”; they only want
guidance about specific problems. With such clients, helpers may need to move
more quickly to the action stage. However, I caution helpers to explore enough
to make sure they know what is going on, what actions have been tried, and
what help is needed, and also make sure it is for the client’s needs rather than for
the helper’s comfort or preference before they rush to generate possible actions.
In summary, the three-stage model provides an overall road map for the
helping process, but helpers must attend to individual needs of clients and
environmental pressures before determining how to respond at any given
moment. This book is not meant to be a simplistic “cookbook” or manual of
what to do at every specific moment in helping. That would not be possible,
given the infinite number of situations that could arise with different helpers
and clients. Instead, helpers need to think about what they are trying to
accomplish at each point in the helping process, become skilled at delivering the
various possible skills, and then observe the client’s reactions to help devise
better interventions for that particular client.
51
Facilitative Conditions
I postulate that helpers must not only use skills well but must also convey an
attitude of empathy, feel compassion, and collaborate with their clients.
Empathic collaboration and compassion are major features of all three stages of
the model. Because of the importance of these facilitative conditions, I describe
each in more detail.
EMPATHY
Helpers need to try to understand their clients as much as possible, while at the
same time recognizing that it is never possible to fully understand another
person. Empathy involves understanding clients at both a cognitive level (their
thoughts and expressions) and an affective level (their feelings; Duan & Hill,
1996). Empathy also includes genuinely caring about the client,
nonjudgmentally accepting the client, being able to predict the client’s reactions,
and communicating one’s experience to the client in a sensitive and accurate
manner.
Although helpers sometimes feel the same emotions as their clients,
empathy requires that they recognize that the pain, anger, frustration, joy, or
other emotions belong to the client and not to the helper. Empathy is
sometimes confused with a certain way of responding to clients (e.g., using
reflections of feelings), but empathy is not a specific response type or skill;
rather, it is an attitude or manner of responding with genuine caring and a lack
of judgment. Empathy involves a deep respect for clients and for the clients’
willingness and courage to explore their problems, gain insights, and make
changes. This empathic attitude is experienced and also implemented through a
variety of helping skills, depending on what helpers perceive clients as needing at
specific times.
As mentioned earlier, we can never fully understand other people. We can
try to empathize and imagine how the other person feels, but we can never fully
remove ourselves from our own experiences to understand another person
completely. Similarly, although we might try to have unconditional positive
regard (i.e., caring about, understanding, and appreciating clients for who they
are, regardless of how they behave), our regard for clients is usually conditional
(e.g., that they allow us to help them, that they talk openly about their
problems, that they not get angry at us). Unfortunately, we are not always fully
aware of all of our personal issues and the conditions that we place on clients. As
helpers, we need to do our best to form positive therapeutic relationships with
clients; but when we are not able to establish good relationships, we need to
examine our own issues as well as think about how client dynamics might be
influencing the interaction.
52
COMPASSION
Compassion involves feeling aware of and open to suffering without judgment
(Vivino, Thompson, Hill, & Ladany, 2009). Compassion goes beyond empathy
and understanding by genuinely allowing oneself to feel the pain and suffering
and desire to relieve it. Another way to think of compassion is loving kindness,
of genuinely caring about the other person because of who they are, not because
they deserve it or not. Often, we sit in judgment of ourselves and others, and
trying to think about empathy and gaining compassion can help us shift into a
more open and caring posture toward self and others. I have found it
enormously helpful when supervising student therapists to ask them to try to
find their compassion for clients; this exercise allows them to feel into where the
client is hurting.
COLLABORATION
Furthermore, the whole helping process is collaborative in that helpers guide or
coach clients in working through problems. Helpers are not experts in how
clients ought to live their lives, but helpers can be experts at facilitating the
process of helping clients explore feelings and values, achieve understanding, and
make choices and changes. Rather than giving answers to clients, helpers try to
teach clients how to think through problems, make decisions, and implement
changes. This whole model is essentially client-centered in that helpers work
with clients to choose their solutions to the problems they face. A good
metaphor is the parable about teaching a hungry person to fish: Giving someone
a fish feeds the person for one meal, whereas teaching her or him to fish enables
the person to eat for a lifetime.
BEING EMPATHIC, COMPASSIONATE, AND
COLLABORATIVE
Although empathy, compassion, and collaboration are crucial components of
the helping process, they are not specific skills that can be taught directly.
Rather, they are outcomes of the successful implementation of helping skills and
a reflection of an attitude that the helper feels toward the client. As helpers, we
can be knowledgeable about our implementation of verbal and nonverbal
behaviors, aware of how we come across when using these interventions, aware
of our intentions for using different interventions, and aware of client reactions
to these interventions. However, we cannot always control the outcome of the
helping session. We can strive toward empathy and collaboration, but we cannot
always attain these goals because much depends on clients and how well we
“match” or “click” with them. Even so, through knowledge, self-awareness, and
53
a genuine desire to understand, respect, and work with another person,
empathic collaboration is likely to emerge and to be experienced by clients.
A Model for the Process and Outcome of
Helping
Much of what happens in helping situations is so complex that it is often
difficult for helpers, especially beginning helpers, to have a full awareness of the
process. Furthermore, the helping process occurs at many different levels (e.g.,
conscious awareness, unconscious processing) and at lightning speed, which does
not give helpers much time to give conscious thought to every component and
decision that accompanies interactions. Helpers must learn to react quickly
because clients constantly present new needs and challenges.
By looking at the individual components of the process and outcome,
helpers can begin to understand their reactions and responses in different
situations and learn about possible client reactions to interventions. Analyzing
each part of the helping process and outcome initially feels uncomfortable and
cumbersome because beginning helpers are not used to breaking down their
interactions and examining them so carefully. Furthermore, most beginning
helpers are not used to thinking about their reasons for doing things and are not
used to examining the reactions of others. With continued practice, however,
beginning helpers can become more comfortable taking apart and analyzing the
process and then putting it all together again to function in sessions. So let’s
turn to some of the variables that go into the moment-by-moment process.
BACKGROUND VARIABLES
Clients and helpers bring unique ways of viewing the world to the helping
process. They contribute their personalities, beliefs, assumptions about the
world, values, experiences, and cultural and demographic characteristics.
In addition, helpers bring their theoretical orientation (beliefs about how to
help) and their previous experiences in helping (both informal and formal). For
example, one could imagine that an introverted, young, European American
female helper with a psychodynamic theoretical orientation would have a very
different impact on the helping process than would an extroverted, middle-aged,
Iranian American male helper with a cognitive–behavioral theoretical
orientation. Moreover, helpers have preferences and biases related to clients,
which undoubtedly influence their behavior. In 
Chapter 4
, we spend a lot of
time talking about the importance of self-awareness and self-care for helpers.
Similarly, client background variables greatly influence the process. A
54
young, bright, attractive college student who is away from home for the first
time and is feeling lonely and homesick is very different from a substance-
abusing, older man who has been ordered by the court to attend counseling
sessions because he batters his wife.
It is also important to be aware that clients are at various stages of readiness
for change. Some are reluctant to participate in any form of helping; others are
eager to learn more about themselves; and yet others are ready to make changes
in their behaviors. Prochaska, Norcross, and DiClemente (1994, 2005)
identified five stages of change:
In the 
precontemplation stage,
 clients are unaware of the need to change
or have no desire to change. Precontemplators lack information about
their problems, engage in denial about their problems, and often blame
other people or society for their problems. Other people are typically
more bothered by the precontemplator’s behavior than is the
precontemplator.
In the 
contemplation stage,
 clients are aware of and accept responsibility
for their problems. They are beginning to think about changing but
have not yet actively decided to change. Fear of failure often keeps
clients stuck in this stage. Clients in this stage spend time thinking
about the causes of their problems and ponder what it would be like to
change.
In the 
preparation stage,
 clients have made a commitment to change
and are preparing themselves to begin the change process. Some clients
make public announcements that they plan to change (e.g., “I plan to
lose 30 pounds”). Some clients prepare themselves mentally for how
their lives will be different (e.g., “When I lose weight, I will feel
healthier and be more attractive, and it will be easier to exercise”).
In the 
action stage,
 clients actively begin to modify their behaviors and
their surroundings. They might stop smoking cigarettes, begin
studying at regularly specified times, start taking more time for
themselves, or decide to get married. The commitment and
preparation accomplished in the contemplation and preparation stages
seem to be crucial for success in this stage, in that prepared clients are
more aware of what they are striving for and why.
In the 
maintenance stage,
 clients have changed and are trying to
consolidate their changes and deal with lapses. The process of change
does not end, then, with the action stage. It takes several weeks or years
for change to become incorporated into one’s lifestyle, and people
often return to earlier stages in the process of change, suggesting that it
is not easy to make lasting changes. This stage is very challenging
because permanent change is difficult and often requires major lifestyle
55
alterations.
Clients sometimes go through these stages linearly. But more often clients
are at one stage for one problem and at a different stage for other problems (e.g.,
a client could be in the maintenance stage for stopping smoking but in the
precontemplation stage for resolving spiritual issues in his life). Clients might
also bounce around among the stages (e.g., on a good day a client may have a lot
of insight but then regress to the precontemplation stage when scared).
Working with precontemplative clients can be difficult (but not impossible)
because they often come to helping under duress (e.g., court referral) rather than
because they genuinely want to change. One can compare working with
precontemplative clients to trying to push carts with square wheels: It is more
difficult to push a cart with square wheels than to push a cart with round
wheels. In contrast, working with clients in the later stages tends to be easier
because these clients are more eager to work on themselves. The process works
better when clients are interested in, rather than resistant to, change.
THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP
Gelso and Carter (1985) defined the 
therapeutic relationship
 as “the feelings and
attitudes that counseling participants have toward one another, and the manner
in which those are expressed” (p. 159). Researchers have consistently found that
the therapeutic relationship is a major predictor of the outcome of therapy
(Gelso & Carter, 1985, 1994; Horvath & Bedi, 2002). Clients typically report
that the most helpful aspect of therapy is feeling understood and supported. For
some people, the relationship itself is curative, and they need nothing else from
the helper; others need the therapeutic relationship as a foundation for other
interventions. We can think of the therapeutic relationship as being made up of
three parts: the real relationship, the working alliance, and
transference/countertransference (Gelso & Carter, 1985, 1994).
The 
real relationship
 is the genuine, authentic nondistorted connection
between the helper and client. This part of the relationship is similar to
relationships you would have with other people in your life.
The 
working
 (or therapeutic) 
alliance
 is the part of the relationship focused
on the therapeutic work and consists of the bond (i.e., the connection between
the helper and client), an agreement on goals (a consensus about changes the
client needs to make), and an agreement on tasks (a consensus about what is to
take place during the helping process to meet the goals). Interestingly, different
types of working alliances may fit better for different types of clients. For
example, Bachelor (1995) found that some clients prefer helpers who are warm
and supportive, whereas others are put off by too much warmth and prefer
helpers who are objective and businesslike.
Transference and countertransference
 involve distortions based on experiences
56
in previous significant relationships. Transference involves client distortions of
the helper, and countertransference involves helper distortions of the client.
Transference and countertransference are thus like lenses or filters through
which one views the world. For example, a female client may expect that the
helper will be bored with her because her parents ignored her (transference).
Likewise, the helper may react poorly to client anger because anger was not an
acceptable emotion in her or his family (countertransference).
Although most researchers agree that a good therapeutic relationship
facilitates the helping process, they are much less clear about how to establish
good relationships with clients. I postulate that helpers establish good
therapeutic relationships by attending and listening carefully to clients, using the
appropriate helping skills at the right times, treating clients according to their
individual needs, being aware of feelings and limitations, being aware of clients’
reactions to their interventions, being open to feedback from clients, and being
willing to change (see also Hill, 2005b).
I propose that the therapeutic relationship works as follows. Clients often
come to helpers feeling that no one listens to them or cares about them. Helpers
attend to their clients and communicate an understanding of clients’ feelings
and experiences. Helpers are empathic and nonjudgmental and accept clients as
they are, which allows the clients to feel safe enough to express deep feelings.
Finally, helpers are skilled in their interventions, helping clients explore, gain
insight, and make decisions about action and building clients’ confidence that
they can be helped. Within the context of the helping relationship, clients begin
to feel that if their helpers accept them for who they are, they must be okay. It
also allows clients to see that not all people are like those with whom they have
experienced difficulties. Furthermore, working with helpers facilitates clients in
reducing their anxiety and thus increases their capacity for facing interpersonal
pain and anxiety. Clients slowly begin to build self-esteem and gain hope that
they can change.
Helpers cannot establish relationships with all clients, even though we
would all like to think that we can. Some dyads just do not “click.” Some clients
are not motivated or ready to be helped. For example, an adolescent girl might
be forced by her parents to go for helping but not want to be there. Moreover,
some clients have been so hurt and their capacity to trust so seriously impaired
that they cannot benefit from a facilitative relationship. Clients who have been
seriously damaged in relationships often have difficulty attaching to therapists.
The problem sometimes lies with the helpers, however. Similarly, all helpers
have limitations related to their backgrounds (e.g., dysfunctional families) and
personal problems.
Furthermore, some matches between helpers and clients are not ideal and
do not result in positive therapeutic relationships. For example, a female client
who was raped recently might not be able to talk to a male helper no matter how
57
kind he is because she is terrified of all men. An alcoholic client might not want
to see a helper who has never had problems with alcoholism because he fears
that such a helper could not understand his struggle to stay sober. Similarly,
helpers who have not resolved their own experiences of traumatic sexual or
physical abuse might not be able to hear a client’s story of abuse without having
strong emotional reactions or being distracted by their own pain.
MOMENT-BY-MOMENT INTERACTIONAL SEQUENCE
Figure 2.4
 shows a graphical representation of the helping process. Given the
background variables and context, helpers formulate intentions and decide on
specific helping skills. In turn, clients react to the helpers’ interventions, which
lead them to reevaluate their needs and goals and decide how to behave with the
helpers. Helpers then assess clients’ reactions and reevaluate what to do next.
The process thus continues with each person reacting both overtly and covertly,
trying to determine the intentions of the other and deciding how to interact.
Let’s slow down the process and look at each piece.
58
FIGURE 2.4
Factors influencing the helping process.
Helper Intentions
Helpers develop intentions (i.e., goals, plans) by thinking about everything that
has previously occurred and what they would like to accomplish next. Through
asking therapists about why they did what they did, Hill and O’Grady (1985)
developed a list of the intentions. Therapists indicated that they often had
intentions to set limits, get information, and give information. In addition, they
wanted to provide support, focus, clarify, instill hope, and encourage catharsis.
Other goals related to exploration include intent to identify maladaptive
cognitions, identify maladaptive behaviors, encourage self-control, and identify
and intensify feelings. Related to insight and action, therapists wanted to
promote insight, promote change, reinforce change, deal with resistance,
challenge, and deal with the therapeutic relationship. Last, one nontherapeutic
intention was revealed: to relieve helper’s needs. The definitions for these
intentions are listed in Web Form D (found at
59
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
).
Helpers are not always aware of their intentions at the time of delivery
(Fuller & Hill, 1985). For example, helpers sometimes inadvertently self-disclose
to make themselves feel better rather than to be helpful to clients. Reviewing
audio- or videotapes after sessions (alone or with a supervisor) and thinking
about or writing down intentions for each intervention is an excellent way to
increase awareness of what one was trying to accomplish. Helpers are typically
able to identify intentions pretty easily when they review tapes within 24 hours
of the session and recall how they were feeling and reacting at a given moment
in the session (rather than indicating how they currently feel about their
interventions). By slowing down the process and examining it piece by piece,
helpers can discover the different layers of feelings, thoughts, and actions. After
gaining experience with examining intentions during videotape replays, helpers
are often able to obtain more awareness of intentions while they are in sessions
with clients. I encourage beginning helpers to become intentional in their
interventions and to think about what they are trying to accomplish during each
intervention.
Helper Helping Skills
For each intention, the helper could use a few different helping skills (see the
Helping Skills System, Web Form E). For example, to facilitate the client
talking about feelings, the helper might reflect feelings, disclose about feelings,
or ask open questions/probes about feelings. All of these might be quite
appropriate but subtly move the client in different directions.
In addition to matching the skill to the intention, helpers should bear in
mind that the same intervention can have a different impact depending on the
manner of delivery. If the helper says, “You seem to be feeling anxious” in a
supportive, gentle tone, the client will probably have a different reaction than if
the helper uses a critical, judgmental tone.
Client’s Reactions
A helper intervention is met by one or more client reactions (see the Client
Reactions System, Web Form G). When a helper is successful, the client’s
reactions match the helper’s intentions and helping skills. For example, if the
helper’s intention is to provide emotional support and the helping skill used is
an encourager such as “I understand what you’re going through,” the client’s
reaction might be to feel understood and supported. However, if the
intervention is not successful, the client might feel that the helper did not really
hear what was being expressed or that the helper made incorrect assumptions.
Clients are sometimes consciously aware of their reactions, although at
other times they might be unaware of their reactions to helpers. In addition,
60
clients sometimes have difficulty admitting to reactions that are not socially
acceptable (e.g., feeling angry at a helper’s intervention). Admitting negative
feelings about helpers can be difficult if clients respect and depend on the
helpers or if clients cannot allow themselves to have negative emotions. For
example, a client might react negatively to something a helper says because it is
similar to something her parents said, but the client might not allow herself to
express these negative feelings for fear of hurting the helper. Instead, the client
might smile politely but feel somewhat distant and unengaged, not
understanding why she withdrew from the interaction. Research suggests that
clients often hide negative reactions from their therapists out of fear of
retaliation or out of deference to the helper’s authority (e.g., Hill, Thompson,
Cogar, & Denman, 1993; Hill, Thompson, & Corbett, 1992; Rennie, 1994).
For example, clients who feel angry at or misunderstood by their helpers are not
likely to reveal those feelings if they feel unsafe in the therapeutic relationship.
And even if they feel safe, they might feel uncomfortable expressing negative
feelings because of cultural prohibitions against offending others.
A number of factors influence the reactions that clients have to helper
interventions. First, clients’ reactions are influenced by their needs at the time.
For example, clients in severe crisis might tolerate almost any intervention
because they are desperately in need of help. In contrast, high-functioning
clients might be more demanding that helpers be competent and knowledgeable
about how to specifically help them.
Second, client reactions are moderated by the therapeutic relationship. In
generally positive relationships, clients might tolerate some mistakes from
helpers without an adverse reaction because they feel that helpers are genuinely
trying to be helpful. If the relationship is problematic or rocky, however,
anything helpers do might elicit negative reactions from disgruntled clients.
Third, clients’ reactions seem to be influenced by their impressions of the
helper’s intentions. For example, if clients think that their helpers were acting
out of their own personal needs rather than in the best interest of the clients
(regardless of what the helpers’ actual intentions were), they might have negative
reactions. If clients think that therapists want to extend therapy to make more
money rather than because their clients need help, clients might become angry
and uncooperative. In contrast, if clients think that their helpers are beginners
who are just learning to be helpers, they might feel sympathetic and have
positive reactions. Clients’ perceptions, then, even though they might not match
the “reality” of helpers’ intentions, seem to influence clients’ reactions.
Clients’ Needs or Goals
Clients react according to what they need and want from the interaction with
the helper, and determine what is possible to obtain from helpers at a particular
61
time. Thus, rather than being passive recipients of helpers’ interventions, clients
are actively involved in trying to get what they need from interactions. For
example, one client might feel a need to retreat to avoid further confrontation.
Another client might decide that he wants to reveal more because his helper is
accurate in understanding him and can be trusted with secrets.
Clients also want to have an impact on their helpers. For example, Sam
wanted to please his helper and so kept telling her what a good job she was
doing. Other clients might decide not to reveal shameful secrets because they do
not want to tarnish the helper’s opinion of them.
Clients do not typically consciously plot the reactions they want to elicit
from their helpers. Rather, they act on the basis of their past experiences in ways
that maximize the probability of getting their needs met (e.g., to feel close to or
distant from the helper). Some of these client goals are influenced by
transference, which occurs when clients project how significant people in their
lives (e.g., parents) behaved onto how they expect their helpers to behave (see
Gelso & Hayes, 1998; Gelso, Hill, Mohr, Rochlen, & Zack, 1999). For
example, if Sue feels that no one listened to her as a child, she might not be able
to believe that anyone could possibly want to listen to her now. Hence, even
though the helper is attentive, Sue might want the helper to “prove” that he
really wants to listen to her, or she will not talk in the session. Rather than being
aware that the helper is silent because he is trying to give her space to talk, Sue
might perceive the silence as occurring because the helper is bored by her.
Clients’ Behaviors
Clients engage in specific behaviors (e.g., resist, agree, make an appropriate
request, recount, engage in cognitive–behavioral or affective exploration, come
to insight, or discuss therapeutic changes; see Client Behavior System, Web
Form H) on the basis of their reactions, feelings about the therapeutic
relationship, needs in the interaction, and goals (intentions) for a desired impact.
Clients’ behaviors are determined not only by the interaction but also by their
communication ability, awareness of needs, level of pathology, and personality
structure. Hence, one client might be very articulate and insightful about
describing the causes of his pain, whereas another client might be unskilled at
communicating feelings and be unaware of what she is feeling in the moment.
Helpers’ Assessment of Client Reactions and Reevaluation of Goals
Helpers, in turn, try to assess clients’ reactions to their interventions. They
observe how the client reacted to the intervention (e.g., whether the client felt
supported and understood, felt confused and misunderstood, or had no
reaction). Unfortunately, helpers are not always accurate in perceiving clients’
reactions. In fact, research suggests that helpers are not particularly adept at
62
perceiving negative client reactions to their interventions, but they are more
accurate at perceiving positive reactions (Hill et al., 1992). The diminished
ability to perceive negative client reactions might occur because, as noted earlier,
clients hide negative reactions from helpers. People often learn as young children
not to show negative reactions for fear of evoking displeasure or being punished
(e.g., imagine what would happen if an elementary school student told her
teacher that she did not like what the teacher said). Hence, helpers cannot
assume that clients feel positively just because the clients are not displaying
negative reactions.
In addition, helpers might be reluctant to recognize when clients have
negative reactions. For example, many helpers have a hard time with clients’
anger directed at them (Hill, Kellems, et al., 2003). Because they want clients to
like them, having clients get angry at them feels scary and upsetting. These
helpers worry that clients will drop out. When clients are angry, helpers might
misinterpret the anger as a personal rejection. Other helpers might have
difficulty allowing clients to become upset and cry because they feel obligated to
make everything better and have all clients be happy.
Unfortunately, not all helpers have learned to examine the effects of their
interventions on clients, so they use interventions that feel comfortable (e.g.,
giving advice) rather than ones that match the client’s needs in the specific
situation (e.g., empathy, listening). In addition, there is a danger that over time,
helpers can become insensitive to the influence of their behavior on clients and
assume that they know how the clients are reacting internally. Helpers, even
when they are experienced, can strive to be aware of the impact of their
interventions on clients. Rather than making assumptions, helpers might ask the
clients how they are feeling or reacting.
On the basis of their perceptions of the client’s reactions (whether accurate
or not) and observation of the overt behaviors, helpers reevaluate what they are
trying to accomplish and thus come up with new intentions and accompanying
skills for the next intervention. If a helper perceives that the last intervention was
successful and thinks that a similar intervention would be appropriate, she might
continue with the same intention–skill combination. For example, if a reflection
resulted in the client talking about sadness, the helper might use another
reflection to help the client delve even deeper into these feelings. If a helper
perceives that the last intervention was helpful but that something new is
needed, he might choose a different intention–skill combination. For example, if
a helper had reflected feelings and the client responded by talking in depth
about a variety of feelings, the helper might decide to use an open
question/probe to shift the focus to other aspects of problems.
If, in contrast, a helper perceives that the last intervention was not received
well by the client, the helper would try to determine why the intervention was
not successful. If the timing was poor, the helper might decide not to continue
63
that intervention but to go back to a more exploratory intervention to learn
more about the problem. If the helper decides that the intentions were on target
but the wrong skill was used, the helper might use a different skill to implement
the same intention. For example, a beginning helper might try to encourage the
client to talk about feelings by asking a closed question, such as “Did you have
any feelings about that?” If the client responds, “No,” and adds nothing further,
the helper might realize that the closed question stopped rather than facilitated
exploration. The helper might then use a reflection of feeling (e.g., “Perhaps you
feel scared right now”) in the next intervention and observe how the client
responds. Thus, by paying attention to client reactions, helpers can devise new
interventions to fit the immediate need.
Given that the most important criterion for the effectiveness of the helper’s
intervention is the client’s response, helpers need to monitor client reactions to
determine whether their interventions are helpful and make adjustments when
clients respond negatively. I like to think of helpers as personal scientists,
investigating the effects of each intervention, testing what works and what does
not work, and then deciding what needs to be done next. Helpers thus have to
be very attentive to what works with individual clients. Even if a helper finds
that certain helping skills work well with one client, those same skills might not
work the next time with the same client and may not work with the next client.
EXTERNAL WORLD
Many external forces influence the helping process. We can look at these forces
for both clients and helpers.
Clients’ Lives Outside of Helping Sessions
Typically, sessions last only 1 hour per week, whereas clients live another 167
hours outside of the sessions. As helpers, we hope that clients take what they
have learned from helping sessions and try to apply it to “real life.” In one case
of brief psychotherapy presented by Hill (1989), the therapist confronted the
client with the fact that the client did not seem to need him or listen to anything
he said. The client was very surprised because she had never viewed herself this
way. She thought that she was working hard on her issues both within and
outside of therapy. She discussed this feedback with her friends, who agreed
with the therapist’s assessment that she seemed self-possessed and did not appear
to need anything from them. Hearing this feedback from both the therapist and
her friends forced the client to look at her behavior; she used the feedback from
her friends to validate what she was learning in therapy.
In intensive psychotherapy, clients sometimes form images, or what have
been called 
internal representations,
 of their therapists to remind them of their
helpers in-between sessions (Farber & Geller, 1994; Geller, Cooley, & Hartley,
64
1981; Geller & Farber, 1993; Knox, Goldberg, Woodhouse, & Hill, 1999;
Orlinsky & Geller, 1993). For example, some clients might think about what
their therapist would say and use that for guidance or to comfort themselves
between sessions. These internal representations often help clients cope between
sessions.
Another important influence in the external world is social support, which
has been researched extensively (e.g., Cobb, 1976). Specifically, clients who have
social support tend to do better in therapy than do clients who do not have
support (Mallinckrodt, 2000). Clients with friends are less likely to become
overly dependent on their therapists. They have other people to talk to, and they
have enough social skills to form friendships.
However, relationships in the external world can sometimes present
obstacles to progress in therapy. Perhaps the clearest example is when a client’s
changes threaten the status quo of family life, causing family members to
undermine the client’s progress. For example, a severely overweight man’s
weight loss may threaten his marital relationship. The wife may fear that the
husband is now attractive to other women and that he might lose interest in her.
She may begin to cook tasty, fattening desserts to tempt the man to regain the
weight and thus stabilize the relationship. These behaviors are not necessarily
performed consciously but often are desperate attempts to maintain stability in
relationships (see Watzlawick, Weakland, & Fisch, 1974).
Thus, events in the external world can both help and hinder the therapeutic
work. Helpers cannot just attend to what goes on in session; rather, they also
need to be aware of how external events influence the client and the helping
process. They can also encourage clients to talk in the helping setting about
issues that come up outside of helping, and they can encourage clients to take
responsibility for making changes in their lives.
Helpers’ Lives Outside of Helping Sessions
Many of the same forces that influence clients also influence how helpers feel
and behave in helping sessions with clients. If helpers have a lot of stress and
conflict in their personal lives, it is difficult for them to put these aside (bracket
them) so that they can focus on their clients. A particular stress that affects
beginning helpers is anxiety: The more anxious helpers are about their ability to
perform in helping sessions, the less able they are to focus on and be empathic
with clients. Another stressor that many helpers face is burnout or compassion
fatigue, when they feel drained from all they have given to clients.
I highly recommend that helpers seek personal therapy to work on their
personal issues and seek supervision to work on their professional issues so that
they can be as helpful as possible to clients in sessions. In addition, helpers can
be attentive to self-care, ensuring that they eat properly, exercise, have a fulfilling
65
personal life, and have adequate social support.
OUTCOMES OF HELPING FOR CLIENTS
All of the variables discussed to this point (helper and client background
variables, context variables, moment-by-moment interactional sequences, and
the external world) interact to determine the outcome of the helping process for
the client. Thus, the outcome is influenced by many factors, and individuals
react idiosyncratically to different aspects of the process.
One way to categorize outcomes is in terms of three areas: (a)
rem
oralization,
 or the enhancement of well-being; (b) 
remediation,
 or the
achievement of symptomatic relief; and (c) 
rehabilitation,
 or the reduction of
troublesome, maladaptive behaviors that interfere with functioning in areas such
as family relationships and work. Outcome research indicates that
remoralization happens first and is the easiest area to change in therapy;
remediation follows at a slower pace; and rehabilitation takes the longest time to
accomplish (Grissom, Lyons, & Lutz, 2002; Howard, Lueger, Maling, &
Martinovich, 1993). Hence, a client may feel more hopeful after a few sessions
of therapy, but it may take longer for the client to feel less depressed and
anxious, and even longer for the client to make changes in terms of new ways of
behaving in relationships and work.
Another way to conceptualize outcome is in terms of 
intrapersonal,
interpersonal,
 and 
social role performance
 (Hill & Lambert, 2004). Intrapersonal
changes refer to outcomes that occur within the client (e.g., decreased
symptoms, increased self-esteem, improved problem-solving abilities, more
assertiveness, increased subjective well-being). Interpersonal changes take place
in the client’s intimate relationships (e.g., improved communication, increased
marital satisfaction, healthier relationships). Social role performance refers to the
client’s ability to carry out responsibilities in the community (e.g., improved job
performance, increased participation in community activities, greater
involvement in school, reduced antisocial behaviors). For example, a female
client with good outcomes in all three areas may feel better about herself, have a
clearer sense of who she is and the meaning of her life, have an improved
relationship with her husband, and have fewer days of absence at work related to
illness.
It is important to note that therapy does not result in “cures.” In my view,
there is no such thing as functioning perfectly because the human condition
involves inherent feelings of existential issues such as isolation, fears of
responsibility and freedom, and death anxiety. Rather, helpers can expect that
clients begin to function more effectively, feel better about themselves, and
become more acceptant about their condition in life. Sometimes, however,
therapy can actually make clients more anxious as they grapple with existential
66
issues (Yalom, 1980); becoming more anxious is thus not surprising.
Helpers, clients, and clients’ significant others often have different
perceptions of the outcome of the helping process (see Strupp & Hadley, 1977).
For example, a helper might feel pleased with her performance as a helper with
Jack and believe that Jack benefited a great deal from the helping because he said
he was going to change his major. In contrast, Jack might feel that he only
participated in counseling to please his parents and that he listened politely and
responded compliantly in the sessions to appease the helper but dismissed all the
helper’s advice as soon as he left. Jack’s parents might feel sad because their son
is not choosing the career they want for him and resigned that even helping did
not improve their relationship with their son. Thus, the outcomes of helping can
be quite different depending on the individual’s perspective.
Concluding Comments
The whole helping process undoubtedly seems incredibly complex, especially to
the beginning trainee. Similarly, all the components of driving at first seem
overwhelming to a person learning to drive, but later, driving becomes so
familiar that the driver often does not even need to think about the separate
steps (e.g., turning the wheel to make a turn). Another metaphor is that learning
to be a helper is like learning to dance: At first, you pay great attention to the
steps, but once you learn, you forget the specific steps and respond to your
partner. At this point, having a broad overview of the model can provide you
with a framework for understanding the individual intentions and skills.
What Do You Think?
What are your assumptions about human nature and the possibility of
change?
Debate whether all three stages are needed for a complete helping
process or whether another model might be better.
Discuss the role of empathic collaboration in helping.
Discuss whether empathy is an attitude or a skill.
The helping process was described as being very complicated. Do you
agree? What components were left out of the helping process, and what
components were not necessary?
What parts of the helping process are unconscious (i.e., not open to
awareness)?
Why do you think that helpers and clients experience the same
67
interaction differently?
How important do you think helping skills are to the therapeutic
relationship in terms of leading to client change?
Debate whether empathy would be different with clients who are of a
different race, gender, religion, or sexual orientation than is the helper.
Would you personally have more difficulty establishing empathy with a
person who has different rather than the same demographic
characteristics as you?
68
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Covert Processes
Citation:
 Hill, C. E., Thompson, B. J., Cogar, M. C., & Denman, D. W. (1993). Beneath
the surface of long-term therapy: Therapist and client report of their own and each other’s
covert processes. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 40,
 278–287. doi:10.1037/0022-
0167.40.3.278
Rationale:
 In an overt (one that you can observe) exchange, the therapist might ask the
client to do homework between sessions, and the client might agree, which would look like
a very good interchange. However, even though the therapist intended to be encouraging,
the client might feel misunderstood and not do the homework, which is quite a different
outcome of the interchange. Given that previous research (Hill, Thompson, & Corbett,
1992; Regan & Hill, 1992; Rennie, 1994; Thompson & Hill, 1991) has shown that clients
hid negative reactions and that therapists were not very accurate at detecting such hidden
reactions, the authors of the current study wanted to investigate more about these covert
processes.
Method:
 Therapy cases representing a wide range of theoretical orientations and countries
were studied. Prior to the session, therapists reviewed the Therapist Intentions List, and
clients reviewed the Client Reactions System. Therapists then audiotaped/videotaped a
middle session of ongoing therapy. In a review of the audiorecording of the session,
therapists rated the helpfulness of each intervention, indicated up to three intentions that
they had for the intervention, guessed up to three reactions that they thought the clients
had for that intervention, and guessed any client reactions that they thought were hidden
during the intervention. At the end of the tape review, therapists indicated what thoughts
and feelings they thought clients had but did not share, as well as rated the overall quality
of the session. Similarly, clients reviewed the audiorecording and rated the helpfulness of
each therapist intervention, indicated up to three reactions that they had to the
intervention, indicated any reactions that were hidden during the intervention, and guessed
up to three intentions that they thought the therapist had. At the end of the tape, clients
also indicated any thoughts or feelings that they had during the sessions that they did not
share with their therapist and the reasons why they did not reveal them, as well as rated the
overall quality of the session.
A team of judges coded things left unsaid for valence (affective tone) and then judged
whether there was a match between clients’ and therapists’ perceptions of things left unsaid.
The judges then developed categories of cited reasons for leaving things unsaid and for
secrets and then coded all responses into these categories.
Interesting Findings:
Therapists matched (accurately guessed) about half of the reactions reported by clients.
Therapists were more accurate at guessing client reactions related to therapeutic work (e.g., better self-
understanding) than other reactions. And when therapists were accurate about these client reactions related to
therapeutic work, clients were more likely to rate their next interventions as helpful.
Clients hid more negative reactions (e.g., feeling stuck or angry) than other types of reactions.
Most clients (65%) reported that they left at least one thing unsaid during sessions.
69
The primary reason for leaving things unsaid during sessions was that the emotions were overwhelming and they
wanted to avoid dealing with the topic.
Similarly, 65% of therapists reported that they thought clients had left something unsaid during sessions, but they
were accurate in only 27% of the cases.
About half of the clients (46%) had not disclosed at least one secret in therapy.
Most of the secrets were about sex (e.g., “unorthodox sexual persuasions,” “I am more sexually attracted to my
therapist than I have let on,” “childhood sexual abuse”).
The most frequent reasons clients gave for not disclosing were feeling shamed or embarrassed.
Therapists reported that most of their intentions related to assessment (34%), support (19%), exploration (18%),
and restructure (16%).
Clients accurately matched (guessed) on half (50%) of therapist intentions, with the best matches on assessment,
support, and restructure intentions.
Both therapists and clients gave higher helpfulness ratings when clients did not match on assessment intentions
than when they did match.
Both therapists and clients thought it was more helpful when clients were not aware that therapists were intending
to assess the client (e.g., get information from the client).
Therapists thought it was helpful when clients were aware that therapists were intending to help the client explore
(e.g., identify and intensify feelings) and restructure (e.g., promote insight).
Conclusions:
Clients sometimes hide negative reactions, thoughts, and feelings during sessions, often because the feelings are
overwhelming or are too difficult to deal with in therapy.
Many clients have secrets, especially about sexual matters, that they do not reveal because of feelings of shame.
Therapists are not very aware of clients’ reactions, particularly negative reactions.
It is helpful if clients know that therapists are trying to help them engage in therapeutic work (exploration and
restructuring), but not particularly helpful if clients know that therapists are trying to get information from them.
Implications for Therapy:
Helpers need to be aware that clients do not disclose everything they are thinking or feeling. Far from being able
to read clients’ minds, therapists are often not aware of what clients are feeling, especially if the feelings are
negative. Helpers need to observe clients carefully for nonverbal indications of discomfort, and perhaps more
important, ask clients about how they are feeling about the helping process.
Clients do not need to focus on trying to figure out the intentions helpers have for their interventions. But it is
important for clients to tell helpers when they are dissatisfied with something in therapy so that helpers know
more what they need and can tailor the treatment to their needs.
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
70
Intellectual integrity, courage, and kindness are still the virtues I admire most.
—Gerti Cori
O
ne hopes that we all aspire to provide high-quality services that are respectful
of the rights of the people with whom we work. But how do we know what the
standards are?
Mental health professionals have been very concerned with issues of ethics
because of the potential for harm. Thus, most helping professions (e.g.,
counseling, medicine, nursing, psychology, social work) have developed ethical
codes that are intended to protect both the practitioners and the clients. These
codes describe the underlying ethical principles to which professionals aspire in
making their decisions, especially in terms of acting in a responsible manner,
ensuring quality client care, and contributing to society through their work.
Rather than providing “the right answer,” the principles provide guidelines to
helpers for behaving in a responsible manner and resolving ethical dilemmas.
The codes also involve specific standards of conduct for what professionals
should do (e.g., talk about confidentiality) and should not do (e.g., have sexual
relations with clients). 
Exhibit 3.1
 lists the websites of the ethical codes for
several professional organizations.
71
EXHIBIT 3.1
List of Professional Organizations and Websites for Ethical Codes
American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy
http://www.aamft.org/imis15/content/legal_ethics/code_of_ethics.aspx
American Counseling Association
http://www.counseling.org/Resources/aca-code-of-ethics.pdf
American Psychological Association
http://www.apa.org/ethics/code/index.aspx
American School Counselor Association
http://www.schoolcounselor.org/school-counselors-members/legal-ethical
National Association of Social Workers (1996)
http://www.socialworkers.org/pubs/code/default.asp
Ethics
 are principles and standards that ensure that professionals provide
quality services and are respectful of the rights of the people with whom they
work. Acting in an ethical manner also involves following the laws and rules
governing one’s profession. Hence, a mental health organization’s or
association’s principles are aspirational guidelines that people in the profession
have agreed on by consensus, whereas the profession’s standards (its bylaws and
rules) are enforceable through sanctions or professional censure as stipulated by
the relevant organization or association. Furthermore, principles and standards
can be differentiated from personal morality (e.g., being for or against abortion
rights).
Although beginning helpers are not yet professionals and as such are not
obligated to follow the professional principles and standards, they should aspire
to uphold the ethical principles and standards of the profession because it is the
right thing to do. They should conduct themselves in a professional, therapeutic
manner.
The instructor of the class (or his or her supervisor, if the instructor is a
graduate student), in contrast, is a professional, and is therefore responsible for
what goes on in the classroom and in required helping sessions. Thus, the
instructor has a responsibility to be aware of the ethical issues and educate
students about these issues. It is advisable for instructors to have conversations
with students early in training as well as throughout training about what topics
should be disclosed in helping sessions (see 
Exhibit 1.1
), informed consent (see
more detail later in this chapter), confidentiality (see more detail later in this
chapter), and other potential ethical issues. In addition, because laws, statutes,
and legal decisions vary in different jurisdictions and states, instructors should be
aware of and educate students about local requirements.
General Ethical Principles
72
Many ethical codes stress the importance of six basic ethical principles
(Beauchamp & Childress, 1994; Kitchener, 1984; Meara, Schmidt, & Day,
1996):
Autonomy
 refers to the right (of both the consumer and the provider)
to make choices and take actions, provided the results do not adversely
affect others. This principle grants individuals the opportunity to
determine their actions on the basis of their belief systems. For
example, a helper may be working with a client about career decisions,
independent of the client’s parents’ hopes for her to pursue law school.
Suddenly, the client announces that she is ending counseling and
giving up her scholarship to pursue a career as a country music singer.
The helper might encourage the client to consider the pros and cons of
life as a country music singer. However, the principle of autonomy
allows the client the right to make her own decisions, provided these
decisions are not harmful to others. In this example, the helper
supported the client’s decision to attend college and simultaneously
pursue her dream of becoming a musician.
Beneficence
 refers to the intent “to do good” by helping and promoting
growth in others. This principle clearly states that helpers should be
committed to the growth and development of their clients. Helpers
who strive to provide the most comprehensive, empirically supported
services to their clients are embodying the principle of beneficence,
whereas helpers who see clients solely to make money violate this
important principle.
Nonmaleficence
 can be described with the phrase “Above all, do no
harm.” Professionals are asked to ensure that their interventions and
actions do not inadvertently harm their clients. Thus, neglect on the
part of the helper (even if unintentional) would be problematic. For
example, a student in a helping class might be out drinking margaritas
with friends and telling them about the practice helping session he had
in class that day. Later, he might notice that his practice client is at the
table next to him and probably overheard him telling his friends about
her issues. Although the helper may not have used the client’s name or
intended to harm her, he would be responsible for the unintentional
harm that resulted from having disclosed confidential information
about his practice client.
Justice
 can be defined as fairness or ensuring equality of opportunities
and resources for all people. One could interpret this principle to mean
that helpers have an ethical responsibility to rectify the unequal
distribution of helping services by making their services more accessible
to those who are unable to pay. For example, helpers can contribute to
73
building a just society by volunteering at not-for-profit agencies (e.g.,
shelters for battered women, clinics for people with AIDS). An
additional method of promoting justice involves attempts to influence
public policy or legislation to ensure that mental health services are
available to those in need, regardless of their ability to pay, location,
language preference, or disability status.
Fidelity
 refers to keeping promises and being trustworthy in
relationships with others. Fidelity is a critical component of the
relationship between helpers and clients. Without confidence in the
helper’s ability to be faithful to the agreements articulated in the
helping session, minimal progress can be made. For example, the
agreement between helpers and clients typically involves both parties
meeting at a certain time for a specified number of sessions. If helpers
are consistently 20 minutes late for each session, they are breaking the
promise to be available to clients at an arranged time. Violations like
these can have a detrimental impact on the development of the helping
relationship.
Veracity,
 which refers to telling the truth, is a powerful and necessary
principle in helping settings. Clients often rely on their helpers to
provide honest feedback about their interactions in the helping
sessions. One example involves a 21-year-old client, Takiesha, who
worked with a helper for many months. Takiesha had not made much
progress in the last few sessions and asked the helper for some direct
feedback about her work in the helping sessions. The helper provided
several positive remarks and also indicated that at times, Takiesha
appeared to place responsibility for her problems on others instead of
empowering herself. Although Takiesha was upset about hearing this
feedback, she was grateful to the helper for being honest and was able
to understand how her reluctance to take responsibility prevented her
from making necessary changes in her life.
Ethical Issues for Beginning Helpers
Professional therapists and counselors deal with many ethical issues. Here are a
few of the ethical issues that beginning helpers may encounter.
CONFIDENTIALITY
Beginning students who are learning helping skills may encounter
confidentiality issues when they practice with classmates or with volunteer
clients who present real problems. It is important that helpers respect a client’s
74
confidentiality by not divulging information shared in the helping session,
except in limited circumstances (see next paragraph). Sometimes, maintaining
confidentiality can be challenging if students interact with clients outside of the
sessions or if they have friends in common. However, the success of the helping
relationship depends on the client’s ability to trust that information shared with
the helper will be kept confidential.
There are a few limits to confidentiality (recall as mentioned earlier in this
chapter that requirements often vary by jurisdiction or state, and so you need to
be aware of local requirements). First, you need to be able to talk about your
clients with supervisors so that you can learn from your errors and grow as a
helper; supervisors are ethically bound to keep everything confidential and thus
discussing a client’s situation with a supervisor is not a threat to confidentiality.
Second, if the client reveals to you plans to harm self or others, you (and the
responsible instructor or supervisor) may be (depending on the situation and
local laws) legally obligated to report this threat to the appropriate authorities.
Third, if the client reveals the occurrence of abuse of children, elderly persons,
or disabled persons, you (and/or the responsible instructor or supervisor) may be
legally obligated to report such abuse to the appropriate authorities.
It is important to inform clients about the general principle of
confidentiality at the beginning of the first session and then have the client sign
an informed-consent form similar to the one shown in 
Exhibit 3.2
. In addition,
helpers can deal with issues related to confidentiality as they arise in sessions, by
first reminding clients about the limits of confidentiality as they begin to
disclose issues related to harm or abuse (e.g., “I need to remind you before you
say anything more that I may need to report anything you say related to possible
harm to yourself or others or abuse”) and second by consulting immediately
with supervisors and legal authorities and then carrying out the recommended
procedures.
75
EXHIBIT 3.2
Informed Consent Form
I understand that my helper is a student-in-training.
I understand that my helping session(s) may be audio- or videotaped for training and
supervisory purposes; that only my helper and those involved in the course will review any
tapes; and that confidentiality will be strictly maintained in accordance with the law.
Recordings will be destroyed in a timely manner.
I understand that all information shared in this session will be kept confidential, with a
few key exceptions:
a.
 
supervisors may listen to the session or read transcripts of sessions (transcripts will have
no identifying information);
b.
 
harm or intention to harm self or others (as required by law);
c.
 
reasonable suspicion of current or previous abuse of children, elderly, or disabled
individuals, as required by law;
d.
 
court orders.
With the understanding that I may withdraw my consent to the above conditions at any
time, I grant my permission to participate in the session(s) and to be audio/videotaped
by the helper whose signature appears below.
Signature of Client:______________________
Date: ________________
Signature of Helper:_____________________
Date: ________________
RECOGNIZING LIMITS
It is critical that helpers recognize and practice only within the areas for which
they have been trained and are competent. For example, after going through this
course, you will probably be able to use the exploration skills (e.g., listening,
reflecting feelings) with classmates, but you will not have expertise in such areas
as working with children, facilitating personality change, doing crisis
intervention, or working with patients with severe mental illness. As an example,
a friend who discovers that you are learning helping skills may ask you to speak
with her cousin who has been acting in a strange manner and hearing voices that
tell him to destroy the psychology building at the university. Appropriate ethical
behavior in this case would involve telling your friend that meeting with her
cousin is outside of your area of competence. You might, however, offer to speak
with your professor to obtain a referral to a competent practitioner who has
training and expertise in working with people who hear voices.
In a related vein, as a helper, you need to be honest about your
qualifications—that you are a beginning trainee. Helpers who describe
themselves as counselors or advertise that they provide psychological
76
interventions that they have not been trained to use are not acting ethically. For
example, a practice client may refer to you as his “psychologist.” Given that
psychologist
 is a legal term associated with having earned a doctoral degree and
passing a major national examination, ethical behavior would involve telling the
client that you are a trainee learning helping skills and do not have a degree or
license to practice psychology.
Furthermore, beginning helpers should consult with supervisors to enable
them to best serve their clients. In one helping class, a student met with a client
who mentioned that she had considered suicide because of all of the stressors in
her life. The student immediately contacted her lab leader who consulted with
the instructor, who then intervened with the client to provide the necessary
assistance. Furthermore, when one’s own issues threaten to interfere with the
helping process, helpers need to consult supervisors. For example, at the same
time John was struggling with his decision to marry his long-term girlfriend, his
client was also considering whether to make a lifelong commitment to his
partner. John realized the potential for harm in this situation and discussed with
his supervisor how to ensure that his personal issues related to commitment
would not have a negative impact on the helping sessions with his client.
EDUCATING CLIENTS ABOUT THE HELPING PROCESS
Clients have a right to understand the nature of the helping relationship. Many
clients have never experienced a formal helping relationship and are uncertain
about what to expect. If helpers explain their theoretical orientation in simple,
clear terms, clients can make an informed decision about whether or not to
participate in the process. For example, helpers should provide information
about fees, length of the helping relationship, techniques used, whether anyone
will be observing or supervising, and whether the sessions will be audio- or
videotaped. As was noted previously, beginning helpers must also inform clients
about the limits of confidentiality and their status as helpers (e.g., that they are
not professionals). Helpers might ask clients to sign an informed consent form
that explains the process (see 
Exhibit 3.2
). Similarly, many health care
professionals are required by the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 to have their patients sign statements
related to privacy and security of health care information.
Furthermore, clients have the right to understand what outcomes can be
expected. Here it is important not to promise anything that you cannot
necessarily deliver. Thus, for example, it is appropriate to say that helping
involves an opportunity for clients to explore themselves and that you are
optimistic about your work together, but you cannot guarantee that they will be
“cured” or even that they will see improvement.
In addition, when providing services to families or couples, helpers must
77
clarify their roles and the relationships that occur during the time of service. For
example, a helper was seeing an adolescent client whose parents were divorcing.
The mother was struggling during this time and asked whether she could talk
privately with the helper to discuss some of her issues related to the divorce. The
helper gently reminded her of the importance of having a special relationship
with the client (the daughter) and indicated that this relationship might be
jeopardized by even one helping session with the mother. The mother was given
referrals to other qualified helpers.
DEVELOPING APPROPRIATE BOUNDARIES
Helpers need to think about boundaries, or the ground rules and limits of the
helping relationship. Boundaries can be about the structure of helping (e.g.,
length, fees, policies about touching and violence, confidentiality) or about the
interpersonal nature of the interaction (no sexual intimacies, friendships, or
business relationships with clients outside of helping). Considerable research has
been conducted on the practices of experienced therapists regarding boundaries
(see Borys & Pope, 1989; Conte, Plutchik, Picard, & Karasu, 1989; Epstein,
Simon, & Kay, 1992; Holroyd & Brodsky, 1977).
Initially, helpers need to clarify the rules about confidentiality, the length of
helping, and any fees involved. Helpers typically choose to avoid involvement in
social activities with clients outside of sessions because such activities may make
it difficult for helpers to be objective and for clients to feel comfortable
disclosing in the therapy setting. I encourage beginning helpers to give their
work phone number or e-mail address but not their private cell phone number
or e-mail address to clients (although I also encourage you to check local
regulations, and I also recognize that issues around technology change rapidly).
Clients need the work number or e-mail address in case of schedule changes
(and need to be given emergency numbers or hotline numbers in case of off-
hours emergencies), but giving out private numbers can be problematic because
some clients take advantage of beginning helpers who have difficulty setting
limits about not talking on the phone at any hour for any reason. I vividly recall
one of my first clients in a practicum during graduate school. She called for
several nights at midnight because I had not clarified that calling was not
appropriate. When I finally told the client that she could not keep calling every
night, she felt hurt and abandoned, and the therapeutic relationship was
damaged. It would have been better if I had discussed this limit with her initially
to clarify the rules and expectations.
Developing appropriate boundaries is often quite difficult. It is probably
best for beginning helpers to start out being overly cautious and then relax their
boundaries as they gain experience. Consultation with supervisors can be helpful
when in doubt about which boundaries are appropriate and how to set them.
78
Furthermore, exploring one’s own personal values and issues is important when
thinking about establishing boundaries in general. It is even more important for
helpers to examine their own issues when they want to violate or adjust
boundaries with a particular client, because these urges to violate boundaries
often reflect countertransference issues (e.g., need to be loved, need to not have
others get angry).
FOCUSING ON THE NEEDS OF THE CLIENT
At times, the needs of the helper may conflict with the needs of the client. For
example, Jim (the helper) may be preoccupied during a session because he needs
to study for an exam. Jim may have a difficult time focusing on the client (e.g.,
listening, giving eye contact) and may even hope to end the session early to
study. However, it is critical that Jim set aside his own concerns about the exam
and focus on listening carefully to the client and being as present as possible in
the helping session.
An interesting situation results when the client’s unresolved issues result in
behaviors that benefit the helper. For example, Himee noticed that her helper
often had a soft drink on his desk. Himee then began to give the helper a soft
drink at the beginning of each helping session. Although the helper might like
being taken care of in this manner, ethical behavior requires that the helper try
to understand the meaning of Himee’s behavior and act in a manner that places
the client’s needs first. In this case, the helper might assist Himee in uncovering
her desire to please the helper and her fear that the helper might abandon her if
she did not bring gifts to the sessions. It might be in the best interest of the
client to assist her in viewing herself as valuable in relationships, independent of
the gifts she presents to others.
AVOID HARMFUL DUAL RELATIONSHIPS
A potentially harmful dual relationship occurs when someone in power (e.g., a
helper, professor, supervisor) adds another role to his or her interaction with a
less powerful individual (e.g., a client, student, supervisee) because the dual
relationship may lead to the harm or exploitation of the less powerful person.
For example, it would not be unusual or necessarily problematic for a supervisor
also to be a student’s professor and evaluator; however, if the supervisor-
professor also took on the role of therapist, the dual relationship could be
harmful because confidential information disclosed in therapy could potentially
be used against the student. Helpers need to be aware of the power differential
when working with others and ensure that clients are not harmed by their
interactions. For example, if a beginning helper is assigned a client for whom she
or he is also a teaching assistant, harm might occur if the client-student feels that
the helper could not fairly and objectively evaluate him or her when grading
79
exams. Hence, helpers should not take on clients with whom they have other
relationships that would interfere with the helping process, nor should they
develop conflicting relationships with ongoing clients.
Perhaps the most blatant example of harmful dual relationships involves a
helper having a sexual relationship with a client. Sexual involvement with clients
(and former clients) has been shown to have negative outcomes (Pope, 1994).
Thus, many professions have developed explicit rules prohibiting sexual
intimacies between helpers and clients. In addition, providing counseling to
someone with whom one has been sexually involved in the past can be
destructive to the client. Helpers typically cannot be objective and provide
quality services to clients with whom they have been intimately involved. For
more discussion of sexual attraction (a common feeling for helpers at all levels),
see 
Chapter 19
.
Helpers also should avoid getting into the 
role
 of being a therapist with
friends or family members. Although helping skills can certainly be used to
communicate effectively in personal relationships and the ultimate goal is for
people to turn to friends and family for support, taking on the role of a therapist
or helper with friends or family members can be detrimental for several reasons.
First, when a person takes on the role of therapist, the primary goal is to help the
client, whereas the goal with friends and family is to have a 50–50 relationship.
Hence, by taking on the role of therapist with family and friends, it is difficult to
get one’s own needs met. Second, it is difficult to be objective when listening to
the problems of friends or family members. A lack of objectivity could have a
negative impact on a helping session because the helper’s own needs could
interfere with assisting the client to act in her or his best interests. In my own
relationships with family and friends, I certainly dispense advice and support,
but I make clear that it is not from being in the role of a therapist at this time.
Third, the role of helper is powerful and could disturb the power dynamics in
the relationship. For example, Alfonso began to rely on his friend to be his
helper while he was going through a divorce. In time, Alfonso became
dependent on this friend for assistance when problems emerged at work or with
his children. His relationship with his friend-turned-helper was harmed because
their interactions were always focused on Alfonso’s problems. Obviously, the
differences between relationships with friends and family members versus a
professional therapeutic relationship are complicated and overlapping, so I
encourage readers to think through these issues carefully and debate them in
class.
BE AWARE OF YOUR VALUES
Empirical literature has shown that helpers’ values influence clients (e.g., Beutler
& Bergan, 1991), so helpers need to be aware of this influence of values and
80
beliefs in their interactions with clients. For example, a helper who believes that
all women should work outside the home in high-status, nontraditional
occupations may inadvertently discourage a client from selecting a traditional
career that seems to be a good fit for her interests and that would enable her to
focus on her family. Beginning helpers, like advanced clinicians, should work to
understand their biases. Thus, I encourage helpers to increase their awareness of
their values and to ascertain the influence of these values on the helping process.
Becoming aware of values is a part of self-awareness that will be covered more in
Chapter 4
.
The influence of values in helping can be subtle. Helpers can influence the
direction of sessions and clients’ selection of actions through nonverbal behavior
of which they are unaware, such as smiling or nodding their heads at particular
moments. Beginning helpers sometimes struggle with inadvertently encouraging
clients to talk about situations that are comfortable for or interesting to the
helper. For example, a helper might use nonverbal behaviors to indicate great
interest when the client is talking about her romantic relationship but seem
somewhat less interested when the discussion moves to roommate concerns.
Viewing videotapes, talking to supervisors, and self-reflecting can enable helpers
to become aware of how their values influence the helping process.
ETHICAL BEHAVIOR RELATED TO CULTURE
Ethical behavior mandates that helpers be mindful of differences among
individuals and use basic helping skills that reflect an understanding of the
people with whom they are working (see also American Psychological
Association, 2003). I spend more time talking about ethics related to culture in
Chapter 5
.
ACT IN A VIRTUOUS MANNER
Professionals concerned with ethical behaviors have begun to move from a focus
on behaving in an ethical manner (i.e., following the guidelines delineated in an
ethical code) to behaving in a virtuous manner. Virtues are not as concerned
with laws and rules as much as with striving to be a person of positive moral
character (Meara et al., 1996). Part of this change results from the reality that
ethical codes, in and of themselves, cannot provide exact specifications for
behaviors. Helpers need to internalize the six basic ethical principles discussed
earlier in this chapter (autonomy, beneficence, nonmaleficence, justice, fidelity,
and veracity), practice a comprehensive ethical decision-making model, and
monitor themselves and their behaviors to ensure respectful interactions with
clients.
For example, a helper had a very successful helping session with a client at
the university counseling center. She used her basic helping skills to provide a
81
safe and open environment. The client shared much personal information in the
session and struggled with concerns of importance in his life. The following
weekend, the helper ran into the client at a party. She was confused about how
to deal with this situation because her training had not addressed guidelines for
meeting clients in social situations. However, the helper was a sensitive and
respectful woman, so she waited for the client to speak to her first and returned
his brief greeting as they passed. Her response was consistent with virtuous
behavior. It is important to recognize that it is not possible to provide helpers
with answers to every ethical situation they might encounter; instead, helpers
need to behave with clients in a caring and respectful manner that is consistent
with acting in a virtuous manner (which is most likely also ethical).
TAKE CARE OF YOURSELF TO ENSURE THAT YOU CAN
CARE FOR OTHERS
One final often-ignored dimension of ethical behavior involves helpers taking
care of themselves. Helping can be an exhausting enterprise that requires helpers
to give much of themselves to others. The fastest road to burnout involves
taking care of others without paying attention to relaxation and caring for one’s
own needs. It behooves helpers to monitor their health and energy to ensure that
they can provide quality services to others. Helpers might regularly evaluate the
presence of added stressors, poor health, and exhaustion. Helpers can try to
achieve balance by integrating rewarding work, supportive relationships, regular
exercise, and healthy eating habits into their lives. Helpers can also seek
counseling when they need support or assistance with pressing concerns.
Working Through an Ethical Dilemma
Although beginning helpers may not encounter many ethical dilemmas, learning
how to work through these situations can be helpful so that helpers can be
prepared. Ethical dilemmas occur when there are competing ethical guidelines
(Kitchener, 1984). At times, the actions that helpers could take to uphold one
ethical principle would violate another ethical principle. Kitchener (1984)
described inherent contradictions that exist in ethical codes (e.g., individual
autonomy vs. making decisions for clients; confidentiality vs. protecting others).
For example, ethical codes often ensure a client’s right to privacy and
confidentiality. They also endorse the importance of working to minimize harm
to others. These important standards can, at times, conflict with one another.
For instance, one helper worked with an adolescent client who was threatening
to kill herself but did not want the helper to discuss this with her parents. The
adolescent felt that her parents would not take her seriously and might punish
82
her for disclosing these thoughts to her helper. The helper was faced with an
ethical dilemma that was not easily resolved by examining the profession’s
ethical code. In this case, the helper talked with the adolescent about the
importance of disclosing this information to her parents to ensure her safety.
Then, in the presence of the client and with the client’s permission, the helper
discussed the client’s concerns with her parents.
Helpers can follow the A-B-C-D-E strategy for ethical decision making
(Sileo & Kopala, 1993) when they are confronted with an ethical dilemma. To
illustrate its application, let us consider a situation in which a client discloses to a
helper that she was raped by an acquaintance the previous night. The helper in
this case is a beginning helper who feels outraged by the crime and wants to call
the police immediately. The client, however, is concerned about her boyfriend
finding out and definitely does not want the rape to be reported. The helper
realizes that this is not a situation in which he is legally required to break
confidentiality and report the rape, but instead is an ethical dilemma between
reporting a crime against the client’s wishes and maintaining confidentiality.
The helper uses the A-B-C-D-E strategy for ethical decision making to work
toward resolving how to proceed in this challenging situation.
A: ASSESSMENT
The helper identifies the situation; the client’s status and resources; and the
helper’s values, feelings, and reactions to the situation. In this case, the helper
notes that the client is a well-adjusted, bright, and competent young woman
who is finishing her 4th year in college, majoring in business administration. She
reports having a good relationship with her boyfriend. Two close friends have
promised to support her through her recovery from the rape, and she has
indicated an interest in attending a rape survivors’ group. The helper, however,
feels strongly that the rapist should be punished for what he did to the client.
When he reflects more on the issue, however, the helper acknowledges that the
strength of his emotions may result from his feeling helpless when he discovered
that his younger sister had been raped.
B: BENEFIT
The helper evaluates what is most likely to benefit the client, the helping
relationship, and the client’s significant others. In this case, the helper believes
that disclosure of the rape to the police and subsequent prosecution of the rapist
could benefit the client, her boyfriend, and possible future victims. However, he
also acknowledges that the client believes that she would be helped most by
discussing the rape with her helper, her best friends, and a rape survivors’
support group and would be harmed by going to the police. As with many
ethical dilemmas, different benefits are present for several possible solutions.
83
C: CONSEQUENCES AND CONSULTATION
Moving on to the ethical, legal, emotional, and therapeutic consequences that
could result from possible actions, the helper consults with a supervisor who
provides assistance in identifying and working through salient issues. In this
case, the supervisor helps the helper identify that his disclosure of the rape to the
police would undermine the trust that he had worked to develop with the client.
Moreover, the helper would be violating the client’s wishes, confidentiality, and
right to privacy. His reporting of the rape might reinforce feelings of
powerlessness that the client felt after being raped.
D: DUTY AND DOCUMENTATION
The helper next considers to whom a duty exists. In this case, the helper’s
primary duty or responsibility is to the client rather than to other people in her
life (e.g., her boyfriend or other women that the rapist might harm). His job as a
helper is to do no harm to his client and to provide services that enhance her
growth and potential. The helper is beginning to realize how important it is to
abide by the client’s wish for nondisclosure, despite his own desire to prosecute
the rapist and protect others.
Sometimes, the helper may have a duty to protect someone other than the
client (i.e., an identifiable person whom the client is threatening to harm). In
situations in which a child is being abused, helpers are mandated by law to
report the abuse or to assist the client in reporting the abuse to child protective
services (laws vary across states, so it is important to be aware of local laws).
Furthermore, in cases in which the client threatens to harm self or others, the
helper must ensure the safety of the individuals identified as at risk for harm.
For example, if this client told her helper that she planned to murder the rapist
and had enlisted the assistance of an assassin to carry out the plan, the helper
would have a responsibility to prevent harm to the rapist and report this threat
to the police.
The documentation part of this step involves keeping records of what
happens. Given that some of these situations involve sticky legal issues, it is
important for helpers to document what happened as precisely as possible,
remembering that all such documents can be subpoenaed.
E: EDUCATION
The helper reviews his education to determine what he has learned about
appropriate actions to take in dealing with similar ethical dilemmas. The helper
speaks to his supervisor, refers to his notes from his courses, consults current
websites (see 
Exhibit 3.1
), and determines that in this situation the best strategy
84
is to maintain the client’s confidence and assist in her recovery from the rape.
The helper also decides to go for therapy to address his residual feelings about
his sister’s rape.
Concluding Comments
Ethical dilemmas can be aptly described by the two Chinese symbols
representing 
crisis:
 danger and opportunity. Ethical dilemmas can be dangerous
in that the welfare of the client may be compromised but they also present an
opportunity for helpers to reflect on what they have learned and what they value
and then to act in a manner consistent with professional and (one hopes)
personal values. Ethical dilemmas provide a unique challenge for helpers to
confront and resolve important questions and to ensure, to the best of their
abilities, that their clients’ needs are being served. In my experience when ethical
issues arise in classes (and they have a few times), it provides a great opportunity
to think through important pedagogical issues and make sure that the best
possible educational services are being delivered.
What Do You Think?
How do you feel about professional groups imposing ethical
restrictions on helpers?
What do you think the consequences should be if someone violates the
ethical standards?
What is your opinion about cultural considerations in ethics? Discuss
how your response may be influenced by your cultural background.
Discuss the possible positive and negative consequences of discussing
confidentiality and informed consent and how they influence the
therapeutic relationship.
What are some ways, other than those covered in the chapter, that
helpers could inadvertently cause clients harm?
Do you agree that taking care of oneself as a helper helps to prevent
problems in the helping role?
85
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Ethics
Citation:
 Kitson, C., & Sperlinger, D. (2007). Dual relationships between clinical
psychologists and their clients: A survey of UK clinical psychologists’ attitudes. 
Psychology
and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice, 80,
 279–295.
Rationale:
 Ethical codes indicate that dual relationships (i.e., when the therapist and client
have another relationship beyond the professional one) can be problematic. Sexual
relationships between therapists and clients are strictly prohibited in most ethical codes, but
it is less clear about the appropriateness of nonsexual relationships. Kitson and Sperlinger
noted that some nonsexual dual relationships have the potential to upset the dynamics of
the therapeutic relationship, particularly because of issues related to power, boundaries, and
whose needs are being met. Ethical guidelines related to dual relationships have been
developed to minimize loss of objectivity and exploitation by therapists. The authors
wanted to replicate past work on attitudes about dual relationships.
Method:
 Participants (UK clinical psychologists with an average of 14 years of postdoctoral
experience) completed a survey about the appropriateness of 38 different scenarios
representing dual relationships.
Interesting Findings:
Participants rarely discussed with clients the likelihood of out-of-therapy contact and how they would manage
such an encounter. However, this issue was more likely to come up in therapy after there had been a chance
encounter outside of therapy.
Participants unanimously agreed that it is never appropriate to have a sexual relationship with a client being seen
currently or in the year after therapy has ended.
Participants also rated it as inappropriate to provide therapy to a friend, trainee, employee; to develop a business
relationship with a former client; or to accept as a referral a partner of a colleague or employee.
Instances when participants thought that it was sometimes or often appropriate to have dual relationships
included continuing to shop at a supermarket where they regularly see current or former clients, accepting a
referral for therapy of someone who was referred by a former client, continuing to see a client whom they realize is
closely related to a previous client, remaining at a party after accidentally encountering and interacting with a
client at that party, attending a party unconnected with their work where they know one of their clients will be,
and testifying as a witness in a personal injury case after they have established a therapeutic relationship with the
client involved.
Clinical psychologists who viewed dual relationships as less appropriate were female, younger, less experienced,
psychodynamic oriented, worked in an urban area, and did not work and live in the same area as their clients
(these findings replicate research in the United States).
Conclusions:
Clearly, therapists should not be sexually involved with clients.
Therapists should not engage in dual relationships that will exploit clients or are for their own personal benefit.
Many other types of dual relationships are ambiguous in terms of appropriateness.
Implications for Therapy:
When confronted with any potential dual relationship, helpers need to think through the potential problems. It is
a good idea to refer to ethical codes and consult with colleagues.
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
86
Every human has four endowments—self-awareness, conscience, independent will, and
creative imagination. These give us the ultimate human freedom . . . the power to
choose, to respond, to change.
—Stephen Covey
Emma was working with HIV clients who were mandated to come to sessions. When
they did not want to be there or hear anything she had to say or when they had
homophobic attitudes, Emma found herself not liking these clients and getting angry at
them. In contrast, when other clients listened to her, asked lots of questions, and were
very involved, she found it very gratifying to be with them and she felt as though she
had really helped them. But she had to ponder whether she was being unfair to those
reluctant clients, who might actually have really needed her help but did not know how
to accept it.
S
elf-awareness has been thought of as intrinsically positive, necessary for ethical
practice, and critical for skillful helping (Williams, Hayes, & Fauth, 2008).
Most people would agree that helpers need to be aware of themselves, because
who the helper is influences the process. For example, clients may have a
different reaction to a big, imposing athletic man than to a small, unimposing
attractive woman. Furthermore, helpers use their reactions to their clients as one
gauge of how others might react to the client, so the helper needs to be aware of
how his or her reactions to the client are influenced by the helper’s own issues.
For example, the helper might be very sensitive to feeling criticized by an older
female client who reminds him of his mother. Finally, the helper’s mood (e.g.,
being hungry or sleepy, being distracted because of having had a fight with a
partner) can influence how she or he feels and behaves in the session.
But what is self-awareness? Williams et al. (2008) suggested that self-
awareness can be thought of as either a stable characteristic (i.e., self-knowledge
or self-insight) or a state of heightened self-focus (i.e., sensitivity in the here-and-
now). The first type is “Who am I?” whereas the second type is “What am I
feeling in this moment?” Both seem important for anyone who is interested in
87
helping others.
Many aspects of self-awareness are unconscious, but our goal as helpers is to
examine ourselves on an ongoing basis and become more conscious. We strive to
become as aware as possible of who we are and what we bring to the helping
process. At the outset of this chapter, however, I want to stress that self-
awareness is an aspiration and something that we all strive for throughout our
lives, but not something easily obtained and maintained. I suggest that you read
this chapter at the beginning of your training and then come back to it over the
years as you grow and change, because you will have different thoughts about
self-awareness based on your experiences in providing helping.
Self-Knowledge and Self-Insight
Helpers need to have a general awareness of their own issues, biases, strengths,
and weaknesses because these influence how they behave in sessions and how
clients perceive them. Given that helpers use themselves (they rely on their own
reactions to know how others react to the clients), they need to be aware of who
they are and how they come across to others so that they can determine what is
coming from them and what is coming from the clients. Furthermore, by being
aware of their own painful experiences, helpers can become more attuned to and
sensitive to others’ experiences.
So as helpers, we need to be aware of who we are and what we bring to the
process, and use ourselves to help others. In the next sections, I focus on typical
characteristics of helpers, motivations for wanting to be a helper, and potential
biases as a helper. As you read each section, think about yourself and how these
ideas fit for you.
CHARACTERISTICS OF HELPERS
Helping seems to be a natural tendency of many people who have an innate
desire to assist others (Stahl & Hill, 2008). Such individuals may recognize a
special talent in themselves for listening and supporting others. Many students
in helping skills classes say that friends and family often seek them out.
Helpers tend to have several characteristics in common. They listen
carefully and empathically, are nonjudgmental, are open to new experiences and
perspectives, are approachable and friendly, and like to listen (Hill et al., 2013).
Summers and Barber (2010) added that helpers need to have hope, love,
kindness, social intelligence, flexibility, curiosity, creativity, persistence,
humility, and humor, all of which contribute to their being able to have a
flexible emotional, open, reflective relationship with clients.
There are also some characteristics that make it difficult to attain and
88
maintain self-awareness. Perfectionism and a lack of tolerance for ambiguity can
make it hard to deal with the fact that there are rarely “right” answers about
what to do in helping. Furthermore, defensiveness and a lack of willingness to
explore difficult topics such as sexual attraction, anger, and biases can make it
difficult to be open to painful or taboo feelings. Of course, many practicing
therapists are perfectionists, have a lack of tolerance for ambiguity, and are
defensive, so these characteristics do not imply that such people cannot be
helpers. Rather, I mention these as characteristics so that aspiring helpers can
look at those qualities in themselves and think about the potential impact on
their helping abilities.
MOTIVATIONS FOR WANTING TO HELP
As you start the process of becoming a helper, it is valuable to try to understand
what motivates you to want to help others. Most people have a mixture of many
motivations, and these motivations change over time. Motivations are difficult
to be aware of and understand, but it is important to reflect because these
reasons could influence what you do in helping sessions. Recently, Hill et al.
(2013), in a study of undergraduate students taking helping skills classes, found
that some motivations are other-oriented (i.e., to help others and give back to
society), whereas others are more self-oriented (i.e., to feel good and to provide
meaning to life).
Other-Oriented Motivations
One reason for aspiring to become a helper is to make a difference in people’s
lives. For example, helpers might want to provide support to those in need by
volunteering to work in a shelter for homeless women or by becoming a buddy
to a gerontology patient confined to a nursing home. People who are motivated
to use helping skills in situations such as these provide others with supportive
relationships in which clients feel listened to, cared for, and understood. Some
helpers also choose to make a difference in children’s lives by mentoring or
tutoring young students, using their foundation of helping skills to develop
encouraging relationships. Others hope to make life less painful for those in
troubled situations. For example, helpers can provide an important function by
assisting teens who think they might be gay or lesbian and fear retribution from
family and friends.
Furthermore, some people aspire to be helpers because they experienced
therapy themselves as clients when they were struggling with painful issues, and
they want to help others so that others do not have to experience as much pain
as they have. They might also feel grateful to their therapists for helping them
through a difficult situation and want to give back and contribute to society, For
example, when Kendra was 12 years old, her mother died, and Kendra had to
89
assume her mother’s role with her five siblings. She engaged in her own personal
therapy to help her cope with her loss and her new responsibilities. Kendra now
aspires to help children who have experienced loss in their lives. Another
example involves rape survivors who become crisis counselors after receiving
supportive counseling that helped them resolve issues related to the rape.
Similarly, some people who overcome substance abuse want to help others both
as a way of helping others with similar problems and as a way of helping
themselves stay sober.
Finally, people may enter helping fields to work for social change. Helping
affords a unique opportunity to make a difference in the lives of individuals and,
sometimes, to influence social policies. Helpers who work with adolescents in at-
risk environments may provide them with skills, hope, and encouragement to
overcome obstacles and graduate from high school and college. Other helpers
may draft legislation or testify on behalf of policies that fight discrimination
(e.g., sexual harassment) or encourage funding for social services (e.g., child
care). Contributions to social change can also occur through research that
helpers undertake to evaluate the effectiveness of helping interventions (e.g.,
studying the efficacy of training undergraduate students to be effective helpers
for battered women who have entered the criminal justice system).
Self-Oriented Motivations
Most of us are also motivated to become helpers for more self-oriented reasons.
Most of you have probably heard the jokes about how students major in
psychology to heal themselves (or their families or friends). Indeed, many people
enter helping fields to work through unresolved personal issues or to change
situations that they found painful in the past (e.g., an unhappy childhood).
In addition, some people view helping as consistent with their cultural
values and thus seek careers that enable them to assist others. These people are
often natural helpers and have had role models (e.g., parents, aunts or uncles,
cousins) who have dedicated their lives to the service of others (e.g., were
counselors, ministers, or social workers).
For many individuals, the helping environment is attractive because it
allows them to work with clients who are striving toward actualization of their
potential. Furthermore, helpers are often excited by their contribution to the
process of change in clients’ lives and are energized by their clients’ hard work
and personal growth. One therapist told me that there was no better job in the
world than being able to facilitate and be a witness to the growth of people in
the journey to understanding themselves.
Yet another motivation is that it is intellectually challenging to help others.
People are endlessly fascinating and unique, and it is intriguing to try to
understand them and intervene to help them change. Furthermore, helpers learn
90
a lot about other people through helping. Helpers can vicariously experience
other ways of living, similarly to traveling, reading novels, or watching movies.
Hearing clients challenge themselves can in turn impel helpers to examine
themselves. In this way, being a helper can lead to personal growth. One
therapist said that one of her motivations for being a therapist is that she values
self-reflection, personal growth, and ongoing learning. Being a therapist keeps
her on her toes in terms of her own wellness and mental health. Similarly, a
helping career may appeal to many people because of the opportunity to interact
with smart, capable colleagues who value personal growth and helping others.
They may receive support from their colleagues to actively examine their own
issues and improve themselves to ensure their continued success in the helping
role.
Some would consider the idea of wanting to make a difference in people’s
lives to be altruism. According to definitions, however, altruism involves an
unselfish concern or devotion for the welfare of others. One dictionary notes
that altruism is not necessarily beneficial to oneself and can sometimes even be
harmful to oneself (especially if you disregard your own needs). Most people,
however, want to be helpers not only to give to others but also because it makes
them feel good to help others (Hill et al., 2013). Many students in helping skills
classes describe helping as fulfilling and giving them a sense of purpose or
meaning in life. They also describe it as rewarding and gratifying to be able to
help others and to be able to make a difference in their lives.
Of course, some self-oriented motivations can be less positive or healthy
(Bugental, 1965). Some people may want to help others because they are needy
themselves and view helping as a way to develop relationships and fulfill their
interpersonal needs. These people might have difficulty with intimacy and
therefore seek a safe way of getting close to others. In addition, some individuals
sometimes envision themselves as saviors for the less fortunate or as wise
distributors of knowledge and advice, and want to go into the helping profession
as a mission, to save others. Others may use helping as a way to feel better about
what they have by comparing themselves with those who are less fortunate. For
other people, helping others enables them to feel superior to those whom they
are attempting to help. Yet others like the sense of power or authority of being
in the counselor role with people who are suffering. Such motivations can be
dangerous, especially if the helper is not aware of them and acts out of them in
the helping session. For example, when helpers need clients to get better to build
their own self-esteem, they often cannot allow clients to explore and make their
own choices (e.g., choosing not to change). Clients might even feel worse after
being in a session with a helper who is contemptuous, demanding, or seductive.
Finally, some people might aspire to become therapists for achievement,
wealth, prominence, fame, prestige, and glory. Such motivations might be
unrealistic. Although people in the helping professions are generally well-
91
educated professionals with credibility and good standing within their
communities, and a few do become well known because of their scholarly work
and a few do become wealthy, therapists generally get their gratification from
helping others rather than from wealth or prominence. For those people wanting
or needing fame and glory, the therapeutic profession may not be the best
choice.
Balance Between Other-Orientation and Self-Orientation
In general, it makes sense to have some balance between other-oriented and self-
oriented motives for becoming and being a therapist. Being too altruistic could
lead to burnout, and being too self-oriented does not fit with the values of
helping others and could lead to harming clients.
AWARENESS OF BIASES
All of us have biases based on stereotypes of other people. It is perhaps a basic,
but lamentable, human tendency to have in-groups and out-groups and to
believe that people who are not a part of our group are different from us in
fundamental ways, making it hard to empathize with them. Indeed, some recent
neuroscience research indicates that we may be hardwired to be more attracted
to people who are similar to us racially (Ito & Batholow, 2009). I call these
biases 
hot buttons
 for helpers, because they reflect problems that can get triggered
or set off in the helping setting. Becoming aware of hot buttons is important so
that we do not inadvertently or unconsciously mistreat clients.
Some typical hot buttons are based on cultural factors (see also 
Chapter 5
on culture), especially if we have had limited contact with people from other
cultures. Another common hot button that students in helping skills classes have
admitted over the years (and in a recent study; Hill et al., 2013) is thinking
about working with clients who have abused, raped, murdered, committed
crimes, or are generally unlawful. Trainees worry that they will not be able to be
open, nonjudgmental, and empathic with such clients. Because of their anger
and rage at such offensive behaviors, they cannot imagine having compassion for
the suffering of these people or having curiosity about how these people came to
behave in this way. Students also often have difficulty thinking about working
with clients who express hostility, anger, disdain, or disrespect toward them as
helpers. Because helpers are often very empathic, unaggressive people who want
others to like them, it is threatening and scary for them when they think clients
do not like them and might even want to harm them.
We all also have biases based on our own personal backgrounds, which
might show up as countertransferences. For example, a helper may find that she
instinctively dislikes boisterous male clients because they all remind her of her
loud, overbearing father. Another helper might get annoyed with dependent
92
clients because she did not get enough nurturing herself as a child.
Countertransference is discussed more in 
Chapter 11
.
In general, beginning helpers often have trouble with clients whom they
perceive to be different from them on any salient dimension. For example, a
beginning helper might have difficulty imagining working with a client who is
much older. Helpers also often have problems working with clients who have
different values (e.g., on politics, gender equality, stereotyping, racism).
Similarly, and understandably, clients have difficulty believing that helpers who
are different can understand them.
Also difficult, although less often acknowledged, is that helpers have trouble
working with clients who are too similar to them. Helpers often assume that
these clients are exactly like them on every dimension and forget to help the
clients explore, or they might treat the client as a friend and start chatting and
disclosing. An example might be when a female college student client starts
talking about roommate problems, the beginning helper (a female college
student) might project that the client has trouble being assertive just as she does
and might even start disclosing about her own difficulties with roommates. In
such a situation, the client might respond by shutting down and not exploring
her own distinct feelings further.
STRATEGIES TO INCREASE SELF-KNOWLEDGE/SELF-
INSIGHT
It is important that helpers learn about themselves so that their personal issues
do not intrude on sessions with clients and so that they can be more helpful with
clients. By taking care of ourselves, we are more likely to be helpful to our clients
and avoid demanding inappropriate things from clients.
In this section, I discuss two major strategies for increasing self-knowledge.
The first involves personal psychotherapy with a good psychotherapist. The
second involves self-reflection. These are not mutually exclusive. Personal
psychotherapy enhances self-reflection because it can provide an outside
perspective and a healing relationship. Likewise, self-reflection can enhance
personal psychotherapy because typically, people take more personal
responsibility for what they want to discuss in therapy after they have engaged in
self-reflection. Later, when you are seeing clients, supervision can be another
helpful strategy.
Psychotherapy
The ideal place for beginning helpers to learn about themselves is through their
own personal psychotherapy. I heartily recommend that people who want to
become helpers seek therapy not only to resolve personal problems but also to
learn more about themselves and their motivations for becoming helpers. For an
93
account of my own, very valuable experiences in therapy, see Hill (2005a).
Getting into their own personal therapy can enable helpers to recognize
personal issues that could interfere with their ability to help. If they are
preoccupied with themselves and their problems or are unaware of negative
personal behaviors, helpers rarely have energy left over to focus on clients.
Furthermore, therapy can enable helpers to work on their own growth and self-
understanding. An occupational hazard (and benefit) of being a helper is that
the helping process stirs up personal issues that might otherwise lay dormant.
For example, if a client talks about problems with alcoholism and the helper has
not resolved similar problems, it might be difficult for the helper to attend to the
client’s pain instead of focusing on his or her own. Or helpers might minimize
the extent of clients’ problems because their own problems have been neglected.
Although people learn a great deal about themselves through the process of
being helpers, personal therapy gives them the opportunity to work on these
issues in an appropriate setting.
Moreover, being in therapy themselves as clients can teach helpers about the
process of helping. Being a client allows helpers to learn what it is like to be on
the receiving end of helping, to see what is and is not helpful, and to experience
how difficult it is to open up and reveal painful information about oneself. It is
helpful to be a client to empathize with the anxiety, attachment, struggle, and
rewards of the process. Being in therapy also provides a model for helpers about
how they would (or would not) want to act in sessions with their clients. The
firsthand experience of what it is like to be on the receiving end of helping is
invaluable.
It is troublesome when helpers-in-need refuse to seek help themselves but
are willing to be helpers for others. One worries about the motivations of such
persons for wanting to be helpers. Helpers who have the attitude that seeking
help is only for weak or defective people may inadvertently communicate that
attitude and cause clients to feel ashamed for seeking help.
At this point, you might stop and reflect about what your reaction was
when you read this section about personal psychotherapy. Did you say to
yourself, “Terrific, I’m going!” or did you say, “No way, I don’t need therapy”?
What does your reaction say about you and your intentions for wanting to be a
helper?
Self-Reflection
Another suggestion is to set aside time for self-reflection. Journaling (i.e., writing
about your thoughts and feelings) is one way of doing self-reflection. Likewise,
meditation and yoga can be helpful for slowing down and focusing on being
present in the moment.
Mindfulness, which involves attending to each aspect of experience as it
94
unfolds in the present moment (Kabat-Zinn, 2003), is also very helpful. Rather
than rushing around and multitasking, mindfulness entails focusing attention by
nonjudgmentally observing physical perceptions, sensations, emotions, and
thoughts. An attitude of warmth, curiosity, and acceptance toward whatever
emerges is suggested, whether the experience is positive or negative. For
example, mindfulness might involve paying attention when you eat to each taste
and sensation without focusing on other things, or sitting outside in the sun and
being aware of the various emotions as they emerge without denying them. In
this mode, you witness and explore each experience rather than attempting to fix
or change the experience in any way. Essentially, a thought or feeling comes into
your mind, you observe and experience it, and then you let it go. Practicing
mindfulness is good preparation for nonjudgmentally concentrating on and
listening to clients, to what they are saying and feeling, while putting aside one’s
own agenda and preconceptions.
State of Heightened Self-Focus
Visualize yourself in the following situations:
It’s your first session ever seeing a client.
A client is 25 minutes late to your session.
You’re scheduled to take an exam right after your session.
You didn’t get much sleep last night.
You sense that your client did not react well to your intervention.
You think that your intervention was brilliant.
You had an argument right before the session.
What reactions did you have when you visualized these scenes? Did any of
the scenes seem more provocative to you than did others?
When most of us think about helping clients, we think immediately about
the type of client. Will we be seeing someone who is depressed or anxious? Is the
person male or female, old or young? What we often think less about (other
than our initial anxiety and lack of self-efficacy) is how we as helpers feel. What
issues get triggered in us when clients talk about various experiences, thoughts,
or feelings? What reactions are we having to clients when we sit across from
them, and how do these reactions influence how we relate to the client?
Helpers can use their inner experiences as a tool for understanding what is
happening in the helping process. By being aware of their reactions, helpers can
make better decisions about how to intervene and are less likely to act out their
reactions in helping situations (Williams, Hurley, O’Brien, & DeGregorio,
2003). Moreover, helpers’ reactions can provide valuable clues as to how other
95
people react to clients. For example, if the helper feels bored when a client talks
in a monotone voice, chances are that at least some other people in the client’s
life also feel bored when the client talks that way. Hence, helpers have some
firsthand information about how the client comes across to other people. So,
interestingly, if the helper has a reaction, it could be due to the client, or it could
be due to the helper. Let us say that the helper gets angry at the client. Is that
due to something that the client did verbally or nonverbally, or is it due to the
helper’s issue? One way of telling is that if you have the same feeling with many
clients (or people in your life), it is probably you and not the clients (or other
people).
In addition, given that we are all human beings with needs and wishes, our
personal issues often unconsciously influence the helping process. In fact, as
previously mentioned, it is this human relationship that helps clients change,
grow, and reach their full potential. But we want to avoid using the helping
process to meet our own needs, which can harm the clients. We also want to
model healthy interactions for clients in which they are not being taken
advantage of and can feel free to act genuinely in our presence. But it is also
important to be genuine. As McCullough et al. (2003) said, it is important to be
able to laugh when happy and cry when sad. Helpers are not just statues, but
real people with real feelings.
Difficulties obviously arise, however, when helpers genuinely have feelings
that are in opposition to those of clients. For example, perhaps Don talks about
how he uses illegal drugs and loves them, and you have a strong visceral reaction
and have a genuine impulse to tell Don that it is not healthy to use drugs. In
such situations, it is always important to have your feelings and reactions, and to
think about them, but also to think about your goals and intentions for the
helping process. To help Don explore, you might need to back off of your
immediate reactions, but keep track of them later to try to understand where
they come from.
An experienced colleague said that she has a double track going on in her
head during sessions. She both pays attention to what the client is saying and is
aware of her own reactions. She noted that it was many years before she was able
to do this comfortably, and she actually was not sure how she learned it. But she
did notice that if she focuses too much on trying to be aware, she is not able to
be aware. When this colleague loses track of her reactions, she does a body scan
to sense how she is feeling physiologically (does she have a tense jaw, furrowed
brow, crossed or uncrossed legs?). She also noted that she is much more
comfortable with silence and less talking on her part, which leads to a slower
pace, allowing her clients more space to explore.
This same colleague talked about the necessity of bracketing personal events
in order to focus on the client. Experienced therapists generally can bracket their
personal issues when they are in session unless they are undergoing a major
96
crisis, in which case they are usually aware that they should not be doing therapy
at the time. The most dangerous time is when the therapist is not aware of or
minimizes the stress and thus cannot bracket it. For one helper, having a teenage
son who was constantly pushing limits caused her to have difficulties with
teenage clients who pushed boundaries. Not being able to maintain a sense of
her boundaries made it difficult for her to nonjudgmentally empathize with such
clients.
TYPES OF IN-THE-MOMENT SELF-AWARENESS
We can think about two types of in-the-moment self-awareness (Williams,
Judge, Hill, & Hoffman, 1997). The first involves a facilitative self-awareness
(i.e., being able to be mindful and accepting of thoughts and feelings as they
emerge). The second involves hindering or interfering self-awareness such as
distracting, negative self-talk about personal issues, anxiety about one’s skills,
anxiety about being taped, and rumination about errors. Not surprisingly,
hindering self-awareness has been linked with therapists’ negative feelings about
their own performance in sessions (Williams et al., 2008). Sometimes beginning
helpers are so distracted by interfering thoughts (“What am I going to say
next?”) that they stop listening to the clients. The goal is to increase facilitative
self-awareness (i.e., to be fully present in the moment and emotionally available
to the client) and to decrease hindering self-awareness (i.e., to bracket
distractions and negative self-talk).
STRATEGIES FOR INCREASING IN-THE-MOMENT
FACILITATIVE SELF-AWARENESS AND DECREASING
INTERFERING SELF-AWARENESS
It is important that helpers learn about themselves so that personal issues do not
intrude on sessions with clients. By taking care of ourselves and having healthy
relationships, we are less likely to demand inappropriate things from clients. It is
when we feel depleted, have either high or low emotional instability, lack self-
compassion, are generally in bad shape that we are more likely to act out or
engage in inappropriate or unethical activities with clients. Being aware can help
us draw back and figure out ways to take care of ourselves and restabilize into a
more optimal state. Practicing these strategies in daily life can make it more
likely that you will be able to use them within the helping setting.
Increase Self-Awareness
Make a conscious attempt to become aware. Get in a quiet space and turn off all
machines. Focus on your body (e.g., “Is there any tension in your head, neck,
stomach?) while breathing deeply. Focus on your breath. Be aware of whatever
97
thoughts come into your mind and then let them go. It can also be useful to
practice mindfulness, meditation, and relaxation.
Increase Self-Compassion
It is important to have compassion for yourself, or put another way, to love
yourself as you truly are. We all have problems given that it is hard to be a
human being, so it is important to be self-aware and make changes in your life
but not to be too hard on yourself. Accept yourself as a person who is imperfect
and striving, who has both positive and negative feelings, positive and negative
motivations, biases, judgments, and aspects you like and dislike. I recommend
that you read Neff’s (2011) book on self-compassion.
Explore/Gain Insight/Make Action Plans
Try to understand from where the feelings are coming (therapy, of course, can
help greatly with this). Particularly, think back to childhood and how you were
raised. Also, think about major events in your life, both positive and negative,
and how these influenced you. Then think about the last few days and what
experiences you are currently encountering. Ask yourself the following:
When have I felt this way before?
With whom have I felt this way before?
What was the situation when I felt this way before?
Why did I feel this way?
Once you have some understanding of where your feelings come from, you
can figure out what to do about them. You are certainly influenced by your past
and your current situation, but you have some choices and can make some
changes.
In Sessions With Clients
When you are in a session and suddenly become aware of interfering self-
awareness (e.g., you feel critical, inept, anxious, blocked, cannot listen, cannot
be empathic, or you find yourself fiddling with a pen, holding your breath,
leaning back or forward, jittering), you can pause, take a deep breath, focus on
your breathing, and give yourself a chance to think without having to respond
immediately. You can say “Hmmm” or “I need time to think” to slow down the
process. Again, accept that you are not perfect and have a moment of
compassion for yourself. Positive self-talk can be helpful here. And then return
the focus to the client instead of on self. Often we become so overwhelmed by
our own feelings, or we get stuck trying to implement an agenda that is not
working. It can be useful at such moments to return the focus to the client,
98
perhaps asking how they feel or reflecting feelings. These suggestions are
supported by consistent finding in the research (e.g., Williams et al., 2008) that
therapists return to the use of basic techniques as a way of reigning in hindering
self-focus and returning their positive attention to the client.
One colleague said that when she has a strong feeling in the session that she
does not immediately understand (e.g., she is angry and has lost empathy for the
client), she makes a mental note of the feeling and then lets it go and moves on
with the session. After the session, she comes back to this feeling and tries to
understand it, trying to think about the origin of the feeling. This reflection
helps her better plan for subsequent sessions with the client. The important
point here is to give yourself time and space without feeling pressure to
understand it in the moment. You can also say, “Sorry that I lost focus there for
a minute, could you please repeat what you said?”
I also want to highlight the idea of staying in touch with your body, asking,
What is your body telling you? If you have a feeling that you cannot identify, do
a body scan: Are you feeling tired, does your back hurt, do you feel an urgent
need to run out and go to the bathroom? Your body and its physiological
reactions can be a valuable source of information regarding your emotional
status.
I also want to stress that many of the reactions that helpers feel in sessions
may be evoked by clients. In such cases in which the stimulus is interpersonal
rather than intrapersonal, the helper will need to conceptualize how to be
immediate with the client. Immediacy, or talking directly about the relationship,
is covered in 
Chapter 14
.
In addition, as a colleague reminded me, it is important for helpers to
consciously plan their days and not see too many clients in a row. Helpers need
to take time before each session to prepare themselves mentally and after each
session to reflect about what happened and write some process notes. And they
need to engage in self-care between sessions to go to the restroom, have a snack,
make phone calls, and clear their head.
Supervision
An ideal place to examine these issues is in supervision (i.e., consultation with a
trained professional). With the help of an experienced supervisor, helpers can
begin to identify which feelings come from personal issues, which are stimulated
by clients, and which are due to a combination of personal issues and client
behavior. Peer supervision can also be invaluable (of course, remember to be
concerned about confidentiality here).
Reviewing Sessions
It can be very helpful to play back sessions and think about your thoughts and
99
feelings at each moment. Thinking about your intentions and the client
reactions can also help. Similarly, students have found it helpful to transcribe an
occasional session because transcribing helps slow down the process so that you
can really try to see and understand what was happening.
Healthy Lifestyle
An important way to prepare yourself for being fully present in your work with
clients is to engage in self-care. These suggestions are not going to be surprising
to you, as huge amounts of research support them. Most basic is that you need
to take care of yourself physiologically. You need to get an adequate amount of
sleep (most people need at least 8 hours of sleep per night), have a healthy diet
(with a minimum of junk food and lots of fruits and vegetables), exercise (your
body is a machine that needs at least 30 minutes of exercise per day), and have
good interpersonal relationships (a strong support network is vital). Balance is
the keyword. Freud talked about how all of us need both love and work in our
lives. It is not good to work too much or play too much.
In conclusion, although self-awareness is hard, there are many strategies for
working on it both in and out of sessions. Being fully present in life is not only
good for being a helper, it is also a good goal for living.
What Do You Think?
Is self-care really important?
What message do you give to clients if you are obviously not caring for
yourself (e.g., you come to a session with a cold or look extremely
tired)?
Is self-awareness a trait or can it be developed?
What interferes with self-awareness?
Is it possible or desirable for everyone to become more self-aware?
What impact or role do you think the less-positive motivations for
becoming a helper have on the helping process? Is it possible that they
could even be helpful?
Can you have too much self-awareness?
Do you think that personal psychotherapy and self-reflection are
necessary or helpful?
Can people change? Is there free will?
100
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Journaling to Enhance Awareness
Citation:
 Hill, C. E., Sullivan, C., Knox, S., & Schlosser, L. Z. (2007). Becoming
psychotherapists: Experiences of novice trainees in a beginning graduate class.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 44,
 434–449.
Rationale:
 We need to learn more about how trainees experience training, specifically in
terms of what they learn and where they struggle. In a previous study relying on
questionnaire data collected immediately after sessions with volunteer clients, Williams,
Judge, Hill, and Hoffman (1997) found that beginning graduate trainees were very
concerned about their therapeutic skills, performance, ability to connect with clients,
anxiety, self-efficacy, role as therapist, similarities to and differences from clients, and
problematic reactions to clients. Coping strategies included focusing on the client and
positive self-talk. Hill et al. hoped to expand on this study by having students write in
journals about their experiences throughout their first semester of training.
Method:
 In their first semester of graduate training, students (none of whom had any
previous training) engaged in helping skills training following the model used in this book,
saw volunteer clients for 10 one-hour sessions, read and discussed several books about
psychotherapy theory, met weekly with an individual supervisor who also watched their
sessions in vivo, wrote a self-examination paper, and transcribed and analyzed the data for
one of their sessions. In addition, students wrote two to four typed pages in weekly journal
entries about any of the following topics: helping skills, competence, countertransference,
anxiety, self-efficacy, supervision, learning about therapy, cultural issues, ethics, the process
of becoming a therapist, reactions to class, or anything else that seemed relevant. In a final
paper, students reflected on changes they made throughout the semester. The professor and
a graduate research assistant who had taken the course the previous year read each entry and
sent feedback to the students, typically offering support and encouragement but also
challenging discrepancies and asking them to elaborate on important topics. Students
typically responded to the feedback in subsequent journal entries. Data from the journals
were analyzed via qualitative methods.
Interesting Findings:
Students reported many challenges. They were self-critical, anxious about beginning to see clients, felt pressured
to do the “right” thing, had difficulty being aware of their feelings and fully present during sessions, and were
distracted by their thoughts and worries. They worried about their therapeutic abilities and felt some discomfort
in the therapist role.
Students often underidentified (focused on differences) or overidentified (focused on similarities) with their
clients. Students were uncomfortable when clients did not conform with expectations of how clients should
behave in sessions (e.g., did not want to explore deeply), were too psychologically knowledgeable (e.g., talked
about transference), or seemed disturbed. Students often felt pulled to step out of the client-centered role that
they were learning and, rather, fix the client, give advice, self-disclose inappropriately, soothe the client, or cry
with the client.
In terms of learning the helping skills, students expressed concerns about how to formulate the exploration skills
to get the clients to explore deeply and not being stilted or repetitive with their open questions/probes. Regarding
insight skills, they were apprehensive about doing them accurately and appropriately. They found it particularly
difficult to master the insight skills. They seldom mentioned any difficulties learning or using action skills or with
101
integrating skills across stages.
Students mentioned difficulties with managing the logistics of sessions, including client recruitment and figuring
out what to do when clients did not show up or cancelled.
Students reported major improvements in becoming therapists as the semester progressed. They became less self-
critical, more able to connect with clients, better at using the exploration and insight skills, felt better about
themselves in the therapist role, less anxious about seeing clients, more self-efficacious, and better able to connect
with clients.
Students felt that they used supervision to help them cope with anxieties and difficulties. They found it helpful
when supervisors provided instruction, took an active directive role, were supportive, facilitated exploration of
concerns related to becoming therapists or of personal issues that influenced their work with clients, challenged
them, and provided specific feedback about their behavior. All students expressed positive feelings about
supervision, but a few students also had neutral or even negative reactions (about lack of clear expectations about
supervision and difficulties in the supervision relationship).
Coping strategies included positive self-talk, focusing on the helping skills to deal with anxiety, and turning the
focus back to the client instead of self. Between sessions, students prepared for the logistics of sessions (e.g.,
practiced their introductions, wrote in their journals) so that things ran more smoothly.
Conclusions:
Major challenges were self-criticism, managing reactions to clients, learning and using the helping skills, and
session management.
Gains were primarily in the areas of learning and using the helping skills, becoming less self-critical, and
connecting with clients.
Supervision was helpful, although there were occasionally ruptures in the relationships.
Trainees used both in-session (positive self-talk) and outside-session (preparation for sessions) to cope with
anxieties.
Implications for Training:
Writing in a journal is an excellent way to become aware of anxieties and growth.
More than one semester is needed for trainees to feel competent in the skills of all three stages. Exploration skills
can be learned relatively easily, but insight skills require much more practice.
Individual supervision is a very helpful addition to helping skills training. Supervision provides individualized
instruction as well as a forum for discussing challenges related to being a helper.
Preparation outside of sessions is helpful to becoming able to deal with challenges raised in working with clients.
During sessions, it is important to be present and aware of feelings and reactions. When self-awareness hinders the
helping process, trainees can return to focusing on the client and using the exploration skills (reflections of
feelings, restatements, and open questions/probes).
Trainers can help trainees become aware of their hot buttons and reactions to clients.
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
102
If we are to achieve a richer culture, rich in contrasting values, we must recognize the
whole gamut of human potentialities, and so weave a less arbitrary social fabric, one in
which each diverse human gift will find a fitting place.
—Margaret Mead
Ruth, a 24-year-old European American woman, was working with George, a 55-year-
old African American man who was a drug addict. Ruth thought she was doing a pretty
good job until she read a play that George asked her to read. In George’s vivid
description of the drug culture, Ruth realized that she really knew very little about
George’s world. This realization spurred her to do some reading about the African
American and drug cultures, which enabled her to ask George better questions about his
background life.
O
ne specific aspect of self-awareness that is crucial for helping is cultural
awareness. Given that culture pervades everything we think and do, we need to
become aware of who we are and who our clients are culturally and what both
parties bring to the helping process.
My goal in this chapter is to get you to start thinking about culture. I hope
to help you become more aware of your own culture and your worldview, to be
more empathic with people from other cultures, to think about the significant
role of culture in the helping process, and to think about how your cultural
biases would play out in the helping process.
Defining Culture
Culture
 can be defined as the customs, values, attitudes, beliefs, characteristics,
and behaviors shared by a group of people at a particular time in history
(Skovholt & Rivers, 2003). In addition, culture can be considered the “shared
constraints that limit the behavior repertoire available to members of a certain
103
sociocultural group in a way different from individuals belonging to some other
group” (Poortinga, 1990, p. 6). It can also be thought of as “a convenient label
for knowledge, skills, and attitudes that are learned and passed on from one
generation to the next. Accordingly, this transmission of culture occurs in a
physical environment in which certain places, times, and stimuli have acquired
special meanings” (Segall, 1979, p. 91). An even broader definition of a cultural
group is “any group of people who identify or associate with one another on the
basis of some common purpose, need, or similarity of background” (Axelson,
1999, p. 3).
Culture includes race/ethnicity, gender, age, ideology, religion,
socioeconomic status, sexual orientation, disability status, occupation, and
dietary preferences (Pedersen, 1991, 1997). The acronym ADDRESSING
provided by Hays (2001) might be helpful in remembering some of the major
components of culture (this list is not all-inclusive but provides a useful
acronym):
A 
=
 age and generational influence
D/D 
=
 developmental or acquired disabilities
R 
=
 religion and spiritual orientation
E 
=
 ethnicity
S 
=
 socioeconomic status
S 
=
 sexual orientation
I 
=
 indigenous heritage
N 
=
 national origin
G 
=
 gender
Each of us belongs to many cultures, any one of which may become salient
at a particular time depending on the people, place, or situation (Pedersen &
Ivey, 1993). Some cultural groups require admission (e.g., one has to attend
school and pass tests to become a psychologist), others are biologically
determined (e.g., age), and still others are a person’s choice, albeit influenced by
environmental factors (e.g., religion, vegetarianism). Given that our
socializations create a web of complex cultural influences, some cultural
identities can carry more weight than others (e.g., religion may be more
important than sexual orientation to a particular person).
It is important to learn about the history and general characteristics of a
culture to understand the background and worldview (see, e.g., McGoldrick,
Giordano, & Garcia-Preto, 2005; Muran, 2007). Inaccurate perceptions of a
client’s culture can negatively affect the therapeutic relationship by creating
more distance between the therapist and client and potential for premature
termination. It is also important, however, not to assume that everyone within a
given group is the same (e.g., not all Irish are jokers, storytellers, and dreamers)
because you might be making assumptions that are not true. In fact, there are
104
generally more differences within groups than there are between groups (D. R.
Atkinson, Morten, & Sue, 1998; Pedersen, 1997). For example, you see more
differences among women than you generally do between women and men.
Dimensions of Culture
It is important to be aware that race is not biological. At the DNA level, there
are no differences between people of different “races.” Rather, race is a socially
constructed idea, such that we categorize people on the basis of some physical
characteristics (e.g., skin color, hair type). Thus, when referring to a person’s
heritage or background, we often refer to 
race/ethnicity.
Racial identity,
 or how individuals identify with their racial or ethnic culture
(Fouad & Brown, 2000; Helms, 1990; Helms & Cook, 1999), is often more
important than race/ethnicity because identity is more indicative of how people
define themselves. Of course, people can develop their sense of racial identity
over time (Helms & Cook, 1999). In the United States, for example, racial and
ethnic minority group members often move from depreciating their own
race/ethnicity or culture to a more appreciative perspective. Majority group
members, in contrast, hopefully move from a perspective of ignorance and
entitlement to understanding the privilege inherent in their status and thus
begin to advocate for social justice.
Enculturation
 and 
acculturation
 are also key constructs to consider for
people who have moved from one culture to another (e.g., when a person
emigrates from Vietnam to the United States). Enculturation refers to retaining
the norms of one’s indigenous culture, whereas acculturation refers to adapting
to the norms of the dominant culture (Kim & Abreu, 2001). Note that this
acculturative process can foster a bicultural experience for individuals in which
two distinct cultures are seen as salient parts of their identity simultaneously
(e.g., Berry & Sam, 1996). However, adults who come to the United States
from another country (first generation) often remain closely aligned with the
way that their culture of origin was when they left, whereas their children
(second generation) quickly acculturate to American ways. This difference in
cultural values often causes problems in the family, with parents being upset that
their children are not retaining the traditional cultural values and dress but
rather are behaving according to different cultural norms. It also can cause strain
in the family and upset the lines of authority when children acculturate faster
than do the parents and use the new language better than can the parents.
Children often have to serve as interpreters with teachers and cannot receive
help with their homework, which interferes with traditional familial hierarchies.
Ind
ividualism versus collectivism
 refers to the relative importance placed on
105
the individual versus the group (McLeod & McLeod, 2011). Some cultures
(e.g., the United States) focus more on the rights of the individual and tend to
see people as independent and autonomous. Other cultures (e.g., Korea) tend to
focus more on the family and view people as interdependent. A therapist
colleague, for example, told me that he routinely starts sessions with Hispanic
clients by asking about the family rather than about the individual because being
considered within the context of the family immediately sets these clients at ease.
Egalitarianism
 refers to how much power and authority is considered, with
some cultures valuing everyone equally and others having more of a hierarchical
power structure (McLeod & McLeod, 2011). For example, in a helping session,
clients from some hierarchical cultural backgrounds might expect the helper to
be the authority and tell them what to do, whereas clients from egalitarian
cultural backgrounds might want the helper to be more of a consultant or
friend.
Rationality–spirituality
 refers to how much a culture is based on a rational-
scientific perspective versus a mystical, spiritual perspective (McLeod &
McLeod, 2011). Thus, some clients might want helpers to cite research evidence
to back any claims, whereas others might prefer more of a spiritual explanation
and approach.
Cultures can also vary in terms of 
gender and gender orientation
differentiation,
 with some cultures having very defined roles to which men and
women must adhere, and others being more relaxed in terms of role definitions
(McLeod & McLeod, 2011). In Middle Eastern cultures, for example, women’s
roles are very limited and different from those of men, whereas roles in the
United States are more flexible in general.
People internalize these cultural dimensions from early in childhood and are
typically unaware of them until confronted with people who have different
cultural expectations. When cultural expectations are violated, a client may not
be aware of why she or he feels uncomfortable but may feel intensely ill at ease.
Likewise, a helper may simply not understand why a client does not share his or
her values.
Cultural Issues in the Helping Process
Helpers need to be aware of and sensitive to cultural differences in the helping
process. It is important to note that we as counselors will not always get it
“right” and are not expected to. The importance is in how we address it once we
become aware of cultural issues.
Skovholt and Rivers (2003) suggested that helpers need to consider (a) the
general experiences, characteristics, and needs of the client’s cultural groups; (b)
106
the client’s individual experiences, characteristics, and needs; and (c) basic
human needs—those common to all people (e.g., food, shelter, dignity, respect).
Hence, knowledge of general cultural characteristics can provide some
background information about societal forces impinging on clients, but helpers
also need to learn about the individual from the individual. Thus, helpers work
to determine which helping skills are most effective with different clients.
Similarly, helpers need to be aware of their own cultural values, how these
impinge on them and shape the way they view the world, and how they
influence the ways in which the helper interacts with others from different
cultures.
There are two basic types of problems that can emerge in cross-cultural
interactions. The first is that group differences can result in a lack of knowledge.
For example, a Latino helper may not understand the cultural background of a
Native American client. In addition to group differences, there are often power
differences that cause other problems. For example, if a White Christian helper
makes assumptions about, dismisses, or discriminates against an Arab Muslim
client, the client may not feel comfortable confronting the helper because he or
she feels in a lower prestige or power position. The second type of problem is
that it can be uncomfortable for a minority helper (e.g., a younger, poor, gay,
African American helper) to be paired with a majority client (e.g., an older,
wealthy, heterosexual, European American) client because it goes against the
cultural stereotypes of the helper being the person in higher social power in the
dyad. For example, a colleague told me about an older woman who told her
during the first session that she was afraid the therapist would not be able to
understand her because she was so much younger. My colleague gently
suggested that they work together in the session to see if it would be a good fit.
After the first session, the client told my colleague that she thought it would be
helpful to her after all.
Ethical Behavior Related to Culture
As is noted in 
Chapter 3
, helpers need to be mindful of differences among
individuals and use skills that reflect an understanding of the people with whom
they are working (see also American Psychological Association, 2003).
Beginning helpers should not assume that helping skills transfer across cultures
and individuals. One example is the assumption that maintaining eye contact is
a sign of openness, interest, and willingness to participate in the session. In some
cultures, however, a lack of eye contact signifies respect for an authority figure
and thus should not be interpreted according to societal norms that there should
be eye contact in sessions.
107
At times, helpers who are working with clients from a different culture
either neglect or attribute too much significance to the culture of their clients
when providing interventions. It is important for helpers to realize that helping
in the traditional manner may (or may not) be sufficient for these clients. Thus,
heterosexual helpers who are working with lesbian or gay clients should
investigate the literature about working with these clients and be aware of the
special challenges that may be present for these clients, while also understanding
that lesbian and gay clients may share many similarities with heterosexual
clients. For example, Shawn was depressed and felt hopeless when he sought
help at the university counseling center. His helper assumed that because Shawn
was a gay man, his depression ensued from the discrimination that gay men
experience on campus. The helper told Shawn that he understood how painful it
must be to be a gay man on a predominantly heterosexual college campus.
Shawn was stunned and angry at the helper. He had sought assistance because
his sister had recently been killed in a car accident and he was having trouble
grieving the loss, not because of problems related to his sexual orientation. Thus,
it seems critical to be aware of the client’s culture as deeply influencing the
client, but never to assume that the client’s cultural background and related
experiences are the primary motivators for seeking assistance.
Furthermore, a helper who is working with a client from a different culture
should not assume that the client’s goals are to assimilate (or not assimilate) into
the majority culture. For example, Mei immigrated to the United States from
another country and asked for assistance in selecting a career. She explained to
her helper that her parents wanted her to go to medical school, but she was
doing poorly in her science courses. The helper incorrectly assumed that Mei did
not want to pursue a medical career and directed her to select a different
occupation on the basis of her interests, values, and abilities (because making
career decisions in terms of individual needs and abilities is a cultural value for
many people living in the United States). However, if the helper had listened
carefully, he would have discovered that Mei was feeling devastated about her
inability to meet her parents’ expectations and dreams in part because of her
cultural background, which valued familial harmony and parental approval. In
another situation, the client may not even feel as though she or he is from a
different culture than that of the helper. For example, a Hispanic client who
goes to an all-Black school may feel more comfortable with a Black counselor
than a Hispanic one because he does not identify with the Hispanic community.
Thus, the helper cannot make assumptions based solely on skin color.
Demonstrating interest in clients’ cultures is important, but helpers should
not expect clients to educate them about culture. For example, an African
American client who worked in a battered women’s shelter expressed frustration
not only with being a member of a group of people who have less power in
American society, but also with being asked to train and educate European
108
American helpers about her culture.
Helpers can educate themselves about culture in multiple ways. They can
talk with people from different cultures, travel, try food from different places,
watch movies, and read novels. Above all, perhaps the best idea is to read
relevant professional literature about culture. Several excellent texts provide
further information about multicultural counseling and counseling with specific
groups (D. R. Atkinson & Hackett, 1998; Helms & Cook, 1999; McGoldrick,
1998; Pedersen, Draguns, Lonner, & Trimble, 2002; D. W. Sue & Sue, 1999).
It is always important, however, to remember that much of the description of
cultures in the professional literature or popular media perpetuates stereotypes,
or generalizations, about groups of people. Although these stereotypes are
perhaps accurate in very general terms, they may not apply to individuals within
a given culture. Thus, it is important to learn the stereotypes about cultures but
also to listen to the individual client for how he or she has been influenced by
the many different cultures to which he or she belongs.
All of us need to engage in serious self-examination to discover our cultural
values and beliefs as well as our prejudices and biases. Being aware of our
cultural beliefs (e.g., valuing independence, autonomy, religion, and family) is
important so that we can recognize what we value; but it is also important so
that we do not automatically assume these values are right for everyone else.
Understanding our prejudices and biases is important so that we do not hurt the
therapeutic relationship or accidentally offend clients who are culturally different
from us.
All of us have been socialized to have beliefs about what is good and bad,
and these beliefs form our worldviews. We have firm roots in these beliefs, and
we are often unaware that these beliefs are actually biases and prejudices and that
these biases and prejudices surface when we are least aware of them. Self-
awareness is key. How we convey our awareness of these biases often informs our
clients of whether they can trust and communicate with us.
Sometimes we are so accustomed to these feelings that we do not even
question their validity. Think about your “hot buttons,” or the reactions you
might have to different clients. If you have different reactions to different clients
(e.g., to working with a male vs. female client), you might want to step back and
try to understand these reactions.
It is also important to think about what biases clients might have toward
helpers for various reasons (i.e., personal experiences of discrimination or an
awareness of this nation’s history of discrimination towards non-White racial
groups). For example, an African American client might automatically not trust
a White helper. Providing a safe space for clients and being open to explore these
biases of clients can be helpful in the strengthening of the therapeutic alliance.
On the other hand, the African American client might be very used to being in a
White environment and not have an issue with having a White helper.
109
Furthermore, it is important to take the whole person into consideration rather
than just one aspect, such as race/ethnicity. An African American person with a
middle-class background will likely share many of the values of a White middle-
class helper.
In addition, ethical behavior goes beyond having an awareness of individual
and cultural differences to embracing a commitment to eliminate bias and
discrimination in one’s work. This commitment may involve actively examining
our biases, confronting colleagues who act in a discriminatory manner,
advocating for those with less power, and working for social change. For
example, some helpers facilitate support groups for clients who have been
marginalized in society. Another helper might use her experience as a counselor,
teacher, and researcher to write a book about empowering clients through the
process of counseling (McWhirter, 1994).
Becoming a Culturally Competent Helper
D. W. Sue and Sue (1999) asserted that becoming a culturally skilled helper is
an active, ongoing process that never reaches an end point. It is something to
which helpers aspire and work toward, rather than accepting complacency. The
following are characteristics of culturally sensitive helpers (Arredondo et al.,
1996; Skovholt & Rivers, 2003; D. W. Sue & Sue, 1999):
They strive to understand their culture and how it influences their
work with clients.
They strive to understand how their culture influences their beliefs
about helping (e.g., style, theoretical orientation, definition of
helping).
They honestly confront their biases, prejudices, and discriminatory
behaviors and work to keep them out of the helping process.
They have a wide range of helping skills and use them flexibly to fit the
needs of clients from different cultures.
They are knowledgeable about the cultures of their clients.
They understand the extent to which discrimination and oppression
influence clients’ lives and contribute to their problems.
They acknowledge and address cultural differences between themselves
and their clients while still communicating willingness to help.
They seek supervision or refer when necessary.
Difficulties Helpers Have Related to
110
Cultural Issues
You might wonder whether it would be better to match clients with helpers on
the basis of race/ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, etc. There is not much
evidence that such matching makes a difference. In fact, Hays (2001) suggested
that it is more important to match on cultural values (such as those mentioned
earlier related to egalitarianism) than on race/ethnicity. That said, it has been my
experience that there are some clients for whom matching on demographic
variables is extremely important. For example, some female clients refuse to see a
male helper, some gay clients are very wary about being paired with a helper
who thinks that homosexuality is sinful, and some religious clients are concerned
about being misunderstood by secular helpers.
Beginning helpers also often worry that they need to be an expert in all
cultures before they can be effective helpers. But it would not be possible to be
an expert in all cultures, because each person is an individual and comes from a
somewhat different culture. However, you can educate yourself in a variety of
cultures, be aware of your own cultural biases, and be open to learning about the
culture of your clients. One beginning helper recalled meeting a first-generation
client from an Asian country. Because she was aware that she had some hot
buttons related to immigrants, she went out and searched the literature about
immigration, but then she also asked the client about her experiences. She found
looking at the specific cultural issue to be more helpful than generally learning
about Eastern cultures.
You might also question whether it is appropriate to apply the three-stage
model (and other psychotherapy models) in other cultures. In other words, are
our models and theories universal or are they culture-specific? For example,
Western theories, particularly client-centered and psychoanalytic theories, have
recently been imported to China. Yet in many ways these Western theories
conflict with Chinese cultural values. In studies we have conducted in China
(Duan et al., 2012; Duan et al., 2013), we have examined the effects of using
directives (i.e., giving advice or homework). On the one hand, in the
hierarchical Chinese culture, it is quite common for the person in authority
(such as a teacher or counselor) to give advice. But client-centered and
psychoanalytic theories eschew advice, which puts Chinese helpers trained in
Western theories in a conflict given that their clients expect to be given advice.
Beginning helpers might also be concerned about when it is okay to ask
clients about their culture and when they should not expect the clients to
educate them. I would suggest that it is appropriate to ask clients about
themselves personally and what their experiences have been in their families,
with peers, and in the world to learn about them and their unique experiences.
But it would not be appropriate to expect clients to educate helpers about
111
general characteristics and stereotypes about classes of people.
Most of our true thoughts and feelings about identity and diversity lurk at
the unconscious level. Many of us have been raised to be color-blind (e.g., not to
notice differences and pretend that everyone is equal). Others of us were raised
to be prejudiced; some are deeply ashamed of being prejudiced and worried
about having others discover our unconscious feelings; others are not aware of
these as prejudices or actively believe them. Because these thoughts and feelings
are often unconscious, it is difficult to become aware of them and to sort out
realistic feelings (e.g., a specific client may not be very smart or may act
inappropriately) from prejudices based on stereotypes.
Recently, I heard Dr. Kumea Shorter-Gooden, the chief diversity officer at
the University of Maryland, speak about diversity and inclusion at the university
(April 15, 2013). Her point was that in 2013, overt sexism or racism or other
“isms” occur less frequently than they did in the past because most people, at
least in academic circles, value fairness and equality and want to be
nonprejudiced. More problematic are the implicit biases that we are not aware of
and that just slip out. She noted the discrepancy between intention and impact,
such that a person has a good intention but says something or acts in a way that
is biased or prejudiced. When called on it, the person feels incredibly
embarrassed and ashamed because she or he sees himself or herself as fair,
egalitarian, and unbiased. Her point is that we all are struggling with our biases
and need constant retooling to keep in shape.
Finally, most of the examples related to culture assume that the difficulties
arise because of differences in group membership between the helper and client
(e.g., between gay and heterosexual, between physically disabled and able-
bodied). But it is equally important to stress that difficulties can also arise when
working within our own cultural groups (e.g., two lesbians, two older people)
because the matched identity becomes more salient and can trigger complex
emotions (e.g., anger, jealousy, disappointment, pride). For example, if both the
helper and client are members of a majority group, the helper might not
question a client’s assumptions regarding privilege because unconsciously it just
seems normal.
Diversity work is hard and scary for people of all backgrounds. Most of us
strive to be inclusive and feel ashamed when we have a prejudiced thought and
act in a biased manner. It is fair to say that we all will make erroneous cultural
assumptions. Given that cultural mistakes with clients are inevitable, the bigger
issue is learning to recognize these mistakes and take steps to correct them.
Counselors who acknowledge their mistakes are more likely to strengthen the
therapeutic alliance by validating the client’s feelings and the counselor’s
commitment to be more culturally sensitive. An example of a common pitfall is
helpers being so afraid of messing up that they never explore the issue of
race/ethnicity with their clients of different racial/ethnic backgrounds. At the
112
other extreme, helpers may be so intent on being inclusive and politically correct
that they continuously bring up culture and see everything through that lens. It
is crucial for helpers to become aware of their feelings of guilt, fear, shame,
repulsion, and anger, then to become aware of the origins of these feelings, and
then to consciously choose what attitudes to strive for and behaviors to
implement. Each time we slip up (and again, we will slip throughout life), we
can use these opportunities to reexamine ourselves and deepen our therapeutic
relationships.
My Own Experiences of Culture
To set an example of exploring cultural self-awareness, let me describe my own
cultural background and the influence I think it might have on my being a
helper. I was born in 1948 in the United States, a time right after World War II
when the United States was quite insular from other cultures and values were
very conservative. My parents were European American, and I had almost no
exposure to people from different cultures until I was in my 20s. Although my
parents were kind, caring, and giving people, they were a product of their time
and held what we would now consider racist attitudes. They were very religious,
with my father having been trained to be a Baptist minister, and so my siblings
and I were raised to be good and moral, give back to society, view most
everything pleasurable as sinful, and also to try to convert others to our beliefs.
Another major cultural emphasis was in terms of eating only healthy food,
which was very countercultural at that time and made us very different from
others. We moved a lot and were poor, with my father taking a menial factory
job to support four children. My mother went to work as a social worker (even
though she had no degree) after I (the youngest of four) went to elementary
school. I had to work to put myself through college, given that my parents could
not provide any financial support.
In my family, communication was not open and immediate; rather, people
talked about each other behind their backs. But everyone was very interested in
dynamics and tried to understand ourselves and other people. We were all very
interested in reading, especially about other people’s lives. Yet another important
factor is that as a teenager, I rebelled strongly against my family’s religion and
began to question everything involved with their style of life. Although
dysfunctional in many ways, my family was loving, and I experienced no major
traumas.
Given this background, it was not surprising that I chose psychology as a
major when I went to college. When I earned my doctorate and became a
psychologist, I shifted from a lower middle-class, religious background into
113
being upper middle class, professional, and nonreligious, all of which was a
culture shock. Furthermore, I have spent my entire adult life in the relatively
protected, albeit competitive, academic world. I am married, have two adult
children and one grandchild, and believe that family and work are both equally
important. Meanwhile, the world has also shifted, and the United States has
become incredibly diverse, such that I have neighbors from all over the world.
Given that I am White, American, heterosexual, well educated, not
disabled, and now of a comfortable socioeconomic status, I have a lot of
privileges. I have experienced discrimination because of my gender, but I have
also experienced special treatment because of being a woman. I experienced
poverty as a child and have had to work hard to achieve my academic and
financial success, but I have been fortunate to work within a university and
community that values diversity and equality.
Obviously, all of these components influence who I am as a helper. When
someone is different from me (and most people are on some dimension), I have
to work hard to make sure that I do not project my beliefs and worldview on
them. I have to consciously try to understand their perspectives. I have to
become aware of biases that may get activated and stereotypes that automatically
get activated. I pay attention to my dreams about my clients, and I talk about
my clients in a peer supervision group. The two hot buttons I am most aware of
right now and willing to reveal are an uneasiness around brilliant people from
wealthy backgrounds who have had elite educations because I immediately get
tongue-tied and feel like a poor child, and a lack of understanding of people
who are not interested in deep exploration and insight because it is hard for me
to empathize with people who are not psychologically minded. It is a work in
progress, obviously, to become aware of my biases and assumptions, and I know
that I often fail.
I hope that you will engage in a similar process of thinking about your
background and your biases. Although it is hard and can be painful to admit
these weaknesses, it is crucial so that you understand what impact they might
have on your clients.
What Do You Think?
What is your definition of culture?
Debate the role of culture in functioning.
Many wars have been fought over culture and religion. Debate the
notion that we define ourselves by feeling similar to our group (the 
in
group) and better than the others (the 
out
 group). What can be done to
reduce the number of religious wars?
Would you emphasize similarity or diversity in your thinking about
114
culture?
115
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Working With LGBT Clients
Citation:
 Israel, T., Gorcheva, R., Burnes, T. R., & Walther, W. A. (2008). Helpful and
unhelpful therapy experiences of LGBT clients. 
Psychotherapy Research, 18,
 294–305.
doi:10.1080/10503300701506920
Rationale:
 Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) clients often face stigma,
prejudice, and discrimination, and as a result have higher rates of mental health problems
and seek out mental health services at a higher rate than do their heterosexual peers.
Unfortunately, mental health professionals do not always respond to LGBT clients in a
therapeutic way, which could exacerbate their problems. The authors’ goal in this study was
to identify LGBT clients’ descriptions of helpful and unhelpful events in therapy to enable
future therapists to provide better treatments for sexual minority clients.
Method: 
LGBT clients currently in therapy were interviewed about what they found
helpful and unhelpful in therapy (clients had been in therapy an average of 4.6 different
times, and about two thirds of their experiences were positive). Data were analyzed using
ethnographic content analysis (a qualitative method).
Interesting Findings:
Helpful situations were characterized by therapist warmth, respect, nonjudgmental attitude, trustworthiness,
confidentiality, caring, and listening. Therapists were described as knowledgeable, helpful, and affirming in
dealing with sexual orientation or gender identity. It was also viewed as helpful when therapists helped clients gain
insight, alleviated symptoms, provided structure, taught skills, were available outside sessions, instilled hope and
optimism, were reassuring, helped gain access to medication, and focused appropriately on client concerns.
Unhelpful situations were characterized by therapists being cold, disrespectful, disengaged, distant, or uncaring.
Some unhelpful interventions were meditation, “why” questions, excessive self-disclosure, excessive silence, and
withholding feedback. In addition, therapists sometimes imposed their values, judgments, and decisions on
clients; did not focus on what clients wanted to focus on; mismanaged medication; breached the client’s trust or
confidentiality; pushed clients too much to explore or disclose; were not available; or sexually violated clients.
Conclusions:
There are clearly some things that are helpful and unhelpful with LGBT clients.
A caring relationship and basic helping skills are both important with LGBT clients.
Implications for Therapy:
Therapists need to be warm and accepting of LGBT clients.
Therapists need specific training in working with LGBT clients.
Therapists need to evaluate their values about working with LGBT clients.
Therapists need to remember that sexual orientation and gender identity are not the only problems that LGBT
clients discuss in therapy.
Therapists should not make assumptions about sexual orientation or gender identity, because clients are often in
early stages of identity development.
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
116
117
When one pours out one’s heart, one feels lighter.
—Yiddish proverb
Yusef was feeling miserable, lonely, and worthless after his recent move to the United
States. He desperately wanted to have a close friend with whom he could talk about his
deepest feelings. His parents were concerned about him and suggested that he talk with
a helper. During his first session with the helper, Yusef indicated that he felt like he was
going to “burst from loneliness.” Since moving to this country, he had not talked to
anyone other than his parents. He was hesitant to tell them how badly he felt because he
worried that they would get too concerned, and he felt they could not really do
anything to help him. The helper listened carefully and reflected Yusef’s feelings of
isolation, sadness, and rejection. Yusef began to cry and was able to talk about how he
felt different from the other kids because he was from another culture. The helper let
him talk and express all his feelings. She accepted him and listened nonjudgmentally,
interested in understanding his experiences. At the end of the session, Yusef told the
helper that he felt much better and had renewed energy to make friends. Talking to a
caring, understanding person helped lift Yusef’s burden and made him feel better.
T
his overview chapter presents the theoretical background for and major goals
of the exploration stage. 
Chapters 7
 through 
9
 of this volume describe the major
skills used to reach the goals of the exploration stage. 
Chapter 10
 presents
clinical issues new helpers face in implementing this stage.
Theoretical Background: Rogers’s Client-
Centered Theory
Much of what takes place in the exploration stage is influenced by Carl Rogers’s
theory of personality development and psychological change (see Rogers, 1942,
1951, 1957, 1959, 1967; Rogers & Dymond, 1954). Rogers had a profound
influence on the field of psychology with his optimistic and hopeful assertion
118
that all people have the potential for healthy and creative growth. His client-
centered orientation was rooted in phenomenology, which places a strong
emphasis on the experiences, feelings, values, and inner life of the client. Rogers
believed that perceptions of reality vary from person to person, that subjective
experience guides behavior, and that people are guided by their internal
experience rather than by external reality. Similarly, he believed that the only
way to understand individuals is to enter their private world and understand
their internal frame of reference. In other words, to understand another person,
one needs to suspend judgment and try to see things from that person’s
perspective.
According to Rogers (1942, 1951, 1967), the basic motivational force is the
tendency toward self-actualization, which propels people to become what they
are meant to become. He believed that each person has an innate 
blueprint,
 or
set of potentialities, that can be developed. Just as plants and animals grow
without any conscious effort provided that the conditions for growth are
optimal, Rogers believed that people have an inherent ability to fulfill their
potential. Furthermore, Rogers believed that people are resilient and can bounce
back from adversity given this innate growth potential.
THEORY OF PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT
According to Rogers (1942, 1951, 1967), infants evaluate each experience in
terms of how it makes them feel; Rogers called this the 
organismic valuing process
(OVP). Rogers believed that because behavior is governed by the OVP, infants
can perceive experiences as they actually occur without distorting them. With
the OVP, no experiences are more or less worthy; they just are. In other words,
every event is interesting and open for investigation without prejudice. Infants
thus evaluate experiences as to whether they enhance or maintain the organism.
For example, if an experience (e.g., being hugged) enhances the organism, the
infant feels good and is satisfied and might smile or laugh. However, if
experiences do not enhance the organism (e.g., being cold or having a dirty
diaper), the infant does not feel good, is not satisfied, and so might cry. Infants
evaluate events by how they actually feel, not by how someone else tells them
they should feel. The OVP, then, is an internal guide that everyone has at birth,
and it leads the person toward self-actualization (see 
Figure 6.1
). People freely
seek those experiences that enhance them when they trust this internal guide.
Rogers believed that because infants have positive strivings toward self-
actualization and a natural curiosity about life, they can trust these inner
feelings.
119
FIGURE 6.1
The self-actualizing tendency. Psychologist Carl Rogers’s hypothesized path between the organismic valuing process
(OVP) and the “fully functioning person.” All people, Rogers believed, have a “self-actualizing tendency,” a drive to
encounter actual experience according to one’s own self-concept. When there is such congruence, self-concepts are
valued in terms of basic, genuine feelings and self-regard; experiences are evaluated according to the OVP—that is,
according to the basic needs and desires of the organism.
In addition to having the OVP, children also have a need for unconditional
positive regard. In other words, they need acceptance, respect, warmth, and love
without 
conditions of worth
 (COWs); that is, they need to be loved just because
they are themselves and not because they meet certain standards or fulfill certain
requirements. When children feel prized, accepted, and understood by
significant others (usually parents), they begin to experience self-love and self-
acceptance and develop a healthy sense of self with little or no conflict. A prized
child is able to attend to his or her OVP and make good choices on the basis of
inner experiencing.
Unfortunately, because parents themselves are not perfect, they place
COWs on their children, demanding that children fulfill certain requirements to
be loved. For example, parents may give messages such as “I will not love you
unless you are a ‘good girl,’ ” “I will not love you unless you keep your room
clean,” or “You must be intelligent to receive my love.” Because parents
communicate (through words or actions) that children are lovable and
acceptable only when they behave in accordance with imposed standards,
children come to believe that they must be and act in certain ways to earn their
parents’ love.
Given the need for love, the COWs, rather than the OVP, come to guide a
child’s organization of her or his experiences (see 
Figure 6.2
). In other words,
children sacrifice their OVP to receive love from their parents (e.g., children give
up being spontaneous and playful to sit “properly” and be “good” to please their
parents). When a child introjects (i.e., internalizes) his or her parents’ COWs,
these conditions become a part of the child’s self-concept.
120
FIGURE 6.2
Conditions of worth and incongruence. The self-actualizing tendency can be derailed when the self-concept is altered
by conditions of worth (COWs), which supplant a person’s basic, positive self-regard with others’ conditional
evaluations of worth. The incongruence between actual experience and self-concept, according to Rogers, typically
results in inauthentic expressions of feelings, low self-regard, defensiveness, anxiety, and depression.
The more COWs there are, the more distorted the person becomes from his
or her own experiencing. For example, a mother may communicate to a young
girl that it is not acceptable for her to hate her brother. The girl may feel that to
be loved, she must be a good girl, and so she may disown the hate as not being
part of herself. Hence, rather than learning that she may feel hate but cannot
hurt her brother, she learns that her feelings are not acceptable. Another example
is parents who punish or ridicule a boy for crying when he is hurt or needs help
with a difficult task. The boy might repress his feelings of pain and dependency
and become extremely independent to maintain his parents’ approval. These two
examples illustrate how externally imposed values can substitute for the OVP.
When feelings of hate or dependency get aroused, these children cannot identify
or repress these feelings and thus are not in touch with their inner experiencing.
Children feel positive self-regard only when their experiences are consistent
with feedback they receive from others (e.g., if a girl feels talented in playing the
violin and others tell her that she is talented). Feelings of self-worth become
dependent on the COWs that are learned in interaction with significant others.
A child with too many COWs will not be open to experience, accepting of
feelings, capable of living in the present, free to make choices, trusting, capable
of feeling both aggression and affection, and capable of creativity. He or she will
have a conflicted sense of self.
Obviously, children must become socialized to live in their families and
society. Children cannot act on all their innate desires or get all of their needs
met immediately because the world is not a perfect place and also because other
people have needs that sometimes conflict with theirs. Parents, for example,
121
cannot always immediately meet the infant’s needs because they have other
demands on their time. In addition, parents cannot allow a child to hurt a
sibling or another child. The manner, however, in which parents socialize their
children is crucial. For example, a parent can empathize with a young girl but
still place limits on her (e.g., “I know you are angry at your brother, but you
cannot hurt him”). The girl may feel frustrated but does not learn to deny her
feelings. Instead, she learns to experience her feelings but channel them in a
more socially acceptable direction. In contrast, when parents humiliate a child
(e.g., “Real men don’t cry,” “Shut up, or I’ll give you something to cry about”)
or deny that the child has feelings (e.g., “You don’t hate your teacher,” “You
don’t feel hurt”), the child becomes confused about her or his feelings. The child
may feel sad or feel hatred, but the parents say he or she does not have these
feelings. What should the child trust, the inner experience or what parents tell
him or her to feel? If the child does not pay attention to his or her parents, she
or he risks losing parental approval and love. If she or he does not pay attention
to inner feelings and instead tries to please others, the child loses her or his sense
of self. One can easily see how children come not to trust their inner
experiences. Children must survive, so they often choose parents’ attention and
“love” over inner experiencing.
When COWs are pervasive and the OVP is disabled, the sense of self is
weakened to the point at which a person is unable to experience or recognize
feelings as belonging to the self. For example, a woman might not even be aware
of feeling angry and hurt when being verbally and physically abused by her
husband because she thinks she deserves the abuse. When people cannot allow
themselves to have their feelings, they often feel a sense of emptiness, phoniness,
or lack of genuineness. This lack of genuineness about one’s feelings reflects a
split or incongruence between the real and ideal self and is the source of anxiety,
depression, and defensiveness in relationships.
DEFENSES
Rogers (1957) suggested that when there is an incongruence between who one is
and who one thinks one ought to be, the person feels threatened. For example, a
person who acts pleasant and happy but is actually feeling grumpy and depressed
is in danger of losing touch with his or her inner self. If she or he were to
perceive her or his depression accurately, his or her self would be threatened
because he or she has built an image of self as always happy. When a person feels
such a threat, she or he typically responds with anxiety, a signal that the self is in
danger. Feeling this anxiety, the person invokes defenses to reduce the
incongruity between experience and sense of self, thereby reducing anxiety.
One major defense is perceptual distortion, which involves altering or
misinterpreting one’s experience to make it compatible with one’s self-concept.
122
By distorting experiences, clients avoid having to deal with unpleasant feelings
and issues and can maintain their perceptions of themselves. For example, a man
may perceive himself as being of average weight even though he is quite
overweight and no longer fits into chairs. He might tell himself he does not eat
any more than other people. As another example, a person with a sense of
worthlessness who is promoted at work might misinterpret the reason for the
promotion to be congruent with her negative sense of self. She might say that
the only reason she got the promotion was that “the boss had to do it” or “no
one else wanted the job.”
A second defense is denial, which involves ignoring or denouncing reality.
In this situation, people refuse to acknowledge experiences that are inconsistent
with the images they have of themselves. By denying their experiences, clients
avoid anxiety. For example, a woman who is treated unfairly at work might
ignore her anger at her boss because she has internalized her parents’ belief that
anger is bad and that she will not be loved if she expresses anger. Rather than
allow herself to experience her anger, she may say she is not trying hard enough
or is not smart enough for the job.
Defenses block incongruent experiences from full awareness and minimize
threats to one’s sense of self and thus allow the person to function and cope. A
certain level of defenses is necessary for coping, but excessive use of defenses can
take a toll on the self in at least three ways. First, the subjective reality (what one
allows oneself to experience) can become incongruent with the external reality
(the world as it is). At some point, the person may no longer be able to distort or
deny the experience, which could lead to overwhelming feelings of threat and
anxiety and disintegration of the self. For example, a child might struggle to
maintain the illusion that things are fine between his parents despite hearing
their nightly battles. However, when his mother leaves without warning, the boy
may not be able to handle the loss and may stop attending school and talking to
others. In another example, a person might partition off parts of self that are
unacceptable and exclude them from awareness (e.g., deny to oneself that sexual
abuse occurred). Second, a person might develop a rigidity of perception in areas
in which she or he has had to defend against perceiving reality. For example, a
woman might have such a strong need to believe in the curative effects of a
quack medicine for cancer that she does not listen to any disconfirming
evidence, resulting in her not seeking proven strategies for treating her cancer.
Third, the real self can become incongruent with the ideal self, suggesting a
discrepancy between who one is and who one wishes to be. A woman might be
average in intelligence but feel a need to be super smart (particularly if she has
internalized parental COWs that she should be extremely intelligent). If the
discrepancy between the real and the ideal is large, the person may feel
dissatisfied and become maladjusted (e.g., depressed, anxious).
123
REINTEGRATION
According to Rogers (1957), to overcome disintegration, rigidity, or
discrepancies between real and ideal selves, a person must become aware of the
distorted or denied experience. In other words, a person must allow the
experience to occur and accurately perceive the event. The woman described
above must acknowledge to herself that she has average intelligence and accept
and value herself rather than distort or deny her feelings. Rogers theorized that
for reintegration to occur, the person must (a) reduce the COWs and (b)
increase positive self-regard by obtaining unconditional positive regard from
others. COWs lose their significance and ability to direct behavior when others
accept the person as he or she is. In effect, individuals return to the OVP and
begin to trust the inner self, thus becoming more open to experience and
feelings (see 
Figure 6.3
).
124
FIGURE 6.3
A healing relationship. Only through a healing relationship that offers empathy, unconditional positive regard,
genuineness, and acceptance—typically from a therapist or helper—can the self-concept be restored to congruence with
actual experience, according to Rogers (1957). The self-concept returns to evaluations of actual experience based on the
organismic valuing process (OVP), thereby facilitating self-actualization and the drive to become a “fully functioning
person”—one who can realize the self’s maximum potentiality for independence, creativity, authentic expressions of
feelings, and love. COW 
=
 conditions of worth.
A person can reintegrate without unconditional positive regard from
another person if there is minimal threat to the self and the incongruity between
self and experience is minor. Typically, however, individuals respond to years of
having COWs imposed on them by becoming increasingly defensive. Once
developed, defenses are difficult to let go because the person anticipates being
vulnerable and hurt again. In effect, defenses are adaptive to help children cope,
but fear and habit make them difficult to shed when they are no longer needed.
A helping relationship, then, is often crucial for overcoming defenses and
allowing the person to return to trusting the OVP. A helping relationship allows
the individual’s self-actualizing tendency to overcome the restrictions that were
internalized in the COWs. In a helping relationship, the helper attempts to
enter the client’s subjective world and understand the client’s internal frame of
reference. The helper also tries to provide an experience in which the client is
accepted and cared for without COWs. Thus, genuine acceptance from helpers
begins to enable clients to accept themselves. This helping relationship does not
necessarily need to be from a professional helper, and in fact, people often seek
healing relationships from supportive people in their environment (e.g., friends,
125
relatives, rabbi, minister, priest).
Rogers (1951) believed that the helping relationship, in and of itself,
produces growth in the client: “I launch myself into the therapeutic relationship
having a hypothesis, or a faith, that my liking, my confidence, and my
understanding of the other person’s inner world, will lead to a significant process
of becoming” (p. 267). Rogerian helpers believe that most clients benefit greatly
from being listened to, understood, and accepted. The power of this kind of
relationship can be highly therapeutic and constructive. In the Rogerian
approach to helping, the helper enters the therapeutic relationship with the
facilitative attitudes of congruence (genuineness), unconditional positive regard,
and empathy.
Rogers (1957) postulated six conditions that he considered to be necessary
and sufficient for change to occur.
1.
 
The client and helper must be in psychological contact.
 A therapeutic relationship or
emotional connection between the helper and client is essential.
2.
 
The client must be in a state of incongruence.
 There must be a discrepancy between
self and experience that leads the client to feel vulnerable or anxious. If a client
feels no anxiety, she or he is unlikely to be motivated enough to engage in the
helping process.
3.
 
The helper must be congruent (genuine) or integrated in the relationship.
 The helper
must be open to her or his own experiences and be genuinely available to the
client. The helper cannot be phony in the helping relationship.
4.
 
The helper must feel unconditional positive regard for the client.
 The helper values all
feelings (although not necessarily all behaviors) and places no judgment on the
feelings. Essentially, a helper is trying to understand a client’s feelings and
experience but is not trying to judge whether the person “should” or “should
not” have the feelings or whether the feelings are “right” or “wrong.”
5.
 
The helper must experience empathy for the client.
 The helper tries to immerse
herself or himself in the client’s feeling world and understand the client’s inner
experiences. The understanding comes out of the helper’s experiencing of the
client’s feelings, using the helper’s inner processes as a referent. The helper not
only experiences the client’s feelings but also has his or her own reactions to the
client’s feelings; the helper is thus able to go beyond words to understanding the
client’s implicit feelings (Meador & Rogers, 1973). The helper tries to feel as if
she or he were the client and temporarily living in the client’s life, without ever
losing the awareness that they are separate individuals. The helper tries to sense
and uncover feelings of which the client is unaware because of the threatening
nature of these feelings. Rogers emphasized that empathy is not passive but
requires thinking, sensitivity, and understanding. He described 
empathy
 as
follows:
It means entering the private perceptual world of the other and becoming thoroughly at
126
home in it. It involves being sensitive, moment by moment, to the changing felt meanings
which flow in this other person, to the fear or rage or tenderness or confusion or whatever
that he or she is experiencing. It means temporarily living in the other’s life, moving about in
it delicately without asking judgments. (Rogers, 1980, p. 142)
Empathy can be distinguished from sympathy, in which the helper
feels pity for the client and often acts from a position of power rather
than as an equal. Empathy also differs from emotional contagion, in
which a helper feels the same feelings as the client (e.g., becomes just as
depressed as the client) and cannot maintain objectivity. Empathy
involves a deep understanding of the client’s feelings. Bohart, Elliott,
Greenberg, and Watson (2002) indicated that empathy is effective
because it creates a positive relationship, provides a corrective emotional
experience, promotes exploration, and supports the client’s active self-
healing efforts.
Another construct that is similar to empathy is compassion, which
means to resonate with the client’s suffering (see Vivino, Thompson,
Hill, & Ladany, 2009). I think of compassion as caring deeply for
another person and accepting that person while being fully aware of his
or her frailties and humanness. Thus, it is more than just feeling others’
feelings; it is being able to feel deep understanding of what it must be
like to be them. When I have trouble connecting with clients, I try to
gain compassion for them, to accept and understand why they are as
they are. Rogers probably considered compassion as a part of empathy,
but it is helpful for therapists to cultivate compassion in addition to
empathy because it allows them to feel deeply for what their clients are
going through.
6.
 
The client must experience the helper’s congruence, unconditional positive regard, and
empathy.
 If the client does not experience the facilitative conditions, they do not,
for all practical purposes, exist for the client, and the sessions are not likely to be
helpful.
Rogers (1951) stated that a facilitative attitude (being genuine,
unconditionally positive in regard, and empathic) on the part of helpers is what
is most beneficial for clients. He indicated that skills were important but that the
facilitative attitude served as the basis for the skills. Skills without a facilitative
attitude might not only be unhelpful but might be harmful.
In summary, Rogers speculated that if helpers can accept clients, clients can
come to accept themselves. When clients accept themselves, they can allow
themselves to experience their real feelings and accept that the feelings come
from themselves. Hence, the OVP is unblocked, and the person becomes open
to his or her experiences. The client can begin to experience love, lust, hatred,
jealousy, joy, competitiveness, anger, pride, and other feelings; accept the
feelings; and come to accept self. It is important to remember that acceptance of
127
feelings is distinct from decisions about what to do about those feelings.
Allowing oneself to have the feelings provides a basis for making decisions about
what to do because the actions are then based on inner feelings rather than on
“shoulds.”
CURRENT STATUS OF CLIENT-CENTERED THEORY
Meta-analyses have shown that client-centered therapy and humanistic therapy
are indeed effective and that they are just as effective as other approaches to
psychotherapy (Elliott, Greenberg, Watson, Timulak, & Freire, 2013). In
addition, reviews of the empirical literature have confirmed the importance of
the facilitative conditions, particularly of empathy, in leading to positive
outcome of therapy (Farber & Doolin, 2011; Kolden, Klein, Wang, & Austin,
2011). It appears that the facilitative conditions are important for allowing
clients to feel safe and supported, to help clients have a positive relationship
experience, to promote exploration, and to support clients’ active self-healing
efforts.
Recent research has focused more on the working alliance, or the
relationship between the therapist and the client, rather than just the therapist-
offered facilitative conditions (e.g., Horvath, Del Re, Flückiger, & Symonds,
2011). Thus, contemporary researchers consider the interaction between
therapist and client to be more important than just looking at what the therapist
offers. In fact, it is hard to imagine the therapist being empathic without the
client being responsive and engaged, given that both therapist and client are
involved in the interaction.
THE RELATIONSHIP OF ROGERS’S THEORY TO THE
HELPING SKILLS MODEL
Rogers’s theory forms the foundation for the exploration stage and informs the
insight and action stages. I agree with Rogers that helpers should maintain an
empathic client-centered stance of trying to understand the client’s experience as
completely as possible with as little judgment and as few prior assumptions as
possible. Empathy, compassion, and a therapeutic relationship can be effective
in helping clients begin to accept themselves and trust their experiences.
In contrast to Rogers’s assertion that a facilitative attitude is more important
than the specific skills, I believe that a facilitative attitude and skills are
inseparable (Hill, 2005b, 2007). Skills are used to express a facilitative attitude,
and a facilitative attitude is needed to express the skills. In addition, as
articulated in 
Chapter 4
, awareness (including self-knowledge, in-the-moment
awareness, and cultural awareness) is also crucial because without awareness, the
helper is likely to act out unconscious impulses in a way that could damage
clients. Client involvement is also important but of less focus at this point
128
because we are concentrating on the helper’s contribution to the helping process.
Thus, a facilitative attitude, awareness, and skills are all important components
of the helper’s contribution to the helping process.
Another point on which I diverge somewhat from Rogers’s theory relates to
his assertion about the helpful components of the therapeutic process. For some
clients, being understood and encouraged to express their feelings is enough to
get them back to a self-healing mode so they can function again and make
needed changes. Others, however, need more assistance in learning how to deal
with feelings and experiences, many of which may be new to them.
Furthermore, some clients need to be assisted in moving toward insight and
action. In addition to maintaining the facilitative conditions, then, I posit that
helpers need to be able to facilitate insight and action. Additional theories
(psychoanalytic, cognitive, behavioral) are needed to assist some clients in
moving beyond exploration of thoughts and feelings; these are described in later
chapters.
Furthermore, I do not completely agree with Rogers that people are
inherently good and striving for self-actualization. There seems to be minimal
evidence for these postulates. My assumption is that people are neither good nor
bad at birth but rather develop depending on temperament, genetics, the
environment, parenting, and early experiences (see 
Chapter 2
, this volume).
More is known now about genetic and biological contributions to human
functioning than was known when Rogers proposed his theory. Despite these
differences in beliefs about human nature and biological contributions, though,
I agree with Rogers about the importance of the facilitative conditions for
establishing the therapeutic relationship and helping clients explore concerns
and achieve self-acceptance.
Finally, Rogers did not attend closely to cultural considerations in his
theory, probably because the United States was not as diverse then as it is now.
Culture certainly fits into Rogers’s theory, however, in that being truly empathic
and compassionate assumes a major interest in the person, awareness of who the
person is, and an acceptance of the person. Thus, I would assert that
multicultural awareness is important to genuinely being Rogerian.
Goals for the Exploration Stage
The goals for the exploration stage are establishing rapport and a trusting
relationship; attending, listening, and observing; helping clients explore their
thoughts and narratives; facilitating the expression of emotion; and learning
about clients. The sections that follow define these goals in more detail.
129
ESTABLISHING RAPPORT AND DEVELOPING A
THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP
Helpers establish rapport (i.e., an atmosphere of understanding and respect)
with their clients so that clients feel safe to explore. Rapport sets the stage for
development of the therapeutic relationship, which is important in helping.
Clients are most likely to reveal themselves when they believe they have a caring,
therapeutic relationship with their helpers. Clients generally need to feel safe,
supported, respected, cared for, valued, prized, accepted as individuals, listened
to, and heard in their interactions with helpers. In everyday relationships, people
often do not fully listen to others, so it is a gift to clients for helpers to listen
attentively to them without rushing to say something next (e.g., telling a
competing story, as friends often do).
During the exploration stage, helpers strive to understand their clients from
the clients’ frame of reference. They aspire to “walk a mile in the client’s shoes”
and view the world through their clients’ eyes. Helpers try to understand clients’
thoughts and feelings without imposing their thoughts or values on clients. They
attempt not to judge clients and figure out whether they are “right” or
“blameworthy” but instead have compassion and try to understand how clients
came to be the way they are and how it feels to be who they are. Helpers try to
align or attune themselves (i.e., feel what it is like to be the client) so they can
understand the client’s feelings.
If helpers can assist clients in becoming aware of their inner experiencing,
clients can begin to trust and then to heal themselves. Rogers (1957)
hypothesized that clients typically need to feel accepted and prized by others
before they can begin to accept and value themselves. To do this, helpers need to
accept clients as they are as much as possible and provide them with the
facilitative conditions of empathy, unconditional positive regard, and
genuineness. As mentioned earlier, 
empathy
 refers to understanding another
person and feeling as if you are the other person (i.e., trying to put yourself in
her or his place even though you are not that person and can never understand
the person completely). 
Unconditional positive regard
 refers to accepting and
appreciating another person without judgment. 
Genuineness
 (or what has also
been termed 
congruence
) refers to helpers’ being open to their own experiences
and genuinely available to clients rather than being phony or inauthentic. A
large part of establishing a relationship is having an attitude of acceptance,
empathy, respect, and compassion. Helpers need to listen and understand clients
without judging them. In addition, having knowledge of helping skills, feeling
competent in being able to use the skills, being aware of one’s own feelings and
motivations, and being able to appropriately use the skills places helpers in the
framework in which they are more likely to have a therapeutic attitude.
Helpers should not think they can simply establish a relationship at one
130
point in time and ignore it thereafter. They need to be aware of maintaining the
relationship throughout the helping process. At any time throughout the
process, the relationship can, and often does, rupture and need repair (see Hill,
Nutt-Williams, Heaton, Thompson, & Rhodes, 1996; Rhodes, Hill,
Thompson, & Elliott, 1994; Safran, Muran, Samstag, & Stevens, 2002). In fact,
relationships are often stronger after a rupture and repair.
Beginning helpers often worry about the possibility of not liking a client or
not being able to establish rapport with a client. For example, many beginning
helpers think they could never work with rapists or child abusers because they
would be repulsed and horrified. However, the goal of being a helper is not to
make friends with clients. Helpers do not need to “like” clients in the same way
they like or choose to spend time with close friends. Rather, helpers have a
responsibility to understand and assist clients and to feel compassion for the
human beings underneath the exterior presentations. Often, if a helper can gain
insight into how the client got to be how he or she is, the helper can begin to
have compassion for the client.
For example, the greatest challenge for one helper was working with women
in prison. The crimes committed by the women made it difficult for her to
empathize and respect them. However, after getting to know the women and
their life circumstances, she became aware that these women had feelings similar
to hers. Even though she had not experienced the same life events as her clients,
she had experienced many of the same emotions and thus could empathize with
her clients’ feelings, even if she did not condone their behaviors. We often like
to think of people who make us anxious and defensive (e.g., prisoners, dictators)
as evil and “other,” as a different species than we are so that we do not have to
encounter our own negative impulses, but in fact, it is always important to
remember that we have many of the same feelings (e.g., a desire to manipulate, a
desire for revenge).
ATTENDING, LISTENING, AND OBSERVING
The major way that we as helpers establish rapport and build a therapeutic
relationship is through attending, listening, and observing. We orient ourselves
nonverbally toward clients so that we are receptive to listening to whatever they
say. We listen intently to what they say rather than assuming we know anything
about them. We observe carefully to see how they are feeling and reacting to
everything that happens in the session.
In addition, helpers monitor their reactions to clients, as described in
Chapters 2
 and 
4
. Helpers need to know what is going on internally as they
work with clients and make a determination about whether the reactions are due
to their own issues, due to what the client is eliciting from them, or more likely
some combination of the two.
131
HELPING CLIENTS EXPLORE THOUGHTS AND NARRATIVES
Clients need a chance to talk about their problems. It often helps to talk out
loud about what is going on inside. All too often, people just continue with their
ordinary routines without exploring their problems in any depth. As Frank and
Frank (1991) noted, “How can I know what I think until I have heard what I
have to say?” (p. 200). Having a forum to express their thoughts allows clients to
hear and think about the content of what they are saying. Clients need to realize
what they are thinking and have a chance to express these thoughts out loud.
This talking is similar to telling one’s story or narrative.
Furthermore, by realizing what one is thinking, one has a better chance to
hear the inconsistencies and logical fallacies. Talking about one’s thoughts
provides the client the opportunity to think about whether she or he really
believes what is being said, especially when the client knows someone else is
hearing it. In addition, the process of talking to a helper about a problem is
useful because it allows the client to think about it, take it out and examine it,
put thoughts into words, and get another person’s reactions. Then clients can
reevaluate what they are thinking, rewrite the script, and perhaps change the
story or narrative.
ENCOURAGING EXPRESSION AND EXPERIENCING OF
FEELINGS
Emotions are a key element in the helping process because they represent
fundamental experiencing and are connected integrally to cognitions and
behavior. In fact, mental health could be defined as allowing oneself to have a
whole range of feelings and expressing these feelings in an appropriate manner
(e.g., laughing when happy, crying when sad).
One major goal of the exploration stage is for helpers to assist clients in
experiencing feelings about their presenting problems. Many clients learned as
children to suppress their feelings. They had to distort or deny their actual
feelings to survive and gain approval from parents or other significant persons,
so many clients are not aware of their feelings. For example, if clients cannot
allow themselves to feel hurt, they limit their range of emotions and might feel
hollow or empty inside. Some clients feel that their “inner cores” are rotten or
nonexistent. Clients might not know who they are and might rely on other
people to tell them how they feel. In significant relationships, they might ignore
their feelings and feel distant without knowing why. Hence, being able to feel
their true feelings and put words onto the feelings can be liberating for clients
and help them develop a sense of self.
Sometimes the content of what the client says is not as important as the
feelings about the topic, particularly if there is a discrepancy between content
132
and feelings. Helpers need to listen to the “music” (i.e., the underlying message)
in addition to listening to the words. They need to try to hear both the content
and what the client feels.
In addition, clients need to focus on what they are feeling immediately in
the present moment. Experiencing immediate feelings is often not comfortable,
so clients may want to run away and avoid their feelings. Through support and
encouragement from helpers, clients often are able to tolerate the anxiety and
discomfort of exploring their immediate feelings. For example, Joel spent much
of the session telling the helper about events that occurred during the week.
When the helper gently encouraged him to explore his feelings in the present
regarding these past events (e.g., “How do you feel right now about the event?”),
Joel talked about his feelings, and the session became more intense and
productive than it previously was.
Helpers sometimes need to be assertive and ask about feelings that clients
are not discussing. For example, clients might need to be invited to talk about
difficult feelings such as shame or being depressed or suicidal. In friendships,
people often do not probe beyond what their friends choose to reveal because
they feel that would be overstepping implicit boundaries. In helping
relationships, by contrast, helpers encourage clients to explore painful feelings
that are hard to express. However, helpers need to respect the rights of clients
not to go any deeper than they choose. Helpers thus walk a fine line between
inviting clients to disclose feelings and not forcing them into unwanted
disclosure.
Another reason for encouraging clients to talk about feelings is that
emotional arousal seems to be necessary for change to occur (Frank & Frank,
1991). Without emotional arousal, clients typically are not involved in the
helping process and are not motivated to change. Many times, people deny or
defend against their feelings because they do not want to deal with the
overwhelming or painful nature of their feelings. In contrast, when people have
strong emotional arousal (e.g., fury, despair), they are most aware of feelings and
more likely to change.
LEARNING ABOUT CLIENTS
The exploration stage provides an important opportunity for helpers to learn
about their clients. When a client first comes to a session, the helper has no way
of knowing how to help that particular person. Helpers cannot assume that they
know anything about a particular client or his or her problems, even (or perhaps
especially) if the helper has similar problems. Encouraging an individual client
to explore often requires a substantial amount of time because most people and
problems are quite complex, and it is often difficult to be aware and able to
articulate the experience. In addition, because our goal is to help clients come to
133
their own conclusions and decisions, helpers need to listen carefully to what
clients say and how they feel before constructing an action plan to help them
solve their problems.
In learning about clients, helpers must follow the lead of the individual
client. Helpers can be prepared in general by knowing theories of therapy and
practicing the helping skills, but they must learn more specifically about how to
help each client from that client. A parallel example is having a baby. Expectant
parents can read many books about babies and generally be prepared for having
a child, but they really learn parenting skills from attending to the needs of their
own unique infant (i.e., the baby teaches them how to be a parent because every
baby has different needs). Similarly, each client is different because of culture,
family, and experiences; helpers cannot make assumptions about who the client
is or what she or he needs and has to learn from the client how to be responsive
to that individual.
Furthermore, on the basis of observing and learning about the client, the
helper starts to conceptualize the client and the client’s problems during the
exploration stage. This conceptualization enables the helper to implement the
insight and action stages. Knowing something about the origin of and factors
maintaining the problem can aid helpers in deciding whether clients can profit
from insight and action.
Exploration Stage Skills
In the next few chapters, I focus on three sets of skills that helpers can use to
attain the above goals. The goals of establishing rapport and building the
therapeutic relationship and learning about the client are meta-goals—they
happen as a result of applying the more specific goals in a facilitative manner. So
in the next chapters, we focus on the goals of attending, listening, and observing;
exploring thoughts and narratives; and exploring feelings.
Within each goal, helpers can use several skills somewhat interchangeably.
To attend, listen, and observe, helpers use eye contact, facial expression, head
nods, open body posture, body movements, space, grammatical style, silence, no
or minimal interruptions, no or minimal touch, encouragers, and approval-
reassurance. To facilitate exploration of thoughts and narratives, helpers use
restatements or open questions/probes about thoughts. To facilitate exploration
of feelings, helpers use reflections of feeling, disclosures of feeling, or open
questions/probes about feeling. It is not so much which skill within the set is
used as that the skills are used for the right goal and are implemented in a
helpful manner (i.e., with good attending skills and empathy). See 
Exhibit 6.1
for a list of goals and skills used to facilitate these goals.
134
EXHIBIT 6.1
Skills for Facilitating the Goals of the Exploration Stage
Concluding Comments
The exploration stage is important to facilitate the development of the helping
relationship, give clients a chance to explore concerns and immerse themselves in
their immediate experiencing, and provide helpers with an opportunity to learn
about clients’ presenting issues and assess clients’ appropriateness for what
helpers can offer. For Rogerians, the exploration stage is all that is needed for
helping. Rogerians believe that the facilitative attitudes of empathy,
unconditional positive regard, and genuineness allow clients to begin to accept
themselves, which releases the inner experiencing and unblocks the potential for
self-actualization. Indeed, some clients need only a listening ear to get them back
to their own self-healing processes. Hence, helpers generally spend a
considerable amount of time in the exploration stage because it can be so
helpful. However, because many clients cannot make progress with exploration
alone, insight and action are often necessary to help them change. In this case,
exploration sets the stage for everything that follows. In addition, exploration
skills are used throughout all three stages. Thus, even when helpers move to
insight and action, the most frequently used skills are the exploration skills
135
because these skills help clients continue to feel safe and encourage deeper
exploration.
It is important for beginning helpers to remember how difficult it is for
some clients to open up and explore. Simply telling them to feel comfortable
and saying that helping is a safe environment is not enough to reduce the fear of
some clients in forming a relationship. In 
Chapter 10
, we explore some of the
difficulties that helpers have creating a safe setting, encouraging clients, and
implementing the exploration skills.
An important caveat throughout the exploration stage (and the rest of the
helping process) is that there are no absolute “right” interventions to use.
Although there are general guidelines, it is not possible to provide a cookbook to
tell helpers exactly what to do in different circumstances with different clients.
Individual clients require different things at different times from helpers. It is up
to helpers to determine which interventions are productive and which are not
useful by paying attention to the individual client’s reactions and responses
(refer back to 
Chapter 2
 for a review of the moment-by-moment process).
What Do You Think?
Rogers has been charged with being too optimistic about human
nature and as reflecting American culture in the mid-20th century
(compared with the pessimistic view of Europeans such as Freud).
Debate whether Rogers’s view is too simplistic and optimistic.
Take each of Rogers’s six conditions and debate its merits.
Do you think that it is the therapist’s facilitative conditions, the
relationship between the helper and client, therapist awareness of needs
and motives, or client involvement that is most crucial for the success
of the exploration stage?
How well do the tasks of the exploration stage fit your personal style?
Discuss whether establishing a relationship is more a matter of
facilitative attitudes or of implementing helping skills.
Describe the challenges you would face in developing a relationship
with someone you believe has done awful and despicable things (e.g.,
rape, murder).
Do you believe that it is necessary for clients to “tell their stories”?
136
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Therapist Skills and Innovative Moments
Citation:
 Cunha, C., Goncalves, M. M., Hill, C. E., Mendes, I., Ribiero, A. P., Sousa, I.,
Angus, L., & Greenberg, L. S. (2012). Therapist interventions and client innovative
moments in emotion-focused therapy for depression. 
Psychotherapy, 49, 
536–548.
doi:10.1037/a0028259
Rationale:
 Narrative theorists suggest that the major change clients make in therapy
involves how they talk about or tell their stories. They measure this change by identifying
innovative moments (IMs) in client speech. Five types of IMs have been identified: 
action
(the client acting in ways that are discrepant with the problematic self-narrative), 
reflection
(new understandings that undermine the dominance of the problematic self-narrative),
protest
 (challenging the problematic self-narrative), 
reconceptualization
 (a shift between two
positions and a transformation process), and 
performing change
 (new activities or
experiences that become possible because of changes). Previous studies have found more
IMs in successful than unsuccessful therapy, in particular, with more occurrences of
reconceptualization and action IMs. Cunha et al. wondered whether specific therapist skills
facilitated IMs. Therapist skills were conceptualized as exploration (includes approval-
reassurance, closed questions, open questions and probes, restatements, reflections of
feelings), insight (includes challenges, interpretations, self-disclosures, and immediacy), and
action (includes information and direct guidance).
Method:
 Three good-outcome and three poor-outcome cases of emotion-focused therapy
for depression were selected based on examination of a number of outcome measures. The
first two sessions, two sequential middle sessions, and the two final sessions of these six
cases were coded for therapist skills and client IMs.
Interesting Findings:
Exploration skills were used more often, whereas insight skills were used less often, in good- compared with poor-
outcome cases across all three phases of therapy. Action skills were used more often in initial phases of good- than
poor-outcome cases but more often in the final sessions of poor- than good-outcome cases.
IMs more often followed skills in the good- than poor-outcome cases. In good-outcome cases, the connection
between skills and IMs increased from the initial to middle phase of therapy and was maintained in the final
phases. In poor-outcome cases, the connection between skills and IMs increased from the beginning to middle but
then decreased in the final phase.
In terms of types of IMs, the authors divided these into easier IMs (action, reflection, protest) and more advanced
IMs (reconceptualization, performing change). In the initial and middle phases of the good-outcome cases, all
three types of skills were associated more with easier IMs but not with more advanced IMs; in the final phase,
exploration and insight skills were more often associated with easy IMs than with the more advanced IMs. In the
final phase of poor-outcome cases, all skills were more associated with the easy than advanced IMs.
Conclusions:
Therapists used the skills more effectively in good- than poor-outcome cases (i.e., all three types of skills led to
more IMs in good- than poor-outcome cases).
Experiential therapists used mostly exploration skills, which fits with this theoretical perspective as being client
centered. However, exploration skills did not lead to more IMs than did insight skills.
Insight skills were used more often in poor- than good-outcome cases. The authors speculated that therapists were
trying to engage clients when the more theoretically preferred exploration skills were not working.
Exploration and insight skills led mostly to the easier IMs in the initial and middle phases of therapy, whereas
137
they led mostly to the more advanced skills later in therapy. It appears that the foundation must be set early in
therapy with the easier IMs before the complex IMs can occur.
Action skills were used more in the beginning and middle phases of good-outcome cases, which the authors
speculate was because therapists were engaging in in-session experiential activities such as chair work. They
speculated that action skills were used less in the final phase because therapists were helping clients consolidate
gains. In contrast, in poor-outcome cases, action skills increased steadily across phases, perhaps because therapists
continued to try to engage clients in therapeutic tasks even when they were not working. Action skills led more
often to the easier than the more complex IMs.
Implications for Therapy:
Therapists should pay attention to the immediate effects of their interventions.
Therapists can use both exploration and insight skills to promote easy IMs in the early and middle phases of
therapy and the more complex IMs in the final sessions of therapy.
Therapists can use action skills (remember that these were usually the in-session directives) to promote the easy
IMs throughout therapy.
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
138
The one who listens is the one who understands.
—African (Jabo) proverb
The students in one class prearranged to manipulate their professor’s behavior through
nonverbal responding. Whenever the professor moved to the right, they looked up, paid
rapt attention, and smiled encouragingly. Whenever the professor moved to the left,
they looked down, rustled their papers, coughed, and whispered. The professor soon
had moved so far to the right, he fell off the stage! This example illustrates the power of
attending skills.
T
he skills covered in this chapter rarely show up on transcripts of helping
sessions because they are mostly nonverbal rather than verbal. They are what has
been called the “back channel” of communication, similar to the oil that greases
the mechanism to make a machine run smoothly or the glue that holds the
elements of a collage together. Helpers attend to clients, listen to them, and
observe them carefully so that the process of helping moves forward. These skills
help clients feel safe and comfortable, which allows them to explore their
thoughts and feelings. Helpers do not usually think consciously about and are
not aware of these skills, but they can have a big impact on clients.
Overview of Attending, Listening, and
Observing
Attendi
ng
 refers to helpers orienting themselves physically toward clients. The
goal of attending is for helpers to communicate to clients that they are paying
attention to them so that clients feel safe to talk openly about their thoughts and
feelings. In effect, attending lays the foundation for the implementation of the
verbal helping interventions. Clients feel they are valued and worthy of being
139
listened to when helpers attend to them. Attending can also encourage clients to
verbalize ideas and feelings because they feel helpers want to hear what they have
to say. Furthermore, attending behaviors can reinforce clients’ active
involvement in sessions.
Attending is communicated mostly through nonverbal and paraverbal (i.e.,
how we say the words) behaviors, which help convey both what helpers are
trying to express and what they do not intend to express (or might be trying to
hide). For example, although a helper might try hard to be empathic and look
concerned, he or she might feel bored and irritated with the client, which might
be expressed through foot tapping or stifled yawns.
Attending orients helpers toward clients, but listening goes beyond just
physically attending to clients. 
Listening
 refers to capturing and understanding
the messages that clients communicate (Egan, 1994). Listening involves trying
to hear and understand what clients are saying. Reik (1948) talked about
listening with a third ear, or trying to hear what the client really means, not just
what she or he says overtly. In effect, the helper puts the verbal and nonverbal
messages together and hears what the client is thinking and feeling at a deep
level.
Attending behaviors set the stage for allowing helpers to listen, but
attending does not necessarily ensure listening. Helpers could attend physically
but not listen (e.g., they could be thinking about dinner that night and not hear
what clients are saying).
Listening provides the raw material from which helpers develop their verbal
and nonverbal interventions, but listening should not be confused with the
ability to deliver helpful interventions. Helpers could listen without being
helpful, but it would be difficult to be helpful without listening. Thus, from
watching sessions, one could not actually tell if helpers were listening; however,
one could infer they were listening if they were able to produce statements that
reflected what they heard.
Observing
 involves paying attention to what is going on overtly with clients
in terms of nonverbal behaviors and mannerisms. Whereas listening focuses
more on the words and nuances of what the client is saying, observing focuses
on trying to pick up on the behavioral cues of the client and how the client is
coming across. Observing is particularly important for noting times when clients
have negative reactions, feel ambivalence, have difficulty expressing emotions, or
are distracted or uninvolved.
Clearly, there is a lot of overlap among the attending, listening, and
observation skills, which is why they are presented together in this chapter. As a
helper, you will want to do all of these to build a relationship with clients.
Before I describe nonverbal behaviors, let’s think about cultural issues in
attending, given that such issues can have a profound impact on the helping
process.
140
Cultural Issues in Attending, Listening, and
Observing
Each culture develops rules for nonverbal communication (Harper, Wiens, &
Matarazzo, 1978). An example of such a rule is the pattern of greeting that
might take no more than one third of a second. This pattern involves looking at
the other person, smiling, lifting the eyebrows, and nodding the head. These
behaviors act as a releaser in that they elicit the same response from another
person. Rules for nonverbal behaviors are typically outside of conscious
awareness. Most people probably could not articulate the nonverbal rules in
their own culture because they learn these rules as young children through social
interactions and example rather than by explicit verbal instruction.
Nonverbal behaviors that are appropriate in one culture might not be
appropriate in another. A whole industry has developed to teach diplomats and
travelers about nonverbal rules of other cultures. For example, in Asia, it is
important for people not to praise themselves and instead to appear humble
(Maki & Kitano, 2002). Therefore, an American who boasts might not be well
received in Asian countries.
If you are involved in interpersonal interactions in which your rules for
nonverbal behaviors are not followed by the other person, you might feel intense
discomfort. You might not be able to understand or articulate why you feel
uncomfortable, but you probably know that something does not feel right. For
example, if someone stares at you, you might feel uncomfortable because it is
inappropriate in your culture to stare for a long time. If someone stands too
close and grabs your arm when you are talking, you might feel an urge to move
away because the person has violated your personal space.
Helpers need to adapt their style to fit clients’ nonverbal styles rather than
expect clients to adapt to them. Helpers can take their cues from clients as to
what makes them feel comfortable. For example, if a client acts nervous when
the helper initiates eye contact, the helper might look away and observe whether
the client responds differently. We cannot stereotype that clients from certain
cultures will behave in specific ways; rather, we have to observe to see how each
individual client responds.
Relax and Be Natural but Professional
It is important not to just appear relaxed but to actually be relaxed. Many
beginning trainees try so hard to maintain an attending stance that they come
across as artificial or posed. They perform all the “right” behaviors but end up
141
being too attentive, which makes clients feel they are being examined too closely.
One of the most difficult tasks facing helpers is to relax and be themselves.
However, when helpers integrate attending and listening behaviors into their
way of being, clients often respond by exploring their concerns.
When you are not able to relax, it can be helpful to step back and try to
learn more about what is going on inside you. For example, if you feel your
muscles tensing or note you are withdrawing physically from clients, you might
reflect about what is going on inside you at that moment. Awareness is the key
to handling situations (refer back to 
Chapter 4
). Once you know how you feel,
you can make informed decisions about how to act rather than having the
reactions “leak out.” Paying attention to bodily reactions provides an incredible
amount of information about clients. If you feel bored, anxious, attracted, or
repulsed by a client, chances are other people feel this way toward the client. See
Chapter 14
 for ideas about how to use these reactions therapeutically during the
insight stage.
Nonverbal Behaviors That Facilitate
Attending
Helpers typically communicate much of their attending and listening through
nonverbal behaviors, and helpers observe what clients may be experiencing
through noting their nonverbal behaviors. Indeed, some researchers (e.g., Archer
& Akert, 1977; Haase & Tepper, 1972) have discussed the importance of
nonverbal behaviors in the communication of emotions. These researchers have
suggested that people communicate true emotions more through nonverbal than
verbal expressions, and that nonverbal behaviors are more reliable indicators of
true emotion when there is a discrepancy between verbal and nonverbal
behaviors. In my opinion, there is not enough empirical evidence to indicate the
relative importance of verbal and nonverbal behaviors; however, enough
evidence exists to suggest that helpers should pay attention to what they and
their clients communicate nonverbally as well as verbally.
So let us examine the different kinds of nonverbal behaviors. 
Kinesics
 refers
to the relationship of bodily movements (arm and leg movements, head nods) to
communication. Bodily movements can be categorized into several types, each
of which has a different function (Ekman & Friesen, 1969). 
Emblems
 are
substitutes for words (e.g., a wave is a universal greeting). 
Illustrators
 accompany
speech (e.g., measuring the size of a fish with the hands). 
Regulators
 (e.g., head
nods, postural shifts) monitor the conversation flow. 
Adaptors
 are habitual acts
that are often outside awareness and have no communicative purpose (e.g., head
scratching, licking one’s lips, playing with a pen).
142
Helpers can use emblems, illustrators, and regulators to accompany verbal
messages, but they should avoid using adaptors that detract from the helper’s
effectiveness by turning the focus away from the client to the helper. Too many
adaptors or an inappropriate use of emblems, illustrators, or regulators is often a
sign of “nonverbal leakage” (i.e., the person does not want to communicate or is
trying to hide, but the feeling leaks out through nonverbal channels).
In the next sections, I review several nonverbal behaviors that are important
for enabling the helper to attend to the client. These behaviors are also
important for the helper to be aware of when observing the client. Obviously,
these nonverbal behaviors all operate together, and sometimes one nonverbal
behavior can compensate for another, but here I break them apart to describe
how each one operates. Note that all of these behaviors can be used too much or
too little with any given client; there is typically an optimal level that the helper
and client have to negotiate, often implicitly.
EYE CONTACT
Eye contact is a key nonverbal behavior. Looking and gaze aversion are typically
used to initiate, maintain, or avoid communication. With a gaze, one can
communicate intimacy, interest, submission, or dominance (Kleinke, 1986).
Eyes are used to monitor speech, provide feedback, signal understanding, and
regulate turn taking (Harper et al., 1978). One could say we meet people with
our eyes or that “the eyes are the windows into the soul.” In contrast, gaze
avoidance or breaking eye contact often signals anxiety, discomfort, or a desire
not to communicate with the other person. In general, a person who violates the
rules of eye contact will have a hard time communicating with others.
In typical noncounseling interactions, people make eye contact with each
other (i.e., mutual gaze) in 28% to 70% of their interactions (Kendon, 1967),
although usually for no more than 1 second at a time. Dyads typically negotiate
when and how much to look at each other, although this is not a conscious
negotiation and takes places at a nonverbal level. Too little eye contact can make
one feel the listener is uninterested in the conversation and is avoiding
involvement. By contrast, too much eye contact can make the other person feel
uncomfortable, intruded on, dominated, controlled, and even devoured.
Likewise, staring can feel rude, insulting, and threatening.
Norms for eye contact differ among cultures. In White middle-class North
America, people tend to maintain eye contact while listening but look away
when speaking, checking back from time to time to get feedback. In some
Native American groups, sustained eye contact is considered offensive and a sign
of disrespect, especially if by a younger to an older person (Brammer &
MacDonald, 1996). Several cultural groups (some Native American, Inuit, or
Aboriginal Australian groups) avoid eye contact, especially when talking about
143
serious topics (Ivey, 1994). And, as noted in 
Chapter 5
, a lack of eye contact
signifies respect for an authority figure in some cultures.
FACIAL EXPRESSION
Darwin (1872) speculated that before prehistoric people had language, they
communicated threats, greetings, and submission through facial expressions. He
believed that this shared heritage explains why all humans express basic emotions
through similar facial expressions. He wrote,
the movements of expression in the face and body, whatever their origin may have been, are
in themselves of much importance for our welfare. They serve as the first means of
communication between the mother and her infant; she smiles approval, and thus encourages
her child on the right path, or frowns disapproval. The movements of expression give
vividness and energy to our spoken words. They reveal the thoughts and intentions of others
more truly than do words, which may be falsified. . . . These results follow partly from the
intimate relation which exists between almost all the emotions and their outward
manifestations. (p. 366)
The face is perhaps the body part most involved in nonverbal
communication because people communicate so much emotion and
information through facial expressions (Ekman, 1993). People pay a lot of
attention to facial expressions because they give clues about the meaning of the
verbal message. In Shakespeare’s (1623/1980) 
Macbeth,
 Lady Macbeth says to
her husband, “Your face, my thane, is a book whereon men may read strange
matters” (Act 1, Scene 5, p. 17).
The following are some common facial expressions and possible meanings
(remember that these are only possible meanings), according to Nirenberg and
Calero (1971):
A frown might indicate displeasure or confusion.
A raised eyebrow may suggest envy or disbelief.
An eye wink might indicate intimacy or a private matter.
Tightened jaw muscles may reflect antagonism.
Eyes squinted might reflect antagonism.
Upward rolling of the eyes may imply disbelief or exasperation.
Both eyebrows raised may denote doubt or questioning.
Ekman and Friesen (1984) showed photographs of facial expressions to
people around the world and found that several facial expressions had the same
meaning across cultures. People around the world cry when distressed, shake
their heads when defiant, and smile when happy. Even blind children who have
never seen a face use the same facial expressions to express emotions as sighted
people (Eibl-Eibesfeldt, 1971). In addition, fear and anger are expressed mostly
with the eyes and happiness mostly with the mouth (Kestenbaum, 1992).
Although people in different cultures share a universal facial language, they
differ in the manner and depth of expression of their emotions. For example,
144
emotional displays are often intense and prolonged in Western cultures, whereas
Asians display emotions of sympathy, respect, and shame but rarely display self-
aggrandizing or negative emotions that might disrupt communal feelings
(Markus & Kitayama, 1991; Matsumoto, Kudoh, Sherer, & Wallbott, 1988).
An important facial feature used in helping is smiling. Although smiling
makes a person look friendly and can encourage exploration, too much smiling
can be perceived as ingratiating or inappropriate when clients are talking about
serious concerns. Helpers who smile excessively could be seen as not genuine,
mocking the depth of clients’ problems, or uninvolved.
HEAD NODS
The appropriate use of head nods, especially at the end of sentences, can make
clients feel helpers are listening and following what they are saying. Indeed,
verbal messages are sometimes unnecessary because helpers communicate
through head nods that they are “with” clients and that clients should continue
talking. Too few head nods can make clients feel anxious because they might
think that helpers are not paying attention; too many can be distracting.
BODY POSTURE
An often-recommended body posture is for helpers to lean toward clients and
maintain an open body posture with the arms and legs uncrossed (e.g., Egan,
1994). This leaning, open body posture often effectively conveys that the helper
is paying attention, although helpers can appear rigid if they stay in this position
too long. Also, if the open, leaning position is uncomfortable, it can be hard for
helpers to attend to clients.
BODILY MOVEMENTS
Bodily movements provide information one often cannot obtain from either
verbal content or facial expression. As Freud (1905/1953a) eloquently stated,
“He that has eyes to see and ears to hear may convince himself that no mortal
can keep a secret. If his lips are silent, he chatters with his fingertips, betrayal
oozes out of him at every pore” (p. 94). Van den Stock, Righart, and de Gelder
(2007) found that body expressions were particularly important in addition to
those of the face and voice in helping responders recognize emotions. Similarly,
Beattie and Shovelton (2005) suggested that spontaneous hand gestures enabled
people to get their messages across more clearly.
Ekman and Friesen (1969) noted that leg and foot movements are the most
likely sources of nonverbal leakage because they are less subject to conscious
awareness and voluntary inhibition. The hands and face are the next best sources
of clues for nonverbal leakage. Hence, if a helper finds him- or herself repeatedly
145
tapping his or her foot, the helper might think about what he or she is feeling.
Gestures often communicate meaning, especially when they are used in
conjunction with verbal activity. According to McGough (1975), the following
are some possible meanings (again, remember that these are just possible
meanings):
Steepling of fingers might suggest that a person feels confident, smug,
or proud.
Touching or rubbing the nose tends to be a negative reaction.
Hand to mouth often occurs when a person has blurted out something
that should not have been said.
Finger wagging or pointing implies lecturing or laying blame.
Tugging at the collar suggests that the person feels cornered.
Pinching the bridge of the nose implies that the person is deep in
thought.
Locked arms or crossed legs can be a defensive or critical position.
A clenched fist is sometimes a defensive or hostile gesture.
Hand over the eyes can be a gesture of avoidance.
Sitting back in chair with hands behind the head may communicate
confidence or superiority.
SPACE
The term 
pr
oxemics
 refers to how people use space in interactions. E. T. Hall
(1968) described four distance zones for middle-class Americans: intimate (0–18
inches), personal (1.5–4 feet), social (4–12 feet), and public (12 feet or more). If
rules for prescribed distances are not followed, people can feel uncomfortable,
although they are not usually aware of what is making them uneasy. Hall noted
that once these patterns for space are learned, they are maintained largely outside
of conscious awareness. Typically, the personal to social distance is considered
appropriate for seating arrangements in helping relationships, although
individuals vary in the amount of distance that feels comfortable for them. Some
helpers place chairs close together, whereas others, when they have control over
the arrangements, place the chairs far apart. Some helpers place a number of
chairs in their offices and allow clients to choose where they sit; where the client
sits then provides information that the helper can later use in speculating about
the client’s needs (e.g., to be close or to be distant).
Space is used in different ways in different cultures (E. T. Hall, 1963).
American and British people generally prefer to be relatively distant from other
people and rarely touch. In contrast, Hispanic and Middle Eastern people
generally prefer less distance. For example, Arabs and Israelis often stand close,
touch, talk loudly, and stare intently. In their review of the literature in work
environments, Ayoko and Hartel (2003) found consistent evidence that space
146
violations triggered conflict for people from different cultural backgrounds. In
addition, Norman (1982) noted that space is a specialized elaboration of culture.
He claimed that space reflects status, power, and expressions of personality. For
example, a client would probably very differently to a helper sitting behind a
desk than to a helper sitting without a barrier in between, given that desks can
communicate power.
Helpers also need to take cultural considerations into account rather than
just reacting unconsciously to someone who uses different proxemic patterns.
However, helpers need to be avoid stereotyping given the vast range of
differences within cultures. For example, a helper should not assume all
Latino/Latina clients want to be hugged at the beginning and end of each
session just because Latino people often hug when greeting and leaving.
Differences exist within cultures, and acculturation to the dominant culture may
influence clients’ comfort with physical closeness.
Paraverbal Behaviors That Facilitate
Attending
In addition to nonverbal behaviors, there are also paraverbal behaviors that
accompany interventions. In other words, the manner in which helpers speak
makes a difference. We consider here tone of voice and grammatical style.
TONE OF VOICE
Consider how you feel when someone speaks with a soft, gentle, inviting voice
as opposed to when a person speaks in a loud, brash, demanding voice. You
might have strong reactions to the two helpers based on their different speech
mannerisms. Similarly, clients are more likely to explore when helpers speak
gently rather than loudly and demandingly.
In addition, it can be helpful for helpers to somewhat match the client’s
pace of speech. Helpers might use a slower pace of speech with clients who speak
slowly. In contrast, helpers might use a somewhat faster pace with clients who
talk rapidly. If a client is speaking too rapidly, however, the helper might use a
slower pace to encourage the client to slow down.
GRAMMATICAL STYLE
Another way helpers communicate attending is by matching the client’s
language and grammatical style. Language must be appropriate to the cultural
experience and educational level of the client, so the helper can form a bond
with the client. If a client says, “I ain’t never gonna make it with chicks,” it
147
would probably be better for the helper to say something like, “You’re
concerned about finding a girlfriend,” rather than “Your inferiority complex
prevents you from establishing relationships with appropriate love objects.” The
latter statement sounds too discrepant from the client’s language. Helpers
should not compromise their integrity by using a language style that feels
uncomfortable to them, but they can modify their style to be more similar to
that of their client. Each of us has a comfort range of behaviors, and helpers
need to find the place within that range to meet each client.
Behaviors That Facilitate Active Listening
and Observing
Listening and observing involve verbal, nonverbal, and paraverbal channels of
communication. Furthermore, helpers observe each of these types of
communication to try to determine what the client is thinking and feeling.
VERBAL MESSAGES
Helpers can listen carefully to the words clients use to communicate thoughts,
feelings, and experiences. Helpers get into a listening stance by using attending
skills (e.g., “um-hmm”) and freeing their minds from distractions. Helpers can
imagine themselves in the client’s position. Thus, helpers listen by seeking to
understand what a client is experiencing from the client’s perspective rather than
from the helper’s viewpoint. For example, an adolescent client, Kathleen,
complained she felt devastated and worthless because she had not been asked to
the prom. From the perspective of the helper, a 35-year-old married woman, not
being asked to the prom was not a catastrophic event. However, by listening to
Kathleen with a third ear, the helper could imagine that Kathleen felt awful.
A key to listening is for helpers to pay attention to clients without
formulating the next response. All too often, people are half listening to what
someone is saying because they are thinking about what to say next. It is better
to listen and say nothing (especially if the client is exploring productively) than
to rush in and say something that interrupts the client’s exploration.
In addition, clients who have different verbal styles than their helpers can
cause confusion for their helpers. Helpers who are introverted might assume that
talkative clients are comfortable, when they could be talking too much out of
anxiety. It is important for helpers not to project their feelings and personal style
onto their clients.
NONVERBAL AND PARAVERBAL MESSAGES
148
Not only is it important that helpers listen to clients’ words, they also can learn a
lot by “listening” to clients’ nonverbal behaviors. Clients who are nervous often
use a lot of adaptors, are quiet, stutter, or cannot speak coherently. Clients who
are defensive or closed often cross their arms and legs, almost as a barricade to
the helper. Clients who are ashamed might look down as they speak. Clients
who are scared might speak softly, look away, or have a closed posture. In
contrast, clients who are comfortable and feel safe with their helpers often lean
forward and talk with animation and feeling in their voices.
As noted earlier, helpers should not interpret nonverbal behaviors as having
fixed or standard “meanings.” Fidgeting can reveal anxiety, but it can also reveal
boredom; folded arms can convey either irritation or relaxation. For example, if
a client sits with arms and legs crossed, he or she is not necessarily withholding
or defending. It could mean he or she is cold or just habitually sits with arms
and legs crossed. Helpers cannot “read” another’s body language as having
universal meaning but can use body language as providing hints or clues about
what a client might be feeling. If a client is sitting with arms and legs crossed
and has scooted the chair back, the helper might hypothesize that the client
needs distance from the helper. The helper needs to investigate this hypothesis
further, however, by talking about it with the client (using skills covered in this
book). Thus, helpers can use nonverbal data to form hypotheses and then gather
more data to determine the accuracy of these hypotheses.
It also appears that some emotions are hard to read. Results from two
studies (A. P. Atkinson, Dittrick, Gemmell, & Young, 2004; Van den Stock et
al., 2007) suggest that fear and anger are harder to recognize than happiness and
sadness. In addition, fear and anger are difficult to distinguish. These results
indicate the importance of helpers not making assumptions about what clients
are feeling.
Helpers also need to be aware of possible misinterpretations when someone
from another culture uses nonverbal behaviors differently than they do. For
example, if a European American helper greets an African American client who
does not make eye contact, the helper should not assume the client suffers from
guilt or low self-esteem but should pay close attention to whether this nonverbal
behavior has a different meaning in the client’s culture.
Helpers are often confused when clients have different nonverbal styles
from theirs. For example, a helper who does not like to make a lot of eye contact
might assume that a client who makes eye contact feels comfortable and in
control of the situation. However, too much eye contact can be as much a
defense or indication of anxiety as too little eye contact; both styles make it
difficult for people to get close to others.
A key to listening is to pay attention to context. Rather than becoming
fixated on the meaning of specific nonverbal behaviors, helpers need to pay
attention to everything about the client: the verbal and nonverbal behaviors, the
149
setting, the culture, and the presenting problem. For example, Archie appeared
angry and hostile to the helper, but his behavior made sense when he revealed
that he had just been stopped and frisked by a police officer for no apparent
reason other than that he was an African American man in a White
neighborhood.
When Rosenthal, Hall, DiMatteo, Rogers, and Archer (1979) showed clips
of emotionally expressive faces and bodies, they found that some people were
better at detecting emotion than others and that women were generally better at
detecting emotion than men. J. B. Miller (1976) used social learning theory to
explain why women might be better at detecting emotion than men:
Subordinates (women), then, know much more about the dominants than vice versa. They
have to. They become highly attuned to the dominants, able to predict their reactions of
pleasure and displeasure. Here, I think, is where the long story of “feminine intuition” and
“feminine wiles” begins. It seems clear that these “mysterious” gifts are in fact skills,
developed through long practice, in reading many small signals, both verbal and nonverbal.
(p. 10)
It is interesting to note that although some people are better than others at
picking up nonverbal cues, some evidence showed that counselors were no better
than noncounselors at nonverbal acuity (Sweeney & Cottle, 1976).
Helpers who are aware that they are not as natively sensitive to nonverbal
cues can try harder to pay attention to these behaviors. A few studies have
suggested that trainees can be taught to increase their sensitivity to nonverbal
communication (e.g., Delaney & Heimann, 1966; Grace, Kivlighan, & Kunce,
1995). It seems that self-awareness and practice can help people become more
sensitive to nonverbal cues.
MINIMAL VERBAL BEHAVIORS
There are two minimal verbal behaviors that helpers can use to facilitate client
exploration: minimal encouragement and approval–reassurance.
Minimal Encouragers
Helpers encourage clients to keep talking through nonlanguage sounds,
nonwords, and simple words such as “um-hmm,” “yeah,” and “wow.” Helpers
use minimal encouragers to acknowledge what the client has said, communicate
attentiveness, provide noninvasive support, monitor the flow of conversation,
and encourage clients to keep talking. Minimal encouragers are often used in
conjunction with and serve the same purpose as head nods.
Too few minimal encouragers can feel distancing, whereas too many can be
distracting and annoying to the client. I suggest helpers use minimal encouragers
and acknowledgments, mostly at the end of client sentences or speaking turns
(i.e., everything a client says between two helper interventions), to encourage
clients to keep talking (assuming they are actively involved in exploration). A
150
minimal encourager here suggests that you are giving up your speaking turn and
would like the client to continue speaking. Interrupting a client to provide
minimal encouragers, however, can be distracting, so helpers should pay
attention to the appropriate timing of this intervention.
Approval–Reassurance
Approval–reassurance is a helpful skill that can be used occasionally (and I stress
occasionally) to provide emotional support and reassurance, indicate helpers
empathize with or understand clients, or suggest that clients’ feelings are normal
and to be expected. The key is to use approval–reassurance to foster exploration
and to make clients feel safe enough to keep talking at a deep level about their
concerns. For many clients, approval-reassurance that their problems are normal
and that they are not alone in their feelings can be empowering and help clients
in deeply exploring their concerns. The following are some examples of
approval–reassurance that could be helpful depending on the situation:
“That’s really hard to handle.”
“That’s a devastating situation.”
“How awful!”
“Wow! That’s an awesome opportunity!”
“Good try!”
“It was really terrific that you were able to express your feelings to
him!”
“Yeah, I know what you’re going through.”
“I’ve been there too.”
Approval–reassurance can also be used to provide reinforcement, indicating
that the helper values something the client has said or done and wants to
encourage the client to continue the effort to change. Some clients need support
or acknowledgment that they have done something well. In addition, approval,
reassurance, and reinforcement can help some clients persist in exploring because
they know someone is listening and sympathetic; this is especially important if
clients are exploring difficult or painful topics.
When using approval–reassurance, it is important that the helper stay close
to where the client is and know the client well enough to know what behavior is
being approved. For example, Beth had been working on being assertive came
into her session and said that she finally told her boss that she wanted more
control over her schedule. The helper immediately said, “Wow, that is great that
you were able to stand up for yourself.” Beth burst into tears and said that she
was fired from her job. It perhaps would have been more helpful for the helper,
instead of assuming that the experience was positive and thus giving approval-
reassurance, to say something like, “And how did that go for you?”
151
Approval-reassurance is especially inappropriate if used to minimize or deny
feelings (e.g., “Don’t worry about it,” “Everyone feels that way”). When used in
this manner, approval-reassurance stops rather than facilitates clients’ exploring
and accepting feelings. Such statements can make clients feel they have no right
to their feelings. Helpers sometimes use these interventions as misguided
attempts to reassure others that everything is okay. Unfortunately, problems
typically do not go away because they are minimized or denied. Most of us have
heard the old sayings, “Give it time” or “Time cures all.” It is not “time” that
makes feelings go away; in fact, feelings often fester when they are bottled up or
denied. Rather, it is awareness, acceptance, and expression of feelings that aid in
resolution of painful affect. To reiterate, our goal as helpers is generally to help
clients identify, intensify, and express feelings rather than minimize or deny
them.
Furthermore, approval–reassurance can sound false if used excessively,
prematurely, or insincerely. If such interventions are used to promote helper
biases (e.g., “I think you’re right to feel guilty about getting an abortion”), they
can also be problematic because they stop client exploration or make clients feel
compelled to agree or comply.
In general, then, if done judiciously and sparingly, approval–reassurance can
encourage clients and facilitate exploration of thoughts, feelings, and
experiences. Approval–reassurance should not be used, however, to diminish
feelings, deny experiences, stop exploration, or provide a moral judgment. When
helpers find themselves using approval–reassurance in a counterproductive way,
they may want to think about what is going on in their own lives.
Here is an example of a positive use of approval–reassurance (in italics):
Client:
 
I just learned that my sister needs to have a kidney
transplant. She’s been sick a lot lately and hasn’t been getting
better.
Helper:
 
That’s too bad.
Client:
 
Yeah, I feel terrible for her. She’s only 21 and has always
been active, so this is a real shock for her. I feel guilty that she
got this horrible disease while I’m healthy and able to function.
Helper:
 
It’s pretty natural to feel some guilt.
Client:
 
Really? I’m glad to hear that. I have been trying to do more
for her. I’m thinking of organizing a campaign to find a donor
and raise money for her treatment. Because she has an unusual
blood type, it will be difficult to find the right person, and it’s
going to cost a lot of money.
Helper:
 
That’s terrific that you would do that for her.
Client:
 
I feel like it’s the least I can do. It does interestingly bring up
a lot of issues for me about obligation versus doing things
152
because I want to. (Client continues exploring her thoughts.)
AVOIDING INTERRUPTIONS
One particularly distracting behavior is interruptions. When the client is
exploring productively (i.e., talking about innermost thoughts and feelings), the
helper does not need to interrupt. Often in the exploration stage, the helper
simply has to attend and listen and stay out of the client’s way, so that the client
has the opportunity to keep talking. Matarazzo, Phillips, Wiens, & Saslow
(1965) stressed that helpers should not interrupt and should delay talking for
several seconds after the end of client statements. This pause (noninterruption)
allows clients to continue thinking and talking without undue pressure from
helpers. Matarazzo et al. found that inexperienced helpers interrupted far more
often than did experienced helpers.
Interruptions can occasionally be helpful, however. If the client is stuck,
cannot think of what to say, or is rambling or talking nonstop but not exploring
in much depth (e.g., is telling stories in a bland tone), the helper may need to
interrupt to help the client get back on track through the use of exploration
skills (see 
Chapters 8
, 
9
, 
10
, and 
19
).
SILENCE
A silence is a pause during which neither helper nor client is speaking. The
silence can occur after a client’s statement, within a client’s statement, or after a
simple acceptance of the helper’s statement. For example, after the client says
something like “I just feel so confused and angry and don’t know what to say,”
the helper might pause to allow the client time to reflect on the feelings and see
if the client has anything new to add. If the client pauses in the middle of saying
something and is obviously still processing the feelings, the helper might be
silent to let the client think without interruption. If the client responds
minimally to something the helper said, the helper might be silent to see if the
client can think of something else to say. It is important to note that to say
nothing is not necessarily to do nothing. Helpers can be attentive and
supportive, and they can listen without saying anything. In fact, sometimes the
most useful thing a helper can do is to say nothing.
I often recommend the use of brief silences for beginning helpers because it
gives them a chance to listen to clients without having to formulate an
immediate response. Thus, when clients pause, the helper ponders how to reflect
all that has been said while of course still attending to the client. Often,
beginning helpers are surprised to discover that clients keep talking, indicating
that they just need permission to talk.
Silence can be used to convey empathy, warmth, and respect and to give
clients time and space to talk (Hill, Thompson, & Ladany, 2003; Ladany, Hill,
153
Thompson, & O’Brien, 2004). Silence can also allow clients time to reflect or
think through what they want to say without interruption. Some clients pause
for a long time because they process things slowly and thoroughly or because
they are in the middle of thinking through something and need time to get in
touch with their thoughts and feelings. At such times, silence is respectful
because it provides space for clients to think without feeling pressured to say
anything. Warm, empathic silences give clients time to express their feelings. By
allowing clients the space, helpers can encourage clients to express feelings from
which they might otherwise run away. Silence can indicate to clients that helpers
are patient and unrushed and have plenty of time to listen to whatever comes
out. During these empathic silences, helpers can sit attentively focused on being
with the client while the client is deeply immersed in thoughts and feelings.
Hence, I suggest that helpers avoid interruptions and give clients several seconds
after speaking to see whether they have anything else to say. Likewise, some
empirical evidence suggests that clients talk more when therapists delay speaking
(Matarazzo et al., 1965).
Silence also is often inadvertently used for negative or inappropriate reasons
(Hill et al., 2003; Ladany et al., 2004). Some helpers are silent because they are
anxious, angry, bored, or distracted. Many beginning helpers are uncomfortable
with silence. They do not know what to do and are often concerned about how
clients might perceive them. To relax, helpers can breathe deeply, relax, and
think about the client and what might be going on inside the client. In other
words, helpers should try to establish an empathic connection with clients
during silence rather than focusing on themselves. If silences go on for a long
time (i.e., more than a minute) or if a client is obviously uncomfortable, the
helper should consider breaking the silence and asking the client how she or he
is feeling.
As with other skills, the acceptability of silence varies by culture. D. W. Sue
and Sue (1999) noted that in Japanese and Chinese cultures, silence can indicate
a desire by the person to continue talking after making a point. In contrast,
European Americans are less comfortable with silence and often rush to fill the
space.
Here is an example of how silence might be used therapeutically when the
client is actively exploring and engaged in the process:
Client:
 
My dog Sam just died. I’m really upset because I’ve had that
dog since I was very little. I grew up with the dog.
Helper:
 
(Silence of about 1 minute) 
How are you feeling?
Client:
 
I was just thinking about how I got the dog. I begged my
parents forever to get me a dog. I said I would take care of it.
Of course, I didn’t much at first, but I did later. Sam was kind
of like Red Rover in the comics—he waited for me at the bus
154
stop, and we had great adventures together. I could tell Sam
everything.
Helper:
 
(Silence of 30 seconds)
Client:
 
Sam helped me get through my parents’ divorce. I felt like I
could rely on him then like no one else. It’s like losing my best
friend—we went through so much stuff together. I felt so
terrible when I left for college and couldn’t take him with me.
He looked so sad, and I didn’t even say goodbye to him.
AVOIDING TOUCH
Touching is a natural inclination when helpers want to indicate support to their
clients and in fact can make clients feel understood and involved in a human
relationship (Hunter & Struve, 1998). Montagu (1971) noted that touch is a
natural physical need and that some people hunger for touch because they do
not receive enough physical contact. Unfortunately, touch can sometimes have
negative effects. Clients can feel that their space has been invaded. If the touch is
unwanted or if clients have a history of unwanted touch, touch can be
frightening and make clients feel unsafe.
Highlen and Hill (1984) reported that the few studies conducted on
touching in therapy were inconclusive. Some studies have shown positive effects
of touching, whereas others have found no effects. A survey of practicing
therapists indicated that about 90% never or rarely touched clients during
sessions (Stenzel & Rupert, 2004). The only type of touch that was used much
at all was a handshake, typically before or after a session. Some therapists,
however, were reluctant to even shake hands due to concern that any touch
could be misinterpreted as sexual or exploitative and result in harm or litigation.
Furthermore, therapists indicated that they were more likely to accept a hug or
handshake than to initiate such behaviors.
Given the potential benefits, misunderstandings, and harm related to touch,
it clearly requires clinical judgment to know when to use touch. It is better for
beginning helpers to refrain from touching to avoid ethical and clinical problems
that may arise. General guidelines for touch for more advanced helpers, as
suggested by Kertay and Reviere (1998) and E. W. L. Smith (1998), are to
1.
 
seek consent from the client before touch,
2.
 
explain the use of touch to the client, and
3.
 
discuss the experience with the client afterward.
Examples of Inappropriate and Appropriate
Attending, Listening, and Observing
155
It helps to have an example of what these attending and listening behaviors
might look like in practice. The first example is of an inappropriate use of these
behaviors, whereas the second example is an appropriate use (although
remember that these will vary based on the client and helper).
EXAMPLE OF INAPPROPRIATE ATTENDING, LISTENING,
AND OBSERVING
In the following example, the helper is distracted by other events and has a hard
time paying attention to the client:
Helper:
 
(leaning back, arms folded, and looking at the ceiling) So,
how come you came today anyway?
Client:
 
(very softly) Well, I’m not sure. I just haven’t been feeling
very good about myself lately. But I don’t know if you can help
me.
Helper:
 
(shifts forward in seat and looks intently at client) Well, so
what is happening?
Client:
 
(long pause) I just don’t know how to . . .
Helper:
 
(interrupts) Just tell me what the problem really is.
Client:
 
(long pause) I guess I really don’t have anything to talk
about. Sorry I wasted your time.
EXAMPLE OF APPROPRIATE ATTENDING, LISTENING, AND
OBSERVING
In this example, the helper is fully present with the client and able to attend and
listen to the client, as well as observe what is going on with the client:
Helper:
 
Hi. My name is Debbie. We have a few minutes to talk
today so that I can practice my helping skills. What would you
like to talk about?
Client:
 
(very softly) Well, I’m not sure. I just haven’t been feeling
very good lately about myself. But I don’t know if you can help
me.
Helper:
 
(matches the client’s soft voice) Yeah, you sound kind of
scared. Tell me a little bit more about what’s been going on
lately.
Client:
 
I’ve been kind of down. I haven’t been able to sleep or eat
much. I’m behind on everything, and I don’t have the energy
to do any schoolwork.
Helper:
 
(pauses, softly) It sounds like you feel overwhelmed.
Client:
 
(sighs) Yes, that’s exactly how I feel. It just seems like there’s
156
a lot of pressure in my first year of college.
Helper:
 
Um-hmm (head nod)
Client:
 
(continues talking)
Difficulties Helpers Experience in
Attending, Listening, and Observing
Many beginning students reading this chapter have said that it is difficult to
observe another person and decide how to intervene. They feel intimidated in
trying both to monitor themselves and to pay attention to the client, let alone
figure out what to say. It makes sense that bringing these behaviors up to
awareness initially feels strained and tense because these are things that we have
done automatically all our lives. Once we focus on them, it feels almost surreal
and like an out-of-body experience. After focusing on them for a while,
however, and paying attention to what you observe and how you come across,
you will hopefully again begin to feel comfortable in your new stance. The key is
practicing with lots of feedback.
Another difficulty is that some helpers are not sensitive to cultural
differences in nonverbal behaviors. When someone from another culture does
something nonverbally that is different from their custom (e.g., using eye
contact differently), some helpers judge these clients according to their own
cultural standards. It is important to become aware of this tendency and try not
to judge clients using your own cultural standards. I want to again emphasize
that there are no right nonverbal behaviors. The key is figuring what helps the
client relax and explore. Within the bounds of looking professional, each helper
needs to determine which attending behaviors feel comfortable and natural to
use. For example, sitting in an uncomfortable but technically correct counselor
posture will probably communicate discomfort rather than professionalism to
the client.
Concluding Comments
Attending behaviors set the stage for helpers to listen and to let clients know
they are being heard. Helpers also need to listen carefully to clients’ verbal and
nonverbal behaviors to hear what clients are saying and observe to pick up clues
about underlying thoughts and feelings. In addition, attending and listening
provide the foundation for all the other skills taught in this book, so helpers
should be particularly attentive to learning these skills.
157
What Do You Think?
Do you think that attending is different from listening?
What are some rules for nonverbal behavior in your culture?
How do you think rules are established for nonverbal behaviors? Can
these rules be changed?
What do you think about the role of culture in attending and
listening?
What are your thoughts about manipulating your nonverbal behaviors
to achieve desired goals with clients?
How much of communication is nonverbal versus verbal?
How do you feel about using silence? How was silence used in your
home?
How might touching help or hinder the helping process? How was
touching used in your family?
158
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Nonverbal Communication
Citation:
 Hill, C. E., Siegelman, L., Gronsky, B. R., Sturniolo, F., & Fretz, B. R. (1981).
Nonverbal communication and counseling outcome. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
28,
203–212.
Rationale:
 Nonverbal behavior is thought to be an important component of helpful
therapy, but it is unclear exactly how it works. The authors indicated three areas that they
wanted to study: nonverbal abilities (skills of interpreting and communicating nonverbal
messages), nonverbal behavior (specific behaviors that are helpful in sessions), and
congruence (the consistency between verbal and nonverbal messages).
Method:
 Twenty doctoral student therapists were each paired with one male and one
female undergraduate student who volunteered to talk about a personal problem.
Therapists conducted a 30-minute session with the volunteer client, and then they both
evaluated the session. Next, they watched a tape of the session. For each 1-minute interval
during the tape review, therapists and volunteer clients rated, using a list of 13 possible
affects (e.g., calm-relaxed, angry-hostile), the following: (a) one overall feeling of their own;
(b) one feeling expressed through words; (c) one feeling expressed through voice tone; (d)
one feeling expressed through movements, facial expressions, gestures, or a combination of
these; and (e) one feeling they thought the other person had. Two weeks later, therapists
and clients completed measures assessing their encoding and decoding abilities (abilities to
send and receive nonverbal messages). Trained judges coded the following nonverbal
behaviors in each 5-second interval of sessions (with sound muted): affirmative head nods,
smiles, direct facing of the body, forward trunk lean, leg position (ankle on knee), and
horizontal and vertical arm movements.
Interesting Findings:
Therapists were better at decoding (interpreting nonverbal messages) than clients were.
Encoding and decoding abilities were not related to session outcome measures.
Therapists did more head nods, forward trunk leans, leg movements, and vertical and horizontal arm movements
but smiled less often than did clients.
The more vertical arm movements the therapist made, the worse the clients rated the credibility of the therapist.
The more the therapist smiled and leaned forward, the more the therapists judged themselves as being empathic
and warm.
If the therapist was consistent in affect between the verbal and nonverbal channels, the therapists viewed
themselves as facilitative.
If the client accurately perceived the therapist’s affect, the client rated the therapist as facilitative.
Clients rated sessions better when they rated themselves as consistent in their verbal and nonverbal affect.
Conclusions:
Nonverbal abilities were not related to session outcome.
The amount therapists used various nonverbal behaviors was only minimally related to session outcome (but
timing, which is probably more important than amount, was not investigated).
Both therapists and clients evaluated sessions as having been better if they each felt consistent in their verbal and
nonverbal displays of affect. It may be that inconsistency or incongruence is a manifestation of anxiety.
Implications for Therapy:
Therapists need to be aware of what they are communicating through their nonverbal behavior.
159
Therapists need to pay attention to what clients are communicating through their nonverbal behavior.
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
160
The world is made of stories, not atoms.
—Muriel Rukeyser
After Jason’s parents were killed in a random drive-by shooting, he needed a chance to
talk with someone who would not judge him. His helper listened supportively, showed
appropriate and encouraging attending behaviors, rephrased the content of what Jason
was saying (e.g., “You’re still trying to understand what happened,” “You can’t make
sense of their deaths,” “You want to hurt their murderer”) and asked open questions to
help Jason clarify his thoughts. Jason left feeling better about having someone listen and
being able to express what he was thinking.
Rationale for Exploring Thoughts and
Narratives
When clients come into a helping situation, we as helpers need to hear what
they think about their problems, what stories they are telling themselves about
how they got where they are, and what explanations they have for their
problems. Once we understand, we can help clients challenge and change the
thoughts and narratives and thus lead to changing their behaviors and rewriting
their stories. In this chapter, I focus on the content of the narratives (the
thoughts), and I focus on the feelings in 
Chapter 9
. Obviously, thoughts and
feelings cannot really be separated, but I have separated them into two chapters
to provide maximum attention to each.
A whole new form of therapy has recently been developed called 
narrative
therapy
 (Madigan, 2011; White, 2007). Narrative therapy is based on the
assumption that people are storytelling creatures. In every culture, people tell
stories that shape who they are and how they think about themselves. Only by
taking those narratives out and examining them can people begin to reshape
who they are and how they think about themselves. Narratives are often ill
161
defined or rigid and need to be reevaluated. A small change can be big in the
long run because it changes the course of the narrative and all other narratives.
The goal in working with narratives in the exploration stage is to bring them out
in open and explore them, whereas we aim to change the narrative in the insight
stage (although clients well may change narratives on their own).
I am not just referring here to the client telling stories to entertain us. The
purpose of helping is not for the helper to be entertained but for the client to
think deeply about his or her concerns. And I am not referring to just obsessing
about problems and endlessly listing complaints. A study found that adolescent
girls tend to coruminate (Rose, Carlson, & Waller, 2007) or endlessly obsess
and worry about issues and bring each other down. Ruminating obviously does
not help but rather seems to perpetuate the same old story. Rather, helpers want
to hear about what troubles clients about these issues. Helpers want clients to
slow the process down and think about their situation, to have a chance to talk
about the different pieces of the problem in a supportive, nonjudgmental
setting. By explaining things to someone else, clients often hear themselves in a
new way.
When I talked about this issue in class recently, a student asked me how we
can tell whether a client is truly exploring versus ruminating versus telling a story
to entertain us. Good question! If a client is telling a story (at least if she or he is
a good storyteller), there is often a polished quality to it—there is a clear
beginning, a build up to a climax, and then a conclusion. The goal of the
storyteller is to perform, and so the attention is focused on getting the other
person’s attention. If the client is ruminating, there is a steady tone, often
boring, and often a monotone voice, with a lot of repetition. The goal of the
ruminator is to worry or justify. In contrast, when a client is truly going inward
and exploring thoughts and narratives, there are often pauses to check things
out, and the voice tone varies as the person is discovering new things as he or she
talks. The goal of the explorer is to think about, evaluate, consider, reflect, and
see new aspects.
The primary skills for helping clients explore thoughts and narratives are
restatements and summaries because they help clients feel heard, encourage
them to continue talking, and help to focus on the most important aspects of
their stories. Open questions and probes for thoughts are also helpful, especially
if not used too often and if interspersed with restatements. Closed questions and
disclosures of similarities are occasionally helpful and are used in rare
circumstances.
Restatements and Summaries
162
Restatements
 are a repeating or paraphrasing of the content or meaning of what a
client has said (see 
Exhibit 8.1
). Restatements typically contain fewer but similar
words as the client’s, are more concrete and clear than the client’s statement, can
be phrased either tentatively (e.g., “So you seem to be saying that maybe you
were a little bit late?”) or more directly (e.g., “You were late”), and refer to
things the client just said or to things the client said earlier in the session or
treatment.
163
EXHIBIT 8.1
Overview of Restatement
Summaries,
 a kind of restatement, tie together several ideas or pick out the
highlights and general themes of the content expressed by the client. Summaries
do not go beyond what the client has said or delve into the reasons for feelings
or behaviors (these would be interpretations; see 
Chapter 13
) but rather
consolidate what has been said. For example, after listening for several minutes,
the helper might say to an adolescent:
So here’s what I think we’ve learned so far. You have a strong reaction when your parents are
intrusive. They barge in your room without knocking and give you no privacy. You feel like they
don’t listen to you. And then you start acting annoyed and shut them out.
RATIONALE FOR USING RESTATEMENTS AND SUMMARIES
The use of restatement goes back to Rogers (1942), who believed that helpers
need to be mirrors or sounding boards, enabling clients to hear what they are
saying without judgment. Thinking about one’s problems alone is often difficult
because one can get blocked or stuck, may not have enough time or energy to
examine problems thoroughly, may rationalize behaviors, or may give up and
quit trying. Having another person who listens and serves as a mirror of the
content offers clients a golden opportunity to hear themselves think.
164
Given that clients often feel confused, conflicted, or overwhelmed by their
problems, hearing accurate restatements allows them to gain feedback about
how their concerns sound to others. It is important that clients hear back what
they have said, so they can evaluate what they are thinking, add things they have
forgotten, think about whether they actually believe what they have said, and
think about things at a deeper level. Because statements often sound different
when repeated by someone else, restatements allow clients to ponder what they
really think. Restatements can also enable clients to clarify matters, explore
aspects of the problem more thoroughly, and think about aspects they had not
considered before. Just taking the time to think through a problem carefully
with the benefit of an interested listener can lead to new understanding. In fact,
with relatively healthy clients who are trying to understand major problems or
make decisions, helpers might never need to go beyond this type of intervention
because these clients only need an opportunity to hear what they are thinking.
The helper typically uses restatements to reflect on new thoughts as they
arise. Successive approximations enable the helper to help the client get closer to
what he or she is trying to say. So the first things out of the client’s mouth may
sound confused, but after a few times trying with the help of gentle
restatements, the client is often better able to express what she or he is thinking.
An additional reason that helpers use restatements is to put their listening
into words and to play an active role in the helping process. Rather than
assuming they have understood what clients have said, helpers use restatements
to check out the accuracy of what they think they have heard. Having to listen
to clients and summarize their words in fewer and more concise terms requires
that helpers attend carefully and determine the key components of what clients
have revealed. Saying “I understand how you feel” or asking questions can be
easy but does not convey any actual understanding; restating what the client has
said is much harder and requires that helpers not only listen but also struggle to
understand enough of what clients have said so they can restate the essence of
their messages. Although at first it may seem that restatements are a passive
mode of responding, helpers are actively engaged in trying to capture the essence
of clients’ experiences and paraphrase it back for clients to hear. It is actually
quite hard to figure out what people are saying given that they often are not
completely sure what they are thinking and so cannot articulate it clearly.
Restatements and summaries are most appropriate to use when clients are
talking cognitively about their problems (i.e., are trying to explain a situation or
thought, trying to sort out what they are actually thinking) rather than when
they are actively exploring emotions. Interestingly, although helpers are typically
oriented more toward working with emotions, clients spend most of their time
talking about thoughts and narratives, and some do not like to or cannot engage
at an emotional level, so being able to engage with clients at this level is
important. Such clients like to analyze their thoughts about problems and might
165
be threatened if asked to focus too much on feelings, especially early in a helping
relationship.
As with restatements, helpers also use summaries to reassure clients that
they have been listening and to check the accuracy of what they have been
hearing. Summaries can be particularly useful when clients have finished talking
about a particular issue or at the end of sessions as a way of helping clients reach
a sense of closure regarding what has been explored. Summaries also can be
helpful at the beginning of subsequent sessions to recap past sessions and
provide a focus for the upcoming session if the client is not quite ready to talk.
Not all clients want or need such summaries, especially if issues seem clear-cut to
them, but summaries can be helpful when clients are diffuse or confused.
HOW TO RESTATE
The goal of restatements is to enable clients to focus and to talk in more depth
about an issue, as well as to assist clients in figuring out issues. Just restating
what the client already knows would not help the client go deeper. Rather,
helpers try to capture the “cutting edge” of what clients have revealed—what
clients are most uncertain about, what is still unexplored, or what is not
completely understood. A student used a metaphor of Wayne Gretzky, a star
hockey player, saying that it is important in hockey to go to where the puck is
going, not where it has been. Helpers, then, should pick out a salient message or
an issue that clients are uncertain about to facilitate further exploration on this
issue.
Clues for determining what is valuable to restate can be gathered by
attending to what the client focuses on most, what the client seems to have the
most involvement in talking about, what the client seems to have questions or
conflicts about, and what is left unresolved. Attention to nonverbal messages
(e.g., vocal quality might indicate that the client is deeply engaged in what he or
she is talking about) can also assist helpers in determining the salient content of
the client’s message.
Helpers sometimes worry that selecting an important part of the client’s
statement requires a judgment call and removes them from a client-centered
approach to helping. I would argue that restatements in fact allow helpers to stay
within a client-centered approach because they are trying to use their empathic
skills to figure out the most important aspect of the message for the client.
Helpers have to listen to clients at a deep level to hear what clients are most
concerned about. The attitude of being client-centered is thus important in
formulating restatements.
Beginning trainees often think they need to capture everything the client
has said, but capturing everything not only would be impossible but would
probably be counterproductive. The focus would shift from the client to the
166
helper because the repeating would take too much time. The momentum would
be lost in the session. The client would be put in a position of trying to
remember everything he or she said to determine whether the helper repeated
everything accurately. In contrast, an effective restatement keeps the focus on
the client and is almost unnoticeable in subtly guiding and encouraging the
client to keep talking. Focusing on one piece of an issue at a time is important to
allow clients the opportunity to delve deeply into a concern. Helpers can return
later to other aspects of the problem after one part is explored thoroughly.
Restatements are generally shorter and more concise than clients’
statements, focusing on important material rather than repeating everything
verbatim. For example, if the client has been talking at some length about the
many things that have been getting in the way of studying, the helper might give
a restatement such as, “So you have not been able to study lately” or “Studying
has been difficult for you lately,” because these statements focus on what is
important for the client to explore at a deeper level. A restatement essentially
orients the client to what the helper wants him or her to talk about.
The emphasis of restatements typically is on the client’s thoughts rather
than on other people’s thoughts. This focus enables the client to focus inwardly
rather than blaming others or worrying about what others think. For example,
Janet was discussing her decision to move to the West Coast. During the
session, she continuously focused on her colleagues’ and friends’ reactions to her
decision. The helper worked to focus the restatements on Janet (“You would like
to move”) rather than on her friends and colleagues (“Your friends don’t want
you to move”).
The emphasis is on helping clients explore more deeply without having an
agenda for what content should emerge. Helpers work to be nonjudgmental and
do not assume they know or understand what clients are experiencing but rather
take the stance of helping the client explore whatever emerges. Helpers are not
invested in solving problems or disclosing their own problems but are focused
on facilitating client exploration.
To reduce the tendency to become repetitive, helpers can vary the format of
restatements. There are several ways to introduce restatements, for example:
“I hear you saying . . . ”
“It sounds as though . . . ”
“You’re saying that . . . ”
“So . . . ”
“What you seem to be saying . . . ”
“If I’m hearing you accurately, . . . ”
“Let me see if I got what you’re saying . . . ”
“I’m not sure I got that completely, let me try to summarize and see if I got
it . . . ”
167
Alternatively, helpers can just repeat and slightly draw out a key word a
client has said, such as 
divorce,
 
music,
 or 
headache.
 If the key word is presented in
a questioning or inviting tone, it encourages the client to tell the helper more
about the topic. For example, if a client has been talking about her daughter
having just been tested and found to have an incredibly high IQ score, and the
helper wants the client to explore more about IQs, she might simply say, “IQ
. . . ?,” thereby inviting the client to tell her more about what IQ means to her.
Although it is typically helpful when restatements are relatively close to
what the client has said, it is not necessary (or often even possible) for the
restatements to be perfectly accurate. For example, if a client presents a confused
and jumbled statement of her of his concerns and the helper provides
restatements that do not encapsulate the content accurately, the client can clarify
what she or he means so both the client and helper can understand the situation
better. Restatements thus allow clients a chance to clarify helpers’ mistaken
impressions.
If your restatement or summary is totally wrong, that is not necessarily a
disaster for the relationship (unless of course the helper has been dismissive,
judgmental, or critical). One misstep does not undo the therapeutic relationship,
as long as the helper demonstrates the willingness to keep listening to try to
understand more.
EXAMPLE OF RESTATEMENTS
The following shows a helper using restatements (in italics) in a session:
Client:
 
I have to go on a pilgrimage to Mecca. I don’t really want to
go because it’s the middle of my last semester in college and I’m
worried that my grades will suffer if I leave for 2 weeks, but I
don’t have much choice. According to my religion, I have to
go.
Helper:
 
You have to go.
Client:
 
Yeah, for my religion, we all have to do a pilgrimage before
we get married. It’s just expected. My father has to go with me
because a man has to be on the pilgrimage, but I don’t have a
very good relationship with him, and he’s not well, so I don’t
know if he can withstand the rigors of the trip. The last time he
went with my brother, it was pretty disastrous.
Helper:
 
You said you don’t have a very good relationship with your
father.
Client:
 
Right. He wasn’t around much when I was growing up. He
was always too busy. And now to spend 2 weeks with him is a
lot. I don’t even know what we could talk about. I feel like I
don’t know him. I get anxious just thinking about spending a
168
lot of time with him. But on the other hand, I wish I knew him
better, so maybe this is an opportunity to get to know him.
Helper:
 
You wish you knew him better.
Client:
 
Yeah, really know him. I’ve always wanted to have a good
relationship with him. People say that we’re a lot alike. And he
could teach me a lot about my religion and culture, things I
don’t know much about, given that I came to the United States
when I was very young.
Helper:
 
So you could learn something from your father.
Client:
 
Oh, yeah, I think I could learn a lot from him. He is a wise
person. I just hope I can be myself with him. I’ve always felt
like such a little kid, and I would rather feel like an adult with
him the way I can with my mother.
Helper:
 
Feel like an adult.
Client:
 
Yeah, I want to feel like myself when I am around him. I
want to be able to behave like I do with other people. I want to
get to know him as a person instead of feeling afraid of him.
(Client continues to explore.)
DIFFICULTIES HELPERS EXPERIENCE IN RESTATING
Many helpers initially feel awkward and stilted using restatements because in
everyday social communication people do not typically paraphrase what another
person has said. Many beginning helpers worry that clients will feel annoyed and
say something like “I just said that.” In fact, the reaction of clients is usually
quite different when they are given a good restatement—they feel heard and are
eager to explore more. Once students learn how to use restatements, they can be
useful not only in helping relationships but also with friends and family to
demonstrate that one is really listening.
Another difficulty beginning helpers face is sounding like parrots if they
continually use the same format to introduce restatements (e.g., “I hear you
saying . . . ”) or if they repeat clients’ messages verbatim. Clients often get
annoyed with parroting and become distracted from focusing on their concerns.
In a related vein, some helpers are so afraid of making a mistake when choosing
key aspects of clients’ messages that they repeat everything, taking the focus off
the client and halting the flow of the interchange. Not surprisingly, clients
quickly become bored and annoyed with such restatements, saying things like,
“That’s what I just said.” Moreover, clients might feel stuck and aimless when
restatements are mere repetitions of what they have said. By choosing the key
components, focusing on the “cutting edge” of clients’ concerns, varying the
format, and keeping the restatements short, helpers can deal with these
problems. It is also important to focus on being empathic rather than restating
169
robotically. Some helpers get so caught up in capturing the content accurately
that they forget the most important thing is to show the client that they are
struggling to hear and make sense of what the client is saying.
Some helpers feel frustrated when they use restatements because they feel
they are not “doing” anything or giving the client specific answers. Restatements
are used to help clients explore and tell their stories rather than come to insight
or action, so helpers rarely feel brilliant when using them. In fact, clients often
are not able to remember restatements because the focus is on them rather than
on the helper.
Open Questions and Probes for Thoughts
Questions come to most of us naturally. We are curious and want to get to
know other people, and questions are a most direct way to elicit information.
Exhibit 8.2
 provides an overview of the different types of questions that are used
in the helping process. In this chapter, the focus is only on open and closed
questions about thoughts, but other types (e.g., open questions and probes for
insight) are presented and discussed later in the book.
170
EXHIBIT 8.2
Types of Questions and Probes
RATIONALE FOR USING OPEN QUESTIONS AND PROBES
ABOUT THOUGHTS
Open questions and probes about thoughts help clients clarify and explore their
thoughts. When using these leads, helpers do not want a specific answer from
clients but instead want clients to explore whatever comes to mind. In other
words, helpers do not purposely limit the nature of clients’ responses to a “yes,”
“no,” or one- or two-word answer, even though clients may respond that way
(see 
Exhibit 8.3
). Whereas open questions are phrased in the form of a question
(e.g., “What are your thoughts about that?”), probes are phrased in the form of a
statement or directive (e.g., “Tell me more about your thoughts”). The phrasing
is different, but the intent for both is to facilitate exploration.
171
EXHIBIT 8.3
Overview of Open Questions and Probes About Thoughts
WHY USE OPEN QUESTIONS AND PROBES TO GET AT
THOUGHTS?
Many researchers have found that open questions are used frequently in therapy
and are generally perceived as being moderately helpful for the therapy process
(Barkham & Shapiro, 1986; Elliott, 1985; Elliott, Barker, Caskey, & Pistrang,
1982; Fitzpatrick, Stalikas, & Iwakabe, 2001; Hill, Helms, Tichenor, et al.,
1988; Martin, Martin, & Slemon, 1989). These studies suggest that open
questions and probes can be a useful intervention for encouraging clients to talk
longer and more deeply about their concerns. I recently heard a person say that
the three kindest words you could hear are “Tell me more.” Indicating curiosity
and interest through judicious use of open questions and probes for thoughts or
probes can truly be a gift.
Open questions and probes serve several purposes. They can be particularly
useful when clients are rambling, repeating the same thoughts but not really
exploring deeply. They can also be used to help clients clarify their thoughts
when they are confused, lead clients to think about new things, help clients
unravel conflicting thoughts, or provide structure for clients who are not very
verbal or articulate. Clients often get stuck describing their problems, and open
questions and probes help them think about different aspects of the problem.
Open questions and probes can also be used to clarify or focus and are
172
particularly helpful when clients are starting the session, rambling, being vague
or unclear, or stuck. As with restatements, open questions and probes
demonstrate that the helper is listening and interested in the client. They show
that the helper is tracking what the client says and is interested enough to
encourage the client to keep talking.
In addition, if a client cannot think of what to talk about, open questions
and probes are a good way for helpers to provide direction. For example, if
Justin has been talking about receiving a bad grade and has explored his feelings
and then the dialogue stops, the helper might ask Justin what a bad grade means
for the future. Other possible open questions and probes might be to ask Justin
to compare how this situation relates to past experiences with grades or how this
grade affects his relationship with his parents. These open questions and probes
could help Justin talk more completely about other important aspects of the
problem. I like comparing problems to a ball of yarn; with each open question
or probe, helpers encourage clients to take out a bit of the yarn and talk about it.
When one piece is explored thoroughly, helpers gently guide clients to pull out
another piece of the yarn (i.e., talk about another aspect of the problem).
In addition, open questions and probes about examples are helpful when
clients are talking generally and vaguely about problems. Asking for specific
examples can give helpers a clearer picture of what the client is talking about
(e.g., “Tell me about a specific time when you felt distant from your father”).
HOW TO USE OPEN QUESTIONS AND PROBES ABOUT
THOUGHTS
There are several ways that open questions and probes can be used. For example:
“Tell me about the last time you thought x.”
“Tell me more about x.”
“What’s that like for you to think x?”
“What do you think about that?”
“What do you mean by that?”
“What does x mean?”
“Can you give me an example of that?”
“What comes to mind when you think about x?”
Appropriate attending behaviors are important when delivering open
questions and probes. If the tone of voice is low and soft, the rate of speech is
slow, and the open question and probe is phrased tentatively, the client is likely
to perceive the helper as conveying concern and intimacy. Helpers should be
supportive, nonjudgmental, and encouraging no matter what clients say because
there are no right or wrong topics to explore and no right or wrong answers to
questions.
173
Open questions and probes should be short and simple. Clients may have
difficulty responding to lengthy or multiple questions because they might feel
confused. Multiple questions (“What did you do next, and what were you
thinking, and what did you mean by that?”) can have a dampening effect on the
interaction if clients do not know which question to respond to first or feel
bombarded. Clients might ignore important questions if there are too many of
them because they cannot respond to all of them. Helpers can come back later
and ask other questions if they still seem relevant.
Thus, open questions and probes about thoughts are most effective when
helpers focus on one part of the problem at a time. Clients cannot talk about
everything at once and may have difficulty choosing a single topic, so it can be
helpful for helpers to pick the most important or salient issue to focus on and
return to others later. As with restatements, it is best to focus on the areas for
which clients have the most energy or affect, or for what is at the “cutting edge”
of a client’s awareness. For example, if Juan is talking about several different
topics, the helper might ask Juan a question about the topic that seems most
unresolved or pressing.
In addition, it is useful to keep the focus of the open question or probe on
the client (“How did you feel about your mother’s behavior?”) rather than
turning the attention to other people (“What did your mother do in that
situation?”). Keeping the focus on the client helps the client explore what is
going on inside him or her rather than deflecting the attention to other people.
For example, if Jean often argues with her mother, the helper can ask about
Jean’s thoughts (“What are your thoughts when your mother starts yelling at
you?”) rather than asking Jean about her mother’s thoughts (“What do you
think your mother would say about this?”). Although it could be helpful to
understand more about the mother, she is not in the room, and the helper is
likely to get a one-sided view of her. The person the helper is most likely to help
is the client, so it is typically better to focus on the client.
It is also important to keep the client focused on current thoughts, although
these current thoughts may be about past events. So rather than asking, “What
did you think then?” the helper would ask, “What do you think now about what
happened then?”
It is not necessary to ask open questions or probes if the client is exploring
at a deep level. Rather than interrupting just to get a chance to say something, it
is better to keep quiet and allow the client to keep talking and only ask questions
when the client is stuck or needs guidance about what to explore further.
One particular kind of probe I like is “Tell me your memories about that.”
This probe is particularly helpful when a client is describing a troubling current
situation that you suspect might be influenced by past experiences. Thus, when
Selina was talking about the effects of her father and stepmother breaking up, I
asked about her memories of her mother and father’s divorce. Selina was able to
174
talk about painful memories that obviously were still affecting her and
influencing how she was dealing with the current situation.
Helpers generally also avoid “why” questions (e.g., “Why did you blow up
at your boyfriend the other night?” “Why are you not able to study?”) in the
exploration stage because they are difficult to answer and can make the client
defensive. As Nisbett and Wilson (1977) indicated, people rarely know why they
do things. If they knew why they act as they do, they probably would not be
talking to helpers. When someone asks why you did something, you might feel
she or he is judging you and deriding you for not being able to handle the
situation more effectively. Instead of “why” questions, helpers could use “what”
or “how” questions (e.g., instead of “Why didn’t you study for your exam?” the
helper could ask, “What was going on that kept you from studying?” “What was
going through your mind when you were trying to study?” or “What is going on
that makes it difficult for you to study?”). Why questions are more appropriate
in the insight stage and are discussed in 
Chapter 13
.
Finally, helpers should be aware of cultural differences in receptiveness to
questions. D. W. Sue and Sue (1999) noted that people from some cultures may
be uncomfortable when they are questioned or asked to initiate the dialogue
(e.g., “What would you like to talk about today?”) because it may be
disrespectful. In such cases, helpers may have to be more direct, either in
educating the client about the helping process or in suggesting topics to discuss.
Helpers cannot assume, however, that clients from other cultures will not like
open questions or probes, but if they observe that clients seem uncomfortable
with them, they can instead try restatements.
EXAMPLE OF OPEN QUESTIONS AND PROBES ABOUT
THOUGHTS
The following shows a helper using open questions and probes about thoughts
(in italics) and probes (in italics) in a session:
Client:
 
My younger sisters are fighting a lot with each other. They
really get nasty and have been hurting each other. My youngest
sister was caught stealing from a store recently. My parents
aren’t doing anything about it, and my sisters are just going
wild. I wish there was more I could do to help them. If I were
still at home, they would listen to me. I think they don’t have
anyone to turn to. My parents are divorcing, so they’re just not
available to my sisters.
Helper:
 
Tell me more about what it’s like for you not to be there.
Client:
 
On one hand, I’m delighted to be away from the mess. On
the other hand, I feel guilty, like I survived the 
Titanic
 crash
and came out alive but they’re sinking.
175
Helper:
 
What is it like when you are with your family?
Client:
 
My parents are still living together, but they fight all the
time. Things are pretty scary around the house because my
parents get pretty violent with each other. I have to look out for
my sisters. I am really more their parent than either of my
parents are. I got to be pretty strong by having to fend for
myself so much.
Helper:
 
Give me a specific example of a time when you had to look after
your sisters.
Client:
 
Oh, yeah, just last night when I called home. My younger
sister said that mom has started to throw dishes around and dad
left the house in a huff and they haven’t talked. No one even
asks them about their schoolwork any more and they are
running around wild. I don’t know what to do for them from
here. (Client continues to explore.)
DIFFICULTIES HELPERS EXPERIENCE IN DELIVERING OPEN
QUESTIONS AND PROBES ABOUT THOUGHTS
A common problem is that helpers tend to ask the same type of open questions
and probes repeatedly, most often “What do you think about that?” Many
clients become annoyed when they continually hear the same type of question or
probe and have a hard time responding.
Similarly, some beginning helpers use only open questions and probes
rather than interspersing these with restatements. Helpers tend to use open
questions and probes excessively when anxious because this skill is relatively easy
and already exists in most helpers’ repertoires. Unfortunately, the interaction can
become one-sided if helpers use too many open questions and probes. In this
situation, helpers are not demonstrating that they are listening to what the
clients are saying or struggling to understand the clients. The tone of the session
can become stilted rather than being a mutual struggle to explore and
understand the client’s concerns.
Closed Questions About Thoughts
Closed questions typically request a one- or two-word answer (“yes,” “no,” or a
confirmation) or ask for specific facts (e.g., “What was your test grade?” “How
old were you when your parents were divorced?” or “Did you call the counseling
center?”). Such questions are asked to gather specific information, presumably
because the helper is going to use the information for some reason (e.g., to assess
the client, to figure out an action plan).
176
Closed questions have an important but limited role in the helping process.
Occasionally, the helper needs to obtain specific information, perhaps because
the client has been vague and the helper needs more information to understand
the situation. The most direct way to get this specific information is through
closed questions. For example, when a client is vague about his or her family
situation and the helper is struggling to understand the family dynamics, the
helper might ask, “Are you the oldest child?” or “Where are you in the birth
order?” In such situations, asking for needed information is better than making
assumptions or being confused. The key is that the information is important for
the therapeutic process.
Helpers can also use closed questions occasionally to ask for clarification,
because they did not hear what the client said, or because they want to
determine if clients understood or agreed with what they said. For example:
“What did you say?”
“Am I right?”
“Is that what happened?”
“Does that sound right to you?”
“Did I understand you correctly?”
Another situation in which closed questions are important is during a crisis
situation. If there is a crisis (e.g., the potential for suicide, homicide, violence, or
abuse of any kind or decompensation into serious mental illness), the process
changes from helping to crisis management. In these situations, helpers need to
ask clients directly about what is happening so they can make appropriate
referrals (see also 
Chapter 19
). If such a situation occurs while you are in
training, it is best to immediately seek out supervision from someone who can
help you figure out how to handle the situation.
Closed questions are appropriate for certain types of interview situations,
such as a medical doctor gathering information to make a diagnosis,
interrogations by lawyers during courtroom trials, or job interviews. In these
situations, the roles between the interviewer and interviewee are often distinct.
The interviewer asks the question to get the desired information; the respondent
answers the questions. The control of the interview usually stays with the
interviewer, who directs the interaction by asking questions.
An example of an interview situation in which closed questions are useful is
in academic advising. When a student comes to me in my role as an academic
advisor asking about her or his chances of being accepted into graduate school,
my goal is to gather enough information about the student’s credentials (e.g.,
grade point average, Graduate Record Examination [GRE] scores, research and
clinical experience, career goals) to make an assessment. The best and most
efficient way of gathering such information quickly is typically through closed
questions (e.g., “What are your grade point average and GRE score?” “What
177
research experiences have you had?” “Where do you hope to be employed after
graduate school?”). I try to ask the closed questions in a supportive, empathic,
nonjudgmental fashion, without attempting to determine what students should
do with their lives or pass judgment on their effectiveness as human beings.
Once I have the information, I can assess how likely it is that the student will be
admitted to graduate school. If I think the student needs help exploring values,
feelings, options, and talents, I typically refer him or her to the campus
counseling center because these tasks are not part of my role as an academic
adviser.
Although closed questions can be helpful in interview situations, they have
limited applicability in helping settings because they typically do not help clients
explore. Helpers slip into an interviewer role and quickly become responsible for
directing the interaction. They become interviewers rather than helpers. Once
trapped in the interviewer role and having to think about the next question,
helpers often have difficulty changing the course of the session and encouraging
exploration. In these situations, clients can become dependent on helpers for the
next question. Rather than exploring problems deeply, clients often respond
passively and wait for the next question.
Given the theoretical premise of the model presented in this book that
helpers are trying to facilitate clients in their self-healing efforts rather than
acting as experts who diagnose and “treat” clients, I would assert that helpers do
not typically need much specific information. Specific information does not help
facilitate exploration of values, feelings, options, and talents. Before asking
questions, I thus recommend that helpers think about what they are going to do
with the information once it is provided. Helpers can ask themselves, “Whose
need am I fulfilling with the information I gain from closed questions?” If the
information will be used to facilitate the process of client exploration, helpers
should go ahead and ask the question. If the information is desired for
voyeurism, curiosity, to fill the silence, or to make a diagnosis and fix the
problem, helpers should probably not ask the closed question during the
exploration stage.
When helpers use closed questions, they follow the same guidelines for
implementation as were proposed for open questions and probes. In other
words, helpers should use an empathic and inviting manner to encourage the
client to explore rather than just answer the simple question. Furthermore,
helpers should refrain from asking multiple closed questions. As with too many
open questions and probes asked at once, clients can feel bombarded and have a
hard time knowing which questions to answer first. Helpers should also avoid
closed questions (questions that have a specific desired answer, e.g., “yes,” “no,”
or specific information) that limit exploration. More important, helpers need to
notice what happens when they use closed questions. Helpers should determine
for themselves whether control of the interaction shifts back to them when they
178
use too many closed questions. Do closed questions make you feel like a grand
inquisitor? Helpers can also ask clients for their reactions to determine the
effects of the closed questions.
Most beginners use too many closed questions because this skill is a familiar
way of interacting outside of the helping situation. In social interactions, people
often ask a lot of closed questions to get the details of exactly what happened.
The goal in these social interactions is to get the facts of the story rather than to
help the person express and explore thoughts, as it is in the helping process.
Helpers sometimes use closed questions inappropriately to satisfy their
curiosity. They might ask for information out of voyeurism rather than to help
the clients explore. For example, Martha was working on her feelings of jealousy
of and competitiveness with her older sister. Martha came into the session and
announced that her sister had a date with a “hot” movie star. The helper
exclaimed, “Wow, how did she meet him?” or “What was he like?” Although
extreme, this example illustrates how helpers can get carried away with asking
for specific information to satisfy their own curiosity rather than to help clients
explore. It also illustrates how the focus can easily shift away from the client to
others.
A particularly egregious type of closed question occurs when the helper is
condescending or tries to coerce the client into responding a particular way (e.g.,
“You really don’t want to keep drinking, do you?”). Such questions take the
focus away from the client and make the helper seem like an expert who knows
how the client should behave.
I would not go so far as to say that helpers should never use closed
questions, given that they can occasionally be helpful. I do, however, encourage
beginning helpers to reduce the number of closed questions they use and instead
use more open questions and probes and restatements. When helpers do need to
use closed questions to gather specific necessary information (sometimes history
is important for gaining awareness of context), they can follow up with the other
exploration skills to help clients get back to exploration.
Finally, I should note that I have known some helpers who use closed
questions that lead to productive client exploration. How can that be? When I
have thought about such interventions, the helper is usually phrasing another
intervention in the format of a closed question or is just incredibly empathic and
conveying via nonverbal behaviors that the client should explore. I do not
necessarily recommend this but say it to note that closed questions are not
uniformly bad.
DISTINGUISHING BETWEEN OPEN AND CLOSED
QUESTIONS
A major distinction is between open and closed questions. Closed questions ask
179
for specific information and thus have a specific answer, whereas open questions
ask the recipient to explore or say whatever comes to mind. In helping, we
generally use open questions as much as possible because we are trying to
facilitate client exploration. Closed questions are used more frequently in
interviews (e.g., job interviews, medical consultations) where specific
information is required.
To distinguish between closed and open questions, I suggest that you see
whether the question can be made to be more open. If it can be made more
open, it is probably a closed question. For example, the closed question “Did
you get an 
A?
” can be changed to “How do you feel about how you did on the
test?” The latter question is more open. One important thing about open
questions is that they allow the client to explore what is important to them. For
example, Mary was wondering where her client, Sam, was in the family birth
order. She almost asked him this as a closed question but decided to practice
making it open. She said, “Tell me more about your siblings,” which led to
Sam’s exploring in detail the many conflicts and tensions in the family and how
he felt everyone babied him because he was the youngest. Mary got far more
information than she probably would have with a closed question. 
Exhibit 8.4
shows how closed questions can be transformed into open questions or probes.
180
EXHIBIT 8.4
Examples of Transforming Closed into Open Questions/Probes
“Have you thought about calling a friend tonight?” 
→
 “What could you do tonight?”
“How many siblings do you have?”
→
 “Tell me about your family.”
“Did you talk to your mother about it?” 
→
 “How did you feel after the event?”
“Do you want to talk about your reactions?” 
→
 “What were your reactions?”
“What time did you get up this morning?” 
→
 “How are you feeling about the amount
of sleep you get?”
“Did you have a happy childhood?” 
→
 “Tell me about your childhood.”
Disclosures of Similarities
In disclosures of similarities, helpers reveal personal information about ways in
which they are like the clients to help clients feel less alone or different (see
Exhibit 8.5
). Yalom (1995) described how universality is an important
mechanism of change because it enables clients to feel that they are not the only
ones who have been in similar situations. In later sections of this volume, I cover
other types of disclosures (of feelings, insight, and strategies) that are more
appropriate for helping.
181
EXHIBIT 8.5
Overview of Disclosure of Similarities
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES ON THERAPIST DISCLOSURE
There has been a great deal of theoretical and empirical interest in therapist
disclosure. Because this is the first chapter in which I discuss disclosures, I
present here some of the theoretical perspectives on it.
Humanistic theorists (e.g., Bugental, 1965; Jourard, 1971; Robitschek &
McCarthy, 1991; Rogers, 1957; Truax & Carkhuff, 1967) have long valued
therapist disclosure. Because they value transparency, realness, and genuineness
in the therapeutic relationship, they think that helper disclosure can have a
positive effect on treatment. Humanists believe that a personal and transparent
style of intervention benefits both the process and the outcome of therapy
because it allows clients to see helpers as real people who also have problems, as
fellow travelers in the journey of life. In addition, humanists believe that when
helpers disclose, there is more of a balance of control in the relationship, in that
clients are not the only ones who are vulnerable. Humanists also contend that
disclosure enhances rapport because clients feel more friendly toward and
trusting of helpers who disclose. Interestingly, humanists think that disclosure
can help to correct transference misconceptions as they occur because helpers are
direct and honest with disclosures and, hence, challenge distortions as they arise.
Additional benefits claimed by humanists for disclosures are that helpers are able
to be more spontaneous and authentic and can model appropriate disclosure.
Moreover, helpers’ disclosures can facilitate client disclosure and repair ruptures
in the therapeutic relationship. In effect, humanists believe that helpers’
disclosures encourage an atmosphere of honesty and understanding between
helpers and clients that fosters stronger and more effective therapeutic
182
relationships.
Similarly, cognitive–behavioral theorists advocate for the use of helper
disclosure. They believe that helper disclosure within sessions, when used with
appropriate boundaries, can strengthen the therapeutic bond and facilitate client
change (see Goldfried, Burckell, & Eubanks-Carter, 2003).
In contrast, traditional psychoanalytic theorists (e.g., Basescu, 1990;
Greenson, 1967; Simon, 1988) view psychotherapy as focused on working
through patients’ projections and transferences. They believe helpers should be
neutral or blank screens so that clients can project onto them their feelings and
reactions toward significant others. For example, a client’s childhood experiences
might prompt the client to transfer onto the helper a fear that the helper is going
to be punitive. An analytic helper might sit behind the client to enable the client
to focus inwardly rather than watching the helper’s face for cues about his or her
reactions. If a helper is in fact being neutral, she or he can assist the client in
seeing that the belief that the helper will be punitive is a projection. If helpers
deviate from neutrality, it is difficult to distinguish client projections from
realistic reactions to what the helper is actually doing. For example, if a helper is
consistently late, it would be difficult to determine whether the client’s anger
was a distortion based on previous experiences or legitimate anger at the helper’s
tardiness. Readers should not confuse neutrality with a lack of empathy,
however, because competent analytic helpers are appropriately warm and
empathic. It is not too surprising, given this emphasis on neutrality, that
psychoanalytic helpers typically do not disclose.
In fact, psychoanalysts propose an inverse relationship between the client’s
knowledge of the helper’s personal life, thoughts, and feelings and the client’s
capacity to develop transference to the helper (Freud, 1912/1959). They believe
that helper revelations contaminate the transference process and deleteriously
demystify the therapy, thereby reducing the helper’s status (Andersen &
Anderson, 1985). In addition, Cornett (1991) suggested that helper disclosure
might represent unresolved countertransference difficulties on the part of the
helper, which would seriously compromise the client’s ability to profit from
treatment. Furthermore, psychoanalysts argue that helper disclosure can expose
helper weaknesses and vulnerabilities, thereby undermining client trust in the
helper and adversely influencing outcome (Curtis, 1981, 1982).
I should note, however, that some current psychoanalytic theorists advocate
the use of disclosure (see Geller, 2003), especially related to the therapeutic
relationship (see 
Chapter 14
). In fact, many current psychoanalytic theorists
would argue that there is no way not to disclose, in that even nondisclosure
reveals a great deal about the therapist.
I agree more with the humanistic thinkers than with the traditional
psychoanalytic thinkers about the value of helper disclosures. I have seen the
power of disclosures in helping settings. But we should also heed the concerns
183
the psychoanalytic thinkers have about disclosures and make sure that
disclosures are used for the benefit of clients rather than for the needs of helpers.
In sum, helpers can disclose beneficially for clients if they do it for the
appropriate intentions (not for their own needs) at the right moment. If helpers
disclose in a manner in which they maintain an objective stance (i.e., are not
overinvested), focus on the client, and observe client reactions, disclosures can be
helpful. In fact, sometimes disclosures can be more helpful than other skills
because helpers are not “putting something on” clients but are respectfully
offering different possibilities to help clients gain insight.
HOW TO DISCLOSE ABOUT SIMILARITIES
A major caveat is for the helper to determine whether the disclosure is for her or
his own needs or for the client’s needs. It is also critical to keep the disclosure
short and turn the focus back to the client. The tone of the disclosure should be
“We’re all human and imperfect” rather than “You think you have it bad, let me
tell about my experience.” It is also important for the helper to disclose only
problems that are relatively resolved rather than ones that they are currently
troubled by (see also Hill & Knox, 2002). For example, when the client
expresses feeling like she is the only one who has ever had a difficult time
adjusting to college, the helper might say, “I had a difficult time too when I first
came to the university. Tell me more about your experience.”
A specific situation that requires a bit more attention is how to respond
when a client asks the helper for a disclosure. For example, a client might ask
where the helper went for vacation or whether the helper is married or has
children. A general rule would be to briefly provide information (if it feels
comfortable) but also to then be curious about what motivates the client’s desire
for this personal information. Helpers might ask clients about their thoughts,
fantasies, or concerns about them to learn more about what motivated clients to
ask for information. In addition to providing the personal information, helpers
can thus use the situation as an opportunity to investigate why clients want the
information. Processing these issues in a gentle and supportive manner can
provide the client with insight and strengthen the relationship.
A Comparison of Skills for Exploring
Thoughts
Restatements help clients hear what they have been saying and enable them to
clarify and expand. With restatements, clients often feel that helpers are listening
to them and trying to understand them. In contrast, open questions and probes
184
about thoughts directly ask the client to explore more, so they give guidance
about what the helper wants the client to talk about at that given moment and
therefore can be helpful when the client is not sure what to do or needs
direction. Closed questions ask for specific information and are helpful if the
helper plans on using the specific information in some way (e.g., developing a
diagnosis, assigning homework), although such interventions rarely help clients
explore. Disclosures of similarities can help clients feel that they are not the only
ones who have ever faced difficulties and can be effective if the focus is quickly
returned to the client. I recommend using mostly restatements, with occasional
sprinkles of open questions and probes, closed questions, and disclosures of
similarities. One guideline is to use restatements when the client is exploring
thoroughly and you want to help her or him keep going, whereas it is perhaps
better to use open questions and probes about thoughts when the client seems to
need more direction.
What Do You Think?
Debate the efficacy of restatements compared with responses that are
more typically used in friendships, such as advice and disclosure.
Compare and contrast restatements and open questions and probes
about thoughts.
In his early theorizing, Rogers (1942) promoted restatement at the
most important skill, whereas later he focused more on other skills.
What do you think about restatements?
How do you respond when people use restatements or open questions
and probes with you?
What cultural considerations can you think of in using restatements or
open questions and probes?
Do you agree that helpers should not ask “why” questions in the
exploration stage?
Debate the merits of focusing on thoughts versus feelings.
185
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Self-Disclosures
Citation:
 Knox, S., Hess, S. A., Petersen, D. A., & Hill, C. E. (1997). A qualitative
investigation of client perceptions of the effects of helpful therapist self-disclosure in long-
term therapy. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology
, 
44,
 274–283. doi:10.1037/0022-
0167.44.3.274
Rationale:
 In the theoretical literature, the use of therapist self-disclosure is controversial,
with psychoanalytic theorists cautioning against it and humanistic therapists advocating for
it. Given that a previous study (Hill, Helms, Spiegel, & Tichenor, 1988) found that clients
rated self-disclosure as the most helpful therapist intervention even though it was used
infrequently, Knox et al. wondered how clients experienced therapist self-disclosures.
Method:
 Clients currently in long-term therapy were interviewed about their experiences of
therapist self-disclosure (which was defined for the participants as “an interaction in which
the therapist reveals personal information about him/herself, and/or reveals reactions and
responses to the client as they arise in the session,” p. 275), both generally and in a specific
example of a helpful disclosure. Transcribed interviews were analyzed using a qualitative
methodology.
Interesting Findings:
Clients typically believed that their therapists disclosed to normalize their experiences or to reassure them.
Helpful therapist disclosures were primarily of facts (recall in the current book that there are also disclosures of
feelings, insight, and action). The disclosures were mostly of events in the past, about family, leisure activities, or
similar experiences. None of the disclosures were about the immediate therapy relationship (which is called
immediacy in this book).
Disclosures typically resulted in positive consequences. More specifically, clients said that they gained insight or a
new perspective; viewed their therapists as more real and human, which improved their relationship; felt better
because they felt normalized and reassured; and could use therapists as models.
Although not typical, clients occasionally had negative or neutral reactions to therapist disclosures (they felt wary
of the therapist or feared the resulting closeness).
Conclusions:
Disclosures in which a helper reveals ways in which she or he is similar to a client to reassure the client of being
normal can be helpful if used cautiously and in the right context. Importantly, these disclosures were of past
events that had been resolved.
There can be some negative effects, particularly of clients becoming nervous about therapists crossing boundaries
and wanting to be too close.
Implications for Therapy:
Used infrequently and at the right time (e.g., when clients are talking deeply about personally distressing
thoughts), disclosures can help reassure clients that they are normal, help clients gain greater insight, make the
therapeutic relationship stronger, and serve as a model for clients about the benefits of disclosure.
Helpers need to be careful about not disclosing for their own needs.
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
186
It seems to me that clients who have moved significantly in therapy live more intimately
with their feelings of pain, but also more vividly with their feelings of ecstasy; that anger
is more clearly felt, but so also is love; that fear is an experience they know more deeply,
but so is courage.
—Carl Rogers
Tyler, an aspiring actor, had been in an automobile accident that left him with a
disability and made it unlikely he would ever be able to act again. Throughout the
session, his helper used a number of reflections (e.g., “You feel angry because you can
no longer do what you love to do,” “I wonder if you feel afraid that people will laugh at
you,” “It sounds like you feel anxious about going out in public”) to help Tyler talk
about his many feelings so he could identify and accept what was going on inside him.
The helper also asked some open questions (e.g., “How do you really feel about that?”)
that helped Tyler stop and think about what he was really feeling and then try to
express his feelings. Once he was able to express his feelings, Tyler felt relieved.
I
n this chapter, I identify four skills that can be used to help clients explore
feelings. Helpers can use reflections of feelings, disclosure of feelings, open
questions and probes about feelings, or focusing.
Rationale for Exploring Feelings
As Rogers noted (see 
Chapter 6
), emotions are a key part of our experience.
They tell us how we are reacting to stimuli and what we need to do. Often we
ignore, deny, distort, or repress feelings because we have been told they are
unacceptable (e.g., being told “big boys don’t cry”). Hence, we grow apart from
our inner experiencing and cannot accept ourselves. We need to return to and
allow ourselves to feel our emotions because only then can we decide what to do
about them.
From an evolutionary perspective, emotions are important because they
187
inform us about what actions to take, whether to fight or take flight. Thus, the
emotions serve as an immediate trigger that informs one how to behave. From a
biological perspective, verbalizing feelings is also important. Functional
magnetic resonance imaging research by Lieberman et al. (2007) showed that
verbalizing feelings is helpful. Putting feelings into words (affect labeling) helps
to diminish negative emotional experiences by decreasing the response of the
amygdala and increasing the activity in the right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex
as mediated by the medial prefrontal cortex.
Summers and Barber (2010) provided a good justification for encouraging
clients to experience their feelings at a deep level. They suggested that
by experiencing old feelings and understanding their context, patients begin to work through
the meanings (sometimes unconscious) attached to these events. Slowly, the old feelings and
perceptions reenter consciousness, and once they are conscious, patients’ natural problem-
solving capacities can be engaged. This process unites insight or self-understanding and
emotional re-experiencing. Some have characterized this aspect of therapy as habituation or
desensitization to the painful feelings. . . . Becoming distant from (or habituated to) these
feelings or thoughts is therapeutic, increasing the patient’s sense of mastery, control, and
autonomy. The patient is no longer afraid of them and can be more emotionally open and
flexible. (p. 34)
Feelings are at least as important as content or thoughts in client
communication. Clients seem to be most able to solve their problems when they
get in touch with their feelings (see also Elliott, Watson, Goldman, &
Greenberg, 2004). Experiencing feelings allows clients to evaluate events in
terms of their inner experiencing.
Furthermore, clients’ expression of emotions enables helpers to know and
understand them. People respond differently to events, so helpers need to know
how experiences are interpreted by individual clients. For example, when Varda
came to a helper’s office because her father died, the helper initially assumed that
Varda felt sad, depressed, and lonely because that is how the helper felt when her
father died. But in fact, Varda felt angry because she had been having intrusive
memories of childhood sexual abuse since her father died. It was safe for Varda
to remember the abuse only when her father was no longer able to hurt her. In
addition, Varda felt relief that her father was dead because she no longer had to
deal with him. This example illustrates the importance of listening carefully and
not imposing assumptions on clients.
If clients experience, accept, and own their emotions, they can become open
to new feelings and experiences. Feelings are not static but change once they are
experienced. When a person experiences a feeling fully and completely, new
feelings often emerge. For example, once Varda experienced her anger, she
became aware of other feelings such as sadness, which then led eventually to
feelings of acceptance and peace. The goal of helping is not to make the client
feel “better” but rather to help the client experience emotions more deeply: to
laugh when happy, cry when sad.
Clients do not have to act on the feelings, but they can make more
188
informed decisions about what to do when feelings are out in the open. In fact,
being aware of one’s feelings makes one less likely to act on them
unintentionally. In contrast, unaccepted feelings are likely to “leak” out,
sometimes in destructive ways. For example, Robert unintentionally was rude
and hostile to a friend who was accepted into a prestigious law school because
Robert’s own application had been rejected. Consciously, he was happy for his
friend, but he had not worked through his own wounded feelings. All of us
know people who do not directly say they are angry but indirectly communicate
subtle, nasty messages that make it difficult to respond to them. Other people
get stuck because they cannot accept their feelings. Similar to the obstruction
that occurs when a river gets dammed up, these people get blocked if they do
not allow themselves to have and express their feelings.
Feelings are rarely simple or straightforward; therefore, it is important to
note that clients might have several conflicting feelings about a topic. For
example, Diana might feel excited about taking a new job and pleased that she
was selected over other candidates. However, she might also feel anxious about
what is required of her, afraid of working too closely with the boss (who reminds
her of her father), insecure about how others may view her, and worried about
whether she can make enough money to pay the rent. It is important for helpers
to encourage clients to experience and express as many feelings as possible
without worrying about whether the feelings are rational, ambiguous, or
contradictory.
Anger, sadness, fear, shame, pain, and hurt seem to be the most important
emotions involved in therapeutic change (Greenberg, 2002). These negative
emotions are often bottled up and not expressed or experienced because of
shame and fear of disapproval. Many people cannot allow themselves to even
think about such feelings. Hence, clients require a supportive environment to
feel safe enough to express these feelings openly.
In addition, it is important to note that sometimes emotions exist in layers
(Greenberg, 2002; Teyber, 2006). For example, after anger is expressed and
experienced, sadness and shame often emerge. Inversely, after sadness is
expressed and experienced, anger and guilt often emerge. Similarly, gestalt
therapists believe every feeling has two sides. If clients talk only about fear,
helpers might wonder about wishes; if clients talk only about love, helpers might
wonder about hate. By fostering exploration of the feelings, helpers enable
clients to admit the multitude of feelings they might not otherwise have been
able to acknowledge.
Helpers need to remember that feelings are multifaceted and change over
time. New feelings emerge as old feelings are experienced and expressed.
Understanding and reflecting feelings at one point in time is just the beginning
of entering into an experiential process; helpers need to constantly look for new
feelings that emerge during the exploration process.
189
Cultural Considerations in Working With
Feelings
Helpers should also be aware of cultural considerations in working with feelings,
given that cultures differ in beliefs about how much emotion should be
expressed. In the United States, people are generally encouraged to be open
about their feelings and experiences. One only needs to turn on radio and
television talk shows to see how people share their innermost feelings freely.
People from non-American cultures, however, are often more reserved about
admitting and expressing feelings, especially with nonfamily members (Pedersen,
Draguns, Lonner, & Trimble, 2002).
There are also gender differences in the expression of emotion, in that men
often have a harder time expressing feelings than women do. Men are not
typically socialized to be sensitive to feelings and often feel threatened if asked to
say what they are feeling (Cournoyer & Mahalik, 1995; Good et al., 1995;
O’Neil, 1981). Helpers may need to proceed more slowly with clients who are
not comfortable with emotions, remembering that emotions occur cross-
culturally but that some people have a hard time expressing emotions.
Before working with feelings, it may be important to educate some clients
about why you are focusing on feelings. My friend EunSun Joo in Korea
pointed out that Korean clients need such information about the importance of
feelings because they worry about losing respect if they express feelings.
Reflection of Feelings
A 
reflection of feelings
 is a statement that explicitly labels the client’s feelings (see
Exhibit 9.1
). The feelings may have been stated by the client (in either the same
or similar words), or the helper may infer the feelings from the client’s nonverbal
behavior or from the content of the client’s message. The reflection may be
phrased either tentatively (e.g., “I wonder if you’re feeling angry?”) or more
directly (e.g., “It sounds to me like you’re feeling angry”). The emphasis can be
just on the feeling (e.g., “You feel upset”) or on both the feeling and the reason
for the feeling (e.g., “You feel upset because your teacher did not notice all the
work you have done recently”).
190
EXHIBIT 9.1
Overview of Reflection of Feelings
Helpers use reflections to help clients identify, clarify, and experience
feelings. In addition to labeling feelings, helpers try to facilitate clients in
experiencing the feelings in the immediate moment (i.e., an experience is more
important than an explanation). For example, a couple might recount an
incident in which they became angry with one another. The helper would
encourage them to express their current feelings and talk to each other about
how they are feeling about the incident now. Cathartic relief occurs when
feelings begin to flow rather than being stuck or bottled up and when clients
accept their feelings.
BENEFITS OF REFLECTIONS OF FEELINGS
Reflections of feelings are ideal interventions for enabling clients to enter into
their internal experiences, especially if delivered with concern and empathy for
clients’ reluctance to experience painful feelings. Clients often have difficulty
identifying and accepting feelings on their own, perhaps because they do not
know how they feel, are ambivalent or negative about the feelings, or have been
punished for having had such feelings in the past.
191
It can be difficult to articulate feelings because emotions are often sensations
rather than fully understood awareness. People often do not have words to
symbolize feelings, so working together with helpers to struggle to label feelings
helps clients identify the feelings. In effect, clients do an internal search
(Gendlin, 1996); in other words, clients focus inward and identify sensations
and then try put words or labels on the sensations (e.g., “I feel a something in
the pit of my stomach. I’m not sure what it is . . . I guess it’s kind of worry . . .
no, maybe it’s more fear, kind of like I’m not sure what will happen. Everything
seems up in the air . . . yes, I definitely feel apprehensive about the meeting.”).
Hearing reflections enables clients to rethink and reexamine what they
really feel. If a helper uses the term 
disgusted,
 this forces the client to think about
whether 
disgusted
 fits his or her experience. This searching can lead to deeper
exploration of the feelings in an attempt to clarify the feeling. It is often difficult
for clients to verbalize their deepest, most private thoughts and feelings. In a safe
and supportive relationship, they can begin to explore the feelings, which are
often complex and contradictory. They can feel a combination of love, hatred,
and guilt toward the same person in the same situation. Being allowed to admit
these ambivalent feelings to another person without rejection can enable clients
to accept feelings as their own.
Reflections also validate feelings. Laing and Esterson (1970) suggested that
people stop feeling “crazy” when their subjective experience is validated. It is
easy to feel that one is the only person who has ever felt a certain way, so hearing
helpers calmly label feelings can help clients believe that such feelings are
acceptable and that helpers accept clients as they are.
Reflections can also be used to model the expression of feelings, which
could be useful for clients who are out of touch with their emotions. Many
people experience an emotion but do not have a label for the feeling. For
example, the intervention “I wonder if you feel frustrated with your sister”
suggests that frustration is a feeling that a person might have in this situation. By
labeling feelings, helpers also imply that they are not afraid of feelings, that
feelings are familiar, and that clients are acceptable regardless of their feelings.
By suggesting a feeling, especially if delivered tentatively and respectfully,
reflections might circumvent clients’ defenses or possible embarrassment about
having the feelings. Helpers thus indicate through reflections that the feelings
are normal and that they accept the person who has the feelings.
Coming up with reflections requires that the helper work at least as hard as
the client is working and demonstrate that he or she is actively engaged in trying
to understand the client. In delivering a reflection, the helper is forced to
communicate his or her understanding of the client’s feelings and check out the
accuracy of his or her perceptions. The helper could say, “I understand exactly
how you feel,” but this statement does not demonstrate that understanding to
the client. Reflections, in contrast, provide an opportunity for helpers to show
192
their understanding. Beginning helpers quickly discover that accurately
perceiving and communicating how another person feels is difficult. Although
we can never truly understand another person, as helpers, we can struggle to get
past our own perceptions and try to immerse ourselves in the client’s experiences
and empathize with the client. Finally, reflections can help to build the
relationship because helpers are working hard to understand their clients. If
clients feel the helpers’ empathy and understanding and are able to talk with
them openly and explore their feelings, the therapeutic relationship is likely to
build.
Reflections of feelings are thus ideal interventions for encouraging client
expression of feelings because helpers give examples of what clients might be
experiencing. Clients can then begin to recognize and accept feelings as natural
and normal. In addition, if helpers clearly articulate what they think clients are
feeling, clients can provide helpers feedback about what helpers did or did not
understand.
HOW REFLECTION OF FEELINGS RELATES TO EMPATHY
Some authors have equated reflection of feeling with empathy (e.g., Carkhuff,
1969; Egan, 1994). I disagree with this stance because it is too narrow to define
empathy
 as just reflection of feeling (see also Duan & Hill, 1996). I agree with
Rogers (1957) that empathy is an attitude or way of being in tune with the
experience of another person. If delivered appropriately, however, a reflection of
feelings could be a manifestation of empathy. For example, if a helper says, “You
must feel so devastated” in a compassionate tone, the client is likely to feel that
the helper understands. A technically correct reflection of feelings, in contrast,
could be unempathetic if delivered at the wrong time or in an inappropriate
manner. For example, if a helper says, “you feel humiliated” in an all-knowing,
firm voice, the client may feel put down or misunderstood. The client might feel
that the helper understands her better than she understands herself, which could
make her mistrust her own feelings.
There are also times when it is more empathic to use a helping skill other
than a reflection. For example, a helper responding to a client who feels stuck in
an abusive relationship might challenge the client’s decision to stay in the
abusive situation. This response might be empathic given the dangerous
situation in the home and the helper’s valuing of the client as a person deserving
of a healthy relationship.
HOW TO REFLECT FEELINGS
Clients need to feel safe enough in the therapeutic relationship to risk delving
into their feelings. They must feel that they will not be disparaged, embarrassed,
or shamed but rather accepted, valued, and respected when they reveal
193
themselves. Hence, reflections must be done gently and with empathy.
When learning to do reflections, a helpful format is to say:
“You feel ____” or
“You feel ____ because ____”
In other words, helpers can say just the feeling word to highlight the feeling
(e.g., “Angry” or “You feel angry”). Or they can say both the feeling and the
reason for the feeling (e.g., “You feel frustrated because you didn’t get your
way”) to provide supporting data for why the client has the feeling.
Once helpers grasp how to do reflections, it is useful to vary the format so
that clients do not become annoyed with repetitiveness. If the helper says, “It
sounds like you’re feeling . . . ” 20 times in a row, it is not surprising that the
client would notice, which would take away from the client’s exploration. The
following are some alternative formats:
“I wonder if you’re feeling ____”
“Perhaps you’re feeling ____”
“You sound (or seem) ____”
“Could you be feeling ____?”
“From your nonverbals, I would guess you’re feeling ____”
“It sounds like you feel ____”
“Perhaps you feel ____”
“So you’re feeling ____”
“And that made you feel ____”
“I hear you saying you feel ____”
“My hunch is that you feel ____”
“You’re ____”
“Upset” (or whatever feeling word is most appropriate)
Using a metaphor instead of a feeling word can also be helpful because
metaphors often capture the imagination and express feelings in pictures in a
way that engages other senses. For example, the helper might say, “It’s like
you’re in a fog” or “It sounds like you felt like you were run over by a truck.”
I suggest that helpers focus on one salient feeling in each reflection rather
than try to reflect all of the feelings in a single statement. This focus enables
clients to search inwardly about this one feeling and try it on for size, whereas
reflecting multiple feelings could be overwhelming and distracting. Helpers can
come back later and pick up on additional feelings for further exploration.
Not only is the specific feeling important, but helpers also need to try to
match the intensity of the feeling to show greater empathy (Skovholt & Rivers,
2003). For example, the intensity of anger could range from a mild “irritated” to
a stronger “mad” to an even stronger “enraged.” Similarly, the intensity of
happiness could range from “okay” to “happy” to “ecstatic.” Helpers can also
194
vary the intensity of a feeling word by using modifiers, such as “somewhat” or
“very” (e.g., “somewhat upset” vs. “very upset”).
It is also sometimes useful for helpers to state the feelings tentatively (e.g.,
“Perhaps you’re feeling upset?”) to encourage clarification. Stating feelings too
definitely (e.g., “You obviously are angry at your mother”) can preclude
exploration because clients might feel that there is no reason to struggle to
identify the inner feeling. Hence, it can sometimes be helpful to adopt a
quizzical tone, such as “I wonder if you might be feeling ____?”
In addition, given that the goal of helpers is to allow clients to immerse
themselves in their feelings so they can come to accept these feelings, helpers
should focus on what the client is feeling in the present moment about the
situation because these are the feelings that are very alive. By focusing on present
feelings, helpers guide clients in experiencing their immediate feelings rather
than in relating details about past feelings (e.g., “You sound irritated right now
as you talk about your mother” rather than “It sounds like you were upset with
your mother when that happened”). Remember that a person can have feelings
in the present about something that happened in the past (e.g., “You still feel
angry as you think about what he said”). Thus, the key is to stay with the feeling
and be in the “now” with the client, helping the client navigate the ebb and flow
of the feelings.
I also suggest that helpers allow clients time to absorb and think about the
reflections that are presented rather than rushing quickly to the next feeling. If
the client starts crying or getting upset, the helper can encourage him or her to
experience and express these feelings rather than trying to “take away” the
feelings or make the client feel better. Pause, go slowly, and do not interrupt
when the client is experiencing feelings; at the same time, be there with the
client and reflect her or his feelings.
Because the goal is to reflect feelings and keep the focus on the client,
helpers need to be aware of staying in the background and facilitating
exploration. Helpers can reach this goal by maintaining a supportive and
listening stance. Clients should almost not notice good reflections because these
interventions help them explore and focus inward on themselves rather than
attending to what the helper is saying.
A great metaphor a student used is that it is not so much that the helper is
using a metal detector to uncover the feelings; it is more that the helper and
client are working together to construct the feelings. When things are going
well, it is not clear who is following whom, but that the helper and client are
working together to get at the feelings.
IDENTIFYING FEELING WORDS
Many beginning helpers have difficulty coming up with a variety of words to
195
describe the emotions expressed in a given situation. 
Exhibit 9.2
 is a checklist of
emotion words developed from several sources (Greenberg, 2002; Hill,
Siegelman, Gronsky, Sturniolo, & Fretz, 1981; student feedback; lists collected
from various unknown sources). This list includes both positive and negative
emotions, but the negative emotions outnumber positive emotions by about two
to one, as is generally true with emotions (Izard, 1977). Feel free to highlight
favorite words and also to add words to the list to personalize it. (The Emotion
Words Checklist is available as a downloadable PDF on the companion website,
at 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.)
196
EXHIBIT 9.2
Emotion Words Checklist
197
198
EXHIBIT 9.2 (
Continued
)
Emotion Words Checklist
199
200
EXHIBIT 9.2 (
Continued
)
Emotion Words Checklist
201
202
EXHIBIT 9.2 (
Continued
)
Emotion Words Checklist
203
204
EXHIBIT 9.2 (
Continued
)
Emotion Words Checklist
SOURCES OF REFLECTIONS
Clues about what a client is feeling can be found in four overlapping sources: (a)
the client’s portrayal of his or her feelings, (b) the client’s verbal content, (c) the
client’s nonverbal behavior, and (d) the helper’s projection of his or her own
feelings onto the client. Helpers need to be aware that the last three sources only
provide clues and may not necessarily accurately reflect a client’s feelings.
Client’s Expression of Feeling
Sometimes clients are aware of their feelings and express them openly. For
example, Amanda might say, “I was really upset with my teacher. I was so mad
that she wouldn’t even listen when I told her my feelings.” The helper might use
another word (e.g., “furious”) to describe the feelings so that Amanda can
experience feelings at a deeper level or explore other aspects of the feelings.
Amanda has signaled her or his readiness to talk about feelings, so the helper can
help her expand on the feeling and identify other feelings.
Client’s Verbal Content
Another source of clues about feelings is verbal content. Although the client may
not be mentioning feelings directly, it is sometimes possible to infer the feelings
from the client’s words. For example, clients often respond to a major loss with
205
feelings of sadness, respond to success with feelings of pleasure, and respond to
anger directed at them with fear or hostility. Hence, helpers can make
preliminary hypotheses about what clients might be feeling based on their
knowledge of how people typically respond in similar situations. For example,
an adolescent client might mention that she received her report card and had
improved her grades in almost every subject. The helper might tentatively say, “I
wonder if you feel proud of yourself for raising your grades.” Helpers need to be
cautious and ready to revise their reflections, however, on the basis of feedback
and added information from the client. Helpers cannot know everything about
clients and will need to amend their reflections as they gather more information
and as the feelings emerge and change in sessions.
Nonverbal Behaviors
How the client appears nonverbally is a third and major source of clues for
feelings. For example, if the helper observes that the client is smiling and looks
pleased, the helper might say, “You seem happy about that.” Or if the client has
a composed facial expression but is kicking his or her foot vigorously (see
Chapter 7
, this volume, noting that people have less control over arm and leg
movements than they do over facial expressions), the helper might wonder out
loud if the client is nervous or angry. The meaning of nonverbal behaviors is not
always the same (see 
Chapter 7
), however, so it is good to use nonverbal
behaviors as clues to possible feelings rather than assuming that nonverbal
behaviors have fixed meanings.
Another valuable clue is when the client uses an atypical nonverbal
behavior. For example, if the client is usually open and has good eye contact but
all of a sudden will not look at the helper and frowns, something relevant to the
helping process could be going on inside the client (e.g., the client might feel
misunderstood).
Projection of Helper’s Feelings
A final source for detecting client feelings is ourselves: How would I feel if I were
in that situation? For example, if a client is talking about an argument with a
roommate over cleaning their apartment, helpers can recall how they have felt in
similar arguments with roommates, siblings, or friends. Helpers are not judging
how the client “should” feel but are attempting to understand the client’s
feelings by remembering and imagining themselves in a similar situation.
Helpers can use these projections as long as they remember that the projections
are possibilities rather than accurate representations of the client’s reality.
Indeed, the helper’s feelings might not apply to the client. However, the helper
can hypothesize about the client’s feelings using her or his own projections and
then search for supporting and nonsupporting evidence in the client’s verbal
206
content and nonverbal behaviors.
ACCURACY OF REFLECTION OF FEELINGS
The feeling word provided by the helper does not have to be perfectly accurate
to be helpful, but it does need to be “in the ballpark.” As long as the feeling
word is relatively close to what the client is feeling, the client can clarify the
feeling. For example, if a client has been talking about feeling scared and the
helper uses the word 
tense,
 the client can clarify and say the feeling is more like
terror.
 Clarifying the feeling gives the helper a clearer understanding of the client
and allows the client to articulate or clarify what he or she is experiencing
internally. One could even argue that reflections that are too accurate could halt
client exploration because there would be no reason for the client to try to clarify
or explore the feelings. However, feeling words that are “not in the ballpark” can
be damaging. If a helper uses the word 
happy
 after the client has said 
tense,
 the
client might feel that the helper is not listening or does not understand, and the
client might give up on the helper and quit exploring.
Helpers are rarely accurate with every reflection because it is so difficult to
understand another person. More often, helpers struggle each time to
understand the changing emotional territory that the client inhabits and
presents. Clients often appreciate the helper’s struggle to understand as much as
valuing the specific reflection. Understanding another person’s feelings is
something helpers strive for but remain humbly aware of how difficult it is to
achieve. Hence, helpers should not be as concerned with assessing the accuracy
of a particular reflection as with trying to understand clients and communicating
to clients that they are working to understand.
An additional concern is that clients might accept the helper’s reflection as
accurate not because it necessarily is but because the helper is in a position of
authority. Clients might feel their helpers know more about them than they
actually do. Helpers thus need to observe whether clients comply too readily
with what helpers say rather than experiencing their own feelings. As tempting
as it might be, acting as an omniscient authority with regard to clients’ feelings
often leads to dependency, misunderstandings, or a difficult realization of the
helper’s limitations. On the other hand, clients might disagree with a reflection
just because the helper is in a position of authority. They may feel a need to
resist if the reflections are presented to adamantly.
WHEN TO USE REFLECTIONS OF FEELINGS
Reflecting feelings can have positive benefits by helping clients explore the
affective component of the problems, experience relief from tension, come to
accept their feelings, and feel proud that they had the courage to express and
face their feelings. According to Greenberg (2002), a good time to focus on
207
emotions is when
there is a therapeutic bond between a helper and a client,
the helper and client agree on the task of working on emotions
(remember that the client may need to be provided with a rationale for
why emotions are focused on),
a client is avoiding feelings (e.g., the client obviously has a feeling but
is interrupting it or is avoiding emotion by intellectualizing, deflecting,
or distracting),
a client behaves maladaptively because of a lack of awareness of feelings
(e.g., becomes passive when abused, depressed when angry, overly
inhibited from feeling happy or sad and so lacking vigor), or
a client needs to reprocess traumatic experiences (although not usually
immediately after the event).
WHEN NOT TO USE REFLECTIONS OF FEELINGS
Reflection of feelings can be problematic if clients reveal more feelings than they
can tolerate at the time. If their defenses are overwhelmed, clients can deteriorate
under prolonged emotional catharsis. They may not be ready for the feelings
and may not feel supported enough to risk deep exploration. It is probably
better not to focus on emotions in the following situations (Brammer &
MacDonald, 1996; Greenberg, 2002):
The therapeutic relationship is not strong (e.g., the client does not feel
safe or does not trust the helper, the helper does not have enough
information about the client);
the client feels overwhelmed by emotions due to severe emotional
disorder, delusional thinking, or extreme anger;
the client is going through severe emotional crises, and discussing
feelings would add more pressure than he or she could handle;
the client has a history of aggression, falling apart, substance abuse,
self-harm, not being able to regulate emotions, or lack of coping skills;
the client shows strong resistance to expressing feelings;
there is not enough time to work through the feelings; or
the helper is not experienced in dealing with emotionally distraught
clients.
During crises or when the client is feeling emotionally overwhelmed or
distraught, it is often more appropriate to help clients regulate their emotions
rather than pressing them to go deeper into feelings (Greenberg, 2002).
Emotion regulation techniques such as relaxation training (e.g., suggest that the
client take a deep breath) are discussed in 
Chapter 17
 of this volume.
My intent in presenting these cautions is not to discourage helpers or make
208
them fearful about dealing with client feelings but to increase helpers’ awareness
about potential hazards of reflecting feelings. In general, reflection of feelings is
appropriate and beneficial but can occasionally lead to clients feeling
overwhelmed by uncontrollable feelings, so helpers need to be aware and
responsive to client reactions.
EXAMPLE OF REFLECTION OF FEELING
The following shows a helper using reflection of feelings (in italics) in a session:
Client:
 
I had to miss classes last week because I got a call right before
class that my father had been in a serious car accident. He was
on the highway and a truck driver fell asleep at the wheel and
swerved right into him, causing a six-car pileup. It was really
awful.
Helper:
 
You sound very upset.
Client:
 
I am. All the way to the hospital, I kept worrying about
whether he was OK. The worst thing is that he already had
several bad things happen to him recently—his third wife left
him, he lost money in the stock market, and his dog died.
Helper:
 
You’re concerned because of all the bad things that have
happened lately.
Client:
 
Yeah, he doesn’t have much will to live, and I don’t know
what to do for him. I try to be there, but he doesn’t really seem
to care if I’m there or not.
Helper:
 
It hurts that he doesn’t notice you.
Client:
 
Yeah, I have always tried to please my father. I always felt
like I couldn’t do enough to make him happy. I think he
preferred my brother. My brother was a better athlete and liked
to work in the shop with him. My father just never valued what
I did. I don’t know if he liked me very much.
Helper:
 
Wow, that’s really painful. I wonder if you’re angry too?
Client:
 
Yeah, I am. What’s wrong with me that my father wouldn’t
like me? I think I’m a pretty nice guy. (Client continues to
explore the situation.)
DIFFICULTIES HELPERS EXPERIENCE IN DELIVERING
REFLECTION OF FEELINGS
Beginning helpers are often nervous about dealing with clients’ expressions of
intense negative feelings, such as sadness or anger. They get anxious when clients
cry because they are uncomfortable with crying, uncertain about how to handle
deep negative emotions, and unsure about how to respond to show
209
understanding. Feelings of guilt might also emerge when clients cry, because
helpers might think their interventions upset the clients or caused the pain.
Furthermore, helpers might be afraid that if they encourage clients to express
their feelings, the clients will get stuck in the feelings and not be able to emerge
from them. Helpers might also have difficulty accepting intense negative feelings
in themselves and thus have difficulty allowing clients to have such feelings. It is
important to stress, however, that feelings are natural and clients need to express
their feelings so that they can begin to accept them. When helpers accept clients’
feelings, it conveys to the clients that their feelings are okay. I encourage helpers
to learn to accept and cope with their anxieties so they can enable clients to
express and accept their feelings. Many helpers find that taking a deep breath
and focusing on the client and the client’s feelings rather than focusing on
themselves helps them encourage clients to express and accept their feelings
(Williams, Judge, Hill, & Hoffman, 1997).
At the other extreme, helpers sometimes have difficulty working with
feelings when clients are reluctant to experience their feelings. We always want
to respect the client’s right to not do something in helping, but at the same
time, we need to remember that clients are sometimes reluctant because they are
scared and need encouragement to go further. If clients go around the edges of
their feelings and then retreat and then come back again, we can sometimes take
this as an indication that they want to go further but are scared (always checking
our own intentions and motivations to ensure we have the client’s best interests
in mind).
At times, beginning helpers have difficulty capturing the most salient feeling
to reflect back to the client. They might hear several feelings and be confused
about which to reflect first. Helpers should pay attention to the feeling that
seems to elicit the most intensity or depth of feelings and the ones that they
think the client can tolerate experiencing and exploring. They can always come
back later and reflect other feelings when they become more salient. There is
time in the exploration stage to cover many feelings in depth, so it is better to
focus on each feeling individually and thoroughly. Practice helps tremendously.
Helpers can practice by guessing the most salient emotions displayed in movies,
reflecting strong feelings of friends when they are talking about problems, and
role-playing in practice exercises.
Some helpers also have difficulty separating their own feelings from the
client’s feelings. They assume clients must have the same feelings they do. Other
helpers overidentify with a client and feel the client’s emotion so strongly (i.e.,
feel sympathy or emotional contagion) that they cannot be objective and
helpful. Helpers need to become aware of their own feelings so that they can
differentiate what is coming from clients and what is coming from them. As
mentioned before, self-reflection, personal therapy, and supervision can help
with this task.
210
Finally, helpers sometimes state the client’s feelings too definitely (e.g.,
“You obviously feel angry”) rather than tentatively (e.g., “I wonder if you feel
angry”). If clients are passive and have difficulty disagreeing with their helpers,
direct statements of feelings by helpers can be problematic because clients are
not thinking for themselves or examining their experiences. A tentative
statement about feelings can be more respectful and encourages clients to verify,
dismiss, or modify the feeling words.
Disclosure of Feelings
Disclosure of feelings
 can be defined as the helper revealing a feeling that he or she
had or has (see 
Exhibit 9.3
). This disclosure can be real (“When I have been in
that situation, I felt stressed”), hypothetical (“If I were in your situation, I would
probably feel stressed”), or how the helper feels in the moment hearing the client
talk (e.g., “Just hearing you talk about your situation makes me feel stressed”).
For the rationale regarding the use of disclosures, refer back to the section on
disclosures in 
Chapter 8
.
211
EXHIBIT 9.3
Overview of Reflection of Feelings
Disclosures of feelings can be used to model for clients what they might be
feeling, especially if the focus is returned to the client after the disclosure (e.g.,
“When I was applying for my first job, I felt terrified about what I would say in
the interview. I wonder if that’s how you feel?”). After hearing a disclosure of
feelings, clients might recognize that they had similar feelings. In other words,
disclosures of feelings can stimulate clients to recognize and express their
feelings. In effect, the disclosure of feelings is similar in intention and
consequences to reflection of feelings. Disclosure of feelings can be helpful for
clients who are afraid to experience their feelings, especially feelings of shame
and embarrassment.
An additional goal of disclosure of feelings is to help clients feel more
normal because they learn that other people have similar feelings. Many of us
think we are the only ones who ever feel lousy, inadequate, phony, or depressed.
Hearing that others have felt the same way can be a tremendous relief. In fact,
Yalom (1995) posited that universality (i.e., a sense that others feel the same
way) is a curative agent in therapy.
HOW TO DISCLOSE FEELINGS
Disclosures of feelings can be a good way for helpers not to impose feelings on
clients. Rather than saying “You feel ____,” the helper says “I felt ____ in the
past, and I wonder if you might feel that way?” Helpers are being respectful by
owning that they are the ones who have the feelings. They acknowledge their
projections and then ask how the client feels. Importantly, after the disclosure,
212
the helper returns the focus to the client.
I do not recommend that helpers make up feelings just to be able to use
disclosures of feelings. Such disclosures are not authentic and thus defeat the
purpose of disclosures. Hypothetical disclosures, however, can be used because
then it is clear that the helper is projecting feelings (e.g., “If I were you, I might
feel worried”).
Many of the same suggestions as were discussed under reflections of feelings
apply to disclosures of feelings. For example, it is best to disclose only one
feeling at a time and to match the intensity of the feeling. I would add that it is
wise for helpers not to disclose anything that makes them feel too vulnerable.
Furthermore, many of the same suggestions as were discussed under disclosures
of thoughts apply to disclosures of feelings. For example, it is important to
disclose for the client’s rather than for the helper’s needs, keep the disclosure
short and turn the focus back to the client.
EXAMPLE OF DISCLOSURE OF FEELINGS
The following shows a helper using self-disclosure of feelings (in italics) in a
session:
Client:
 
How did you learn to be a therapist?
Helper:
 
I am just in the process of learning to be a helper. It will be
many years and lots of training before I am qualified to consider
myself a therapist.
 You seem to be curious about my credentials.
I wonder what is going on for you?
Client:
 
I just wonder if you’re going to be able to help me.
Helper:
 
I can understand that fear. 
I was very nervous about going to
see a therapist the first time too.
Client:
 
I am a bit nervous. This is the first time I’ve talked to anyone
about my problems. I feel like I’m weak if I talk to anyone. My
father always used to say that only crazy people go to therapists.
Helper:
 
That would make me angry.
Client:
 
It did make me angry. My father is hardly one to talk given
his problems. I really want to have an opportunity to talk more
about my feelings about my family—they are pretty messed up,
and I guess I am too.
The helper might shift at this point to using other helping skills (e.g.,
reflections and restatements) to help the client explore more about her feelings
about her family.
Open Questions and Probes About Feelings
213
If the helper wants clients to express feelings, the most reliably efficient skill is
probably probe for feelings (see also Goates-Jones, Hill, Stahl, & Doschek,
2009; Hill & Gormally, 1977) because this skill specifically instructs the client
about how to respond. With a probe for feeling, the helper asks something like,
“I wonder how you’re feeling about that?” Thus, the helper directly asks clients
to talk about feelings (see 
Exhibit 9.4
). I use the term 
efficient
 advisedly,
however, because it is more difficult to show empathy with open questions and
probes than it is with reflections or disclosures of feelings, so helpers need to be
careful to maintain their caring and facilitative attitude when using questions
and probes.
214
EXHIBIT 9.4
Overview of Open Questions and Probes About Feelings
One way to think about coming up with open questions and probes for
feelings is to formulate a reflection to get to the salient topic and then replace
the feeling word with the open question/probe. For example, if the reflection
would be, “You seem worried about what your mother might say,” the helper
might instead say, “How do you feel about what your mother might say?”
The material presented in 
Chapter 8
 for open questions and probes about
thoughts also applies to open questions and probes about feelings. I would
highlight the need to vary open questions and probes about feelings, so that
helpers are not continually saying, “How do you feel about that?” Instead,
helpers might say, “What was that like for you?” or “Tell me about that
experience.”
EXAMPLE OF OPEN QUESTIONS AND PROBES ABOUT
FEELINGS
In the following example, open questions and probes about feelings (in italics)
are intermingled with reflections of feelings and disclosures of feelings:
Client:
 
I think I want to go to the local community college when I
graduate from high school because my parents don’t have
215
enough money to send me anywhere else.
Helper:
 
What are you feeling right now?
Client:
 
I feel a little disappointed because I had always assumed that
I would go to a big university. I’ve gotten good grades, and it
doesn’t seem fair that I cannot go wherever I want.
Helper:
 
You sound angry.
Client:
 
I probably am. My parents told me I could go wherever I
wanted, but then they got divorced last year and nothing has
been the same.
Helper:
 
I know that when my parents got divorced, I felt totally
abandoned. 
I wonder if you feel like that?
Client:
 
I do. They are both into their own stuff now. They are both
dating other people and acting like silly teenagers. I feel older
than them. But because they got divorced, we no longer have
enough money for me to go to the university.
Helper:
 
What might you feel about that?
Client:
 
I feel betrayed. They always promised me I could go to the
university. I was always the smartest kid, and they praised me a
lot for that. But now, they don’t even know I exist. It just feels
like the bottom has fallen out. (Continues)
Focusing
Focusing is a specific method for helping clients experience feelings at a deeper
level (Elliott, Watson, Goldman, & Greenberg, 2004; Gendlin, 1981, 1996;
Wolfe, 2005). It provides a structure whereby the client turns inward,
experiences his or her feelings, and then attempts to put the feelings into words.
Focusing is similar to mindfulness or meditation in that the client sets aside
expectations and waits receptively for feelings to emerge. The helper directs the
client to go inward and be curious and encourages him or her to be open and
tolerant of whatever emerges.
Before embarking on focusing, however, the helper and client must have a
good, solid therapeutic relationship. Because it can be scary for clients to go into
uncharted territory and allow themselves to experience feelings that they had
previously been blocking, the client needs to trust the therapist.
A good time to use focusing is when the client expresses unclear feelings.
Clients may be blocked by their feelings or have trouble allowing themselves to
get into their feelings in depth. The client may have the vague sense that
something is not right but not quite be able to identify the affect. The client
may feel in a fog or have a foreboding sense of anxiety or discomfort.
216
To facilitate focusing, the helper listens carefully and empathically to all
aspects of the client’s communication, tracking the feelings as they shift and
evolve. The helper also tracks the client’s feelings about the experience and the
therapist, particularly in terms of whether the client feels ready and able to
continue with the focusing process. The helper gently and slowly guides the
client through the process. The helper also tries privately to be aware of his or
her own experiencing and uses that to further the client’s experiencing.
The following steps can be used to facilitate focusing:
 
1.
 
When the client has identified a vague feeling that the helper
thinks would benefit from deeper exploration, the helper asks the
client if she or he would like to try an exercise that might help him
or her get more in touch with the feelings.
 
2.
 
If the client agrees, the helper asks that client to close her or his
eyes or concentrate on a point on the wall, focus on her or his
breathing, and notice the sensations of how it feels to inhale and
exhale.
 
3.
 
The helper then directs the client to try breathing slowly from the
diaphragm (e.g., “You can feel your stomach move in an out when
you are breathing from your diaphragm”) and continue to focus on
the sensations of your breathing. The helper then asks the client to
be open to whatever thoughts and feelings arise during this
experience.
 
4.
 
After a pause, the helper asks the client to look inside (e.g., “Ask
yourself what’s going on right now”). After another pause, the
helper might say, “Don’t rush, just see whatever comes to mind,
just let it come.” [During this step, the helper is not expecting the
client to say anything out loud.]
 
5.
 
After another pause, the helper might say, “Tell me what comes to
you.”
 
6.
 
When the client presents a feeling, the helper asks the client to talk
about the feeling in greater depth. The helper might ask the client
to give a word or image that describes the feeling. The helper
might then restate or reflect back what the client is saying. When
the client thinks of a word or image, the helper asks the client to
check out how the word or image fits. If it doesn’t quite fit, the
helper asks the client to keep exploring and check in with his or
her body. If the client is stuck and the helper has a strong image in
mind, the helper might offer the image and ask the client how it
fits, always respecting whether it fits for the client.
 
7.
 
Sometimes describing the feeling helps the client feel a new feeling
(recall from earlier in the chapter that feelings change as we
217
experience them). Getting unstuck from the old blocked feelings
can bring a sense of relief, often signified by a deep sigh. But if the
client does not experience a shift to a new feeling at this point, the
helper can further query the client about the feeling (e.g., “When
you think about that, how does it feel?” “What else might you be
feeling?” “What is the worst part of the feeling?” “What would it
feel like if this feeling were resolved?”). If memories come up, the
helper can ask the client to talk more about the memories and the
feelings they evoke. In effect, the helper keeps working with the
client until the client feels some sense of relief or indicates that she
or he would like to stop.
 
8.
 
During this whole process, the helper also needs to focus on his or
her own breathing. Notice the sensations of how it feels when you
inhale and exhale. Now try breathing slowly from your diaphragm.
Continue to focus on the sensations of your breathing. Try to be
open to whatever thoughts and feelings arise during this
experience. Focus on the area of your body where you experience
the feeling.
 
9.
 
Stay with the imagery and help the client experience her or his
feelings.
10.
 
After the exercise, the helper can ask the client to reflect on the
experience.
A common difficulty for helpers during the focusing exercise involves
sticking too closely to the specific instructions provided here and not attending
to the client’s experience. Given that some clients have trouble focusing on their
bodies and may have strong reactions to the exercise, it is important to modify
the exercise to fit their needs. Other difficulties involve being impatient and
rushing the client, being self-critical when the shift does not happen, or being
overwhelmed or distracted. The instructions are provided a general guideline
and are meant to offer a structure but are not meant to be followed precisely.
Helpers can shift from the exercise to asking about the client’s feelings about the
experience and modify it to fit the client’s needs at the moment.
A Comparison of Skills for Exploring
Feelings
My favorite skill is for exploring feelings is reflection of feelings because, when
used appropriately, it conveys empathy, that the helper is listening to the client,
and that the helper is struggling to understand the client. Reflections of feelings
218
help clients immerse themselves in their feelings, come to accept these feelings,
and then move to new feelings. With reflections, clients often feel that helpers
are listening to them and understand them. Sometimes, it can be helpful to
soften the reflection by using a disclosure of feelings, especially if the helper
turns it back to the client (e.g., “Does that fit for you?”).
Of course, using only reflections or disclosures of feelings could be boring
and tedious for both the client and helper. There are times, for example, when
clients would benefit more from an open question or a probe to help them talk
about feelings. In this situation, an open question or a probe about feelings is a
good way to encourage clients to talk about specific feelings. If clients have
difficulty identifying their feelings, though, they might feel anxious and unsure
when helpers ask, “How are you feeling about that?” Such questions can confuse
or concern clients because they are not sure what helpers want to hear or how
they “should” feel. Sometimes asking how they feel stimulates defenses and
makes clients shut down. Clients can also feel annoyed that helpers are not really
listening to what they are saying or trying to empathize with their feelings.
It can also be helpful to follow up reflections with open questions or probes
about feelings. For example, the helper might say, “You sound sad,” give the
client a chance to respond, and then say, “Can you tell me more about the
feeling of being sad?”
In addition, focusing can be useful when the client seems open to exploring
feelings at a greater depth and seems especially tuned in to inner sensations. For
some clients, exercises can be off-putting, so helpers need to be careful about
introducing the exercise.
What Do You Think?
Compare and contrast the effects of using reflections of feeling,
disclosures of feelings, open questions or probes about feelings, and
probes in terms of their ability to help clients explore.
Compare and contrast focusing on feelings versus thoughts for
exploration.
How does your culture influence how you feel about experiencing and
expressing your feelings and talking about other people’s feelings?
What are your thoughts about the importance of accuracy in
reflections of feelings?
Some therapists do not like to ever disclose anything. What would be
their reasoning? Do you agree?
219
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Eliciting Feelings
Citation:
 Hill, C. E., & Gormally, J. (1977). Effects of reflection, restatement, probe, and
non verbal behaviors on client affect. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
24,
 92–97.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.24.2.92
Rationale:
 Given that client expression of affect is typically viewed as desirable in psycho
therapy, the authors wondered what therapist skills can help clients express affect.
Furthermore, the authors wondered if therapist nonverbal behavior influences client affect.
Method:
 Volunteer clients who were interested in talking with a counselor were paired
with a trained counselor, who first assured the client of confidentiality and then asked the
client to discuss feelings about a problem. The study then followed a classic a–b–a–b
experimental design in which there was a no-intervention phase to allow a baseline
assessment (a), followed by the intervention (b), with a return to baseline (a), and then a
return to the intervention (b), so that we could determine the effects of the intervention.
During the 6-minute baseline, the counselor responded to the client with only minimal
nonverbal and verbal stimuli(“Mm-hmm,” “I see”). During the 9-minute intervention
phase, the counselor was cued via a light behind the client to deliver either the nonverbal
(head nods and smiles at appropriate times) or no-nonverbal (no head nods or smiles)
condition; via another set of lights, the counselor was cued to deliver approximately one
reflection (e.g., “You feel angry because your father doesn’t support you anymore”),
restatement (“Your father doesn’t support you anymore”), or probe (“How do you feel
about your father not supporting you anymore?”) per minute. Volunteer clients were
debriefed after sessions. Interviews were transcribed and divided into response units
(grammatical sentences). Trained judges coded whether the client gave an affective self-
referent (expressed a feeling, e.g., “I feel angry that my father doesn’t support me”) in each
client statement.
Interesting Findings:
Clients produced more affective self-referents during the probe condition than they did during the reflection or
restatement conditions.
Clients talked more during the intervention phases than during the baseline phases.
Conclusions:
Probes elicited more client affect than did reflections or restatements, perhaps because they directly asked the
client to talk about feelings.
It was uncomfortable for volunteer clients to talk without any feedback from the counselor during the baseline
period.
It is important to recognize that the findings may not generalize to actual psychotherapy given that this study
involved an experimental manipulation.
Implications for Therapy:
Probes are a good way to get clients to talk about feelings. Of course, reflections and restatements may have other
impacts not measured in this study.
BONUS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
220
MATERIALS
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
221
It is a luxury to be understood.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson
Dmitry, a new helper, was in his first session with a client, Joe. He asked several closed
questions, and Joe answered them briefly, then sat waiting for more questions. Dmitry
panicked because he did not know what to do next. He felt himself sweating and
wanted to run out of the room. Instead, he paused, took a deep breath, and thought
about what he had learned about helping. His teacher’s words echoed in his head: “Try
to feel what the client is feeling.” So he said, “I wonder if you’re scared right now?” and
was amazed when the client started talking about feeling depressed because he was
doing poorly in his courses. Joe went on to talk about how his father was critical and
shamed him when he did not meet his unrealistic standards. Dmitry quickly became so
engaged in listening to Joe that he forgot his own anxiety.
T
o summarize the last few chapters, the goals of the exploration stage are to
establish rapport and help clients explore thoughts and feelings. It is important
foremost for helpers to be empathic and to accept clients unconditionally so that
clients can then begin to accept themselves and return to a self-healing process.
In addition, helpers lay the foundation during the exploration stage to move to
insight and action. By keeping an awareness of these goals in this stage, helpers
can be more grounded in trying to facilitate the process. Otherwise, it is easy for
helpers to get lost and let clients talk aimlessly or in circles.
This chapter covers issues that arise for helpers during the exploration stage.
First, I review more completely the goals and skills of the exploration stage. I
then talk about the difficulties that helpers typically face in the exploration stage
and present several possible strategies for coping with the difficulties. Finally, I
present an example of the exploration stage.
Choosing Goals to Facilitate Exploration
222
In trying to decide what to do during the exploration stage, the helper has to
first ponder what his or her goals are for helping the client. In general, the helper
wants to put the client at ease, help the client feel safe, create an atmosphere in
which the client can talk, listen attentively to the client, and observe the client
for clues about what he or she might be thinking or feeling but not willing or
able to articulate. This set of goals is accomplished primarily through the
nonverbal and minimal verbal attending, listening, and observation skills
discussed in 
Chapter 7
.
The helper also wants to help the client explore the content of the problem
by telling the narratives about what is troubling him or her. For clients to be
able to talk openly and figure out what they are trying to say and what they
mean, it helps to have someone listening attentively and collaborating with
them. The use of restatements, open questions and probes about thoughts, and
disclosures of similarities can be helpful in pursuing this goal.
The experiencing of emotions is also important. The client needs to focus
not only on the stories but also on the feelings attached to the stories, to
experience and express what is going on internally. Experiencing the emotions
within the context of an accepting relationship allows the client to accept the
emotions and thus come to trust his or her inner experiencing. To facilitate this
emotional experiencing, the helper often uses reflections of feelings, disclosures
of feelings, open questions or probes about feelings, and focusing.
Of course, the goals of establishing a relationship, facilitating exploration of
content, and intensifying feelings often overlap. So how do helpers decide which
skills to use at any given moment in the session? There are no fixed rules, but I
can share with you some ideas based on my clinical experience.
Choosing Skills to Match the Goals and
Intentions
To help clients explore deeply, helpers typically rely mostly on reflection of
feelings (e.g., “You feel tense because you’re not sure how your daughter-in-law
is reacting to you”) to demonstrate that they are listening and struggling to
understand the client’s experience. Reflections are particularly helpful when
clients need encouragement to keep talking, when clients need to experience
their feelings (whether or not they are actively expressing the feelings), or when
helpers want to show support or understanding. Reflection of feelings is also a
useful way to identify possible feelings for clients who are out of touch with their
feelings. In addition, helpers can disclose about their own feelings as a softer,
more tentative way of proposing feelings that clients might have. Or helpers can
use focusing to deepen feelings.
223
Most clients respond to reflections or disclosure of feelings by talking about
their feelings. However, some clients do not, perhaps because reflections do not
direct clients to talk about their feelings. For these clients, helpers can alternate
reflecting feelings with asking open questions or probing about the feelings
(“Tell me more about how you feel when your daughter-in-law drops the baby
off”). In this way, helpers not only suggest possible feelings but also actively
encourage clients to identify and express their own feelings.
If helpers want to help the client articulate and explain their narratives or
stories, they might use restatements (e.g., “So you flunked your exam” or a
repetition of the key word 
exam
) to facilitate the discussion. When clients are
confusing, rambling, or just need to talk, restatements can serve as mirrors that
reflect back to clients what they are saying. Restatements help clients clarify and
think more deeply about what they are saying. Similarly, helpers can use open
questions and probes about thoughts to guide or focus the discussion and help
the client examine different parts of the narrative (e.g., past, present, future
thoughts; thoughts about self or other).
Throughout the session, a helper can use open questions and probes to
maintain the session’s flow (e.g., “How are you feeling about that?” “Tell me
more about that”). If clients seem stuck or are repeating the same material over
and over, helpers can use open questions and probes to ask about other aspects
of problems the client has not addressed. Using a variety of open questions and
probes helps clients explore the complexity of situations and think about things
they might not have considered.
Helpers can follow clients’ responses to open questions and probes with a
reflection of feelings or restatement to show they understand what clients have
said and to encourage them to say more. Open questions and probes request
that clients respond in a particular way, whereas reflections of feelings are a
gentler way of suggesting feelings without seeming as demanding. Restatements
and reflections shift the responsibility for initiating dialogue back to clients and
show that helpers are listening to clients. Alternating among open questions and
probes, restatements, and reflections can keep helpers from getting stuck in an
interviewer mode and can make the session seem less contrived and more
engaging.
On rare occasions, helpers ask closed questions to gather specific, important
information from clients (e.g., “Is your mother alive?” “When did you graduate
from high school?”). Helpers need to remember to use closed questions to
benefit clients rather than to satisfy their own curiosity. Before using closed
questions, then, helpers need to be clear about what they are going to do with
the information and whose needs are being met (the helpers’ or the clients’).
Generally, however, I recommend that helpers try to rephrase closed questions
into open questions and probes, restatements, or reflections of feelings.
224
Implementing the Skills of the Exploration
Stage
Helpers typically face a number of problems in trying to integrate the skills of
the exploration stage. One problem that many beginning helpers have is not
being able to facilitate exploration. Their clients go around in circles, repeating
themselves over and over rather than going deeper into their problems.
Generally, circling occurs when helpers use too many closed questions or use
restatements or reflections that are focused on someone other than the client, are
too general or vague, or do not ask about other aspects of problems. Because
they worry about being too intrusive, beginning helpers often skim the surface
of issues rather than helping clients explore deeply with the skills suggested in
this book.
Another difficulty is that beginning helpers often focus too much on the
skills and forget to attend and listen, or they might forget to be empathic and
caring. It is not enough just to use the right skills; helpers must use them in an
empathic manner to fit what clients need at the time. Even more than using the
skills, helpers need to genuinely care, feel compassion for the client, and be
present and engaged in the moment.
One way to tell whether interventions are working is to pay attention to
clients’ reactions to them. If the client is exploring and going deeper into
problems, that’s great, and you are obviously on the right track. However, if the
client becomes very quiet, passive, or does not explore, the helper should assess
what is not working. Perhaps the helper is not attending or listening, is asking
too many closed questions, is focusing on someone other than the client, or is
giving inaccurate restatements and reflections. The client might be bored,
confused, or overwhelmed with negative feelings and retreat from further
exploration. By assessing the problem, a helper can change what she or he is
doing and try different skills. It is crucial that helpers pay close attention to
client reactions to select appropriate interventions.
When the client is productively exploring, the helper fades into the
background as much as possible. The client is obviously able to work and needs
the helper just to be there supporting the work. Jung (1984) phrased this well in
talking about dream interpretation: “The greatest wisdom [a dream analyst] can
have is to disappear and let the dreamer think [the dream analyst] is doing
nothing” (p. 458). Our job as helpers is to have clients so immersed in
exploration that they do not notice our skills—the interventions should
facilitate, rather than intrude on, the process. This might involve the helper
giving head nods, being silent, and working to be empathic and to communicate
empathy.
Finally, it is important not only to observe the client to see how she or he is
225
reacting to the process but also to ask the client about their reactions (remember
that clients often hide negative reactions; see 
Chapter 2
, this volume). By
checking in with the client frequently, the helper can modify the process to
make it more suitable for the client.
The Process of the Exploration Stage
In this section, I describe several steps that helpers can use in their first session.
These steps include getting started, facilitating exploration, dealing with difficult
client situations, and developing one’s own style.
GETTING STARTED
Before the session, it is ideal for the helper to take some time to “center,” to get
in touch with current feelings and take some time to relax (use deep breathing),
put aside (bracket) other issues and concerns, and focus on being present in the
moment with the client. At the beginning of the session, the helper can also take
a deep breath and assume a helping posture that is comfortable yet professional.
The helper then introduces himself or herself to the client, explains what will
happen in the session, and describes confidentiality. Then the helper turns the
floor over to the client by asking the client what him or her to the session today
or what she or he would like to talk about today. The helper listens attentively
and allows the client to do most of the talking.
The helper can never know or be prepared for everything that will occur in
any given helping session. This lack of control is often hard for beginning
helpers who are used to doing well and mastering situations. My best advice is to
prepare by practicing the skills a lot, and in different situations, so that they
become automatic, and then go into the helping situation without a specific
agenda. In other words, the helper goes in prepared to attend and listen and
focus on the client using whatever skills come naturally given all the practice she
or he has done. In 
Chapter 19
, I focus on intakes, which is a different version of
an initial session.
FACILITATING EXPLORATION
If the client seems focused mostly on talking about ideas, stories, or narratives
without much emotional content, the helper might start by listening carefully.
When the client pauses (try not to interrupt and make sure that the client is
done talking), the helper might use a mix of restatements and open questions
and probes about thoughts to demonstrate understanding and to encourage
further clarification and exploration. If the client has difficulty continuing, the
226
helper might ask open questions and probes to encourage exploration of other
aspects of the problem. After establishing some rapport, the helper might
tentatively introduce reflections of feelings and open questions and probes about
feelings to gently help the client think about feelings.
If the client is clearly in touch with feelings and able to experience and
express them, the helper might start with reflections of feelings and open
questions and probes about feelings to help the client go deeper into the feelings
(remember to go with the cutting edge of the feelings). The helper will probably
occasionally intersperse these feeling-oriented interventions with restatements
and open questions and probes about feelings to help the client explore other
aspects of the problem.
At the end of the session, helpers might summarize what the client has said
to see whether the client has anything else to add and provide closure. For
example, a helper might say,
You’ve been talking a lot today about your feelings about your roommate. You seem
concerned that the two of you are not as close as you have been in the past. You are not sure
what you can do to fix the relationship. How does this summary fit for you?
Alternatively, helpers might ask clients to summarize (e.g., “Could you sum up
what you learned so far?”) to get a sense of how much clients have absorbed.
Ideally, summaries are a joint effort, with helpers and clients trying together to
explicate what has been learned. Sometimes, of course, summarizing is not
necessary because clients naturally move directly to insight.
CONCEPTUALIZING THE CLIENT
In addition, the helper observes the client throughout the session and begins to
formulate hypotheses about what is going on for the client. In other words, the
helper begins to conceptualize how the client got to where she or he is (e.g.,
what contributed to his or her current state) and what the helper can do to get
the client unstuck and functioning better. These observations and
conceptualizations form the basis for interventions during the insight stage.
Some questions that the helper can ask him or herself after each session:
What is the client’s problem?
What is motivating the client to seek help now?
How does the client think and feel about the problem?
In the previous editions of this volume, I talked about determining when
the client had explored enough so that the helper could know when to move
onto the insight stage. I now think that the idea of having explored enough was
somewhat misguided. Clients continue exploring throughout all three stages of
the helping process, so it is not quite right to talk about an adequate amount of
exploration. I now think a more appropriate construct is to determine whether
227
the client is ready for deeper exploration and insight. In other words, there are
sometimes windows of opportunity in which clients are open enough to go
deeper. Thus, rather than helping involving a linear process in which clients go
through exploration, then insight, and then action, it is more typical that clients
spend the majority of their time in exploration and occasionally are able to
venture deeper into insight or action and then go back to exploration.
DEALING WITH DIFFICULT CLIENT SITUATIONS
I can hear trainees asking, “But what do I do when the client won’t talk, or
when the client is too talkative, or when the client is suicidal, or when I’m
attracted to the client?” and so on. For now, I’ll ask you to hold off on the
questions and focus on developing your skills. Once you begin to master the
skills, it is time to turn to focus on difficult client situations—these are covered
in 
Chapter 19
.
DEVELOPING YOUR OWN STYLE
There is no “right” way to implement this (or any other) stage in this helping
model. Each helper has to modify the skills to fit his or her personal style, and
then modify that style to fit the needs to individual clients (all of whom have
different needs and reactions). I suggest that you try out the skills and see how
they work for you. Practice a lot. Get feedback from clients and observers.
Become a personal scientist—see what works and what does not work.
Cultural Considerations
There are a number of cultural considerations to consider when implementing
the exploration stage. First, the humanistic theory behind the exploration stage
is in tune with a Western philosophy that encourages open examination of
thoughts and feelings and emphasizes self-healing and self-actualization. Other
cultures, particularly Eastern cultures, value collectivism more than a strong
emphasis on self (Pedersen, Draguns, Lonner, & Trimble, 2002; D. W. Sue &
Sue, 1999). Clients from non-Western cultures may thus be less amenable to
exploration than to action, so the exploration stage may need to be shorter than
it would be with a Western client (note that many Western clients are also
uncomfortable exploring feelings). Helpers must be mindful of not imposing
their own values about open communication on people from other cultures. I
caution, however, that some exploration is necessary to get a firm foundation of
understanding before rushing to action. Furthermore, helpers must be careful
not to stereotype clients from other cultures or assume all people from a given
228
culture have similar values. Remember that there is more variation within a
given culture than between cultures (D. R. Atkinson, Morten, & Sue, 1998;
Pedersen, 1997).
Another important cultural consideration in the exploration stage relates to
gender. Although in general women are more comfortable expressing feelings
than men, given that men are typically socialized to hide feelings of sadness and
fear, helpers should not assume that all women will enjoy exploration and all
men will not.
A general guideline is that it is important to explore cultural differences
when these seem salient to the client. The helper can mention cultural
differences in the first session and ask about these (e.g., “I am aware that we are
from different cultural backgrounds. I wonder how that is for you?”). The helper
can also be attentive to client discomfort throughout the helping process and ask
the client whether this discomfort is due to cultural differences (e.g., “I notice
you seem uncomfortable when I probe for feelings. I wonder if opening up to a
stranger is frowned on in your family or culture?”). In addition, it can also be
helpful to ask about cultural values related to the helping process (e.g., “What is
the reaction in your family and culture to people seeking help from counselors
or helpers?”). Finally, helpers can ask clients to talk about their culture, so that
they can learn more about the experience for each client uniquely (e.g., “Tell me
about what it is like for you to be a Korean student who has just arrived in the
United States”).
Difficulties Implementing the Exploration
Stage
Here are some difficulties that beginning helpers have talked about when they
are first learning to implement the exploration stage. If you are aware of these
obstacles ahead of time, you will be more likely to cope when difficulties
inevitably arise.
It is important to remember that none of us are perfect, and even
experienced therapists have difficulties, given that helping is a human endeavor.
Indeed, my purpose in talking about these difficulties is so that novice helpers
can become aware that these difficulties are normal.
INADEQUATE ATTENDING AND LISTENING
Several factors might interfere with helpers’ ability to attend and listen
adequately to their clients. Many helpers get distracted from listening because
they are thinking about what to say next (“I wonder if I should bring up that she
229
seems sad?”) or are distracted about something unrelated to the session (e.g.,
“What’s for dinner tonight?”). Helpers sometimes judge the merits of what
clients are saying rather than listening and understanding them. One type of
judgment that is hard to avoid is evaluating clients using one’s own cultural
standards. For example, a European American, middle-class, female helper
might have difficulty listening to and understanding an upper class African
American man or a very poor Asian woman. Sympathy can be another
impediment to listening because helpers sometimes become so involved with
and feel so badly for clients that they cannot maintain objectivity; they try to
“rescue” clients instead of attending to feelings.
ASKING TOO MANY CLOSED QUESTIONS
Beginning helpers often ask too many closed questions because they feel they
need to gather all the details of a problem. Many helpers think the helping
process is similar to a medical model in which they should collect a lot of
information to diagnose the problem and provide a solution for the client.
However, in this stage the helper’s task is to aid clients in coming to their own
solutions, so there is little need to know all the details. Instead, such skills as
facilitating exploration of thoughts and feelings are important for helping clients
explore.
Some helpers ask too many questions simply because they do not have
anything better to say. These helpers do not necessarily want to hear the answers
to their questions; they just want to fill time or satisfy their curiosity. When
asking questions, it is important to clarify for whom the question is being asked
(i.e., to assist the client or to fulfill the helper’s need).
TALKING TOO MUCH
Some helpers talk too much in helping sessions. They might talk because they
are anxious, want to impress clients, or like to talk in general. However, if
helpers are talking, clients cannot talk and, hence, cannot explore their concerns.
Research has found that clients generally talk about 60% to 70% of the time
(Hill, 1978; Hill, Carter, & O’Farrell, 1983). In contrast, in nonhelping
situations, each person in an interaction ideally talks about 50% of the time;
therefore, it can be difficult for beginning helpers to adjust to listening more
than talking.
NOT ALLOWING SILENCE
One of the most daunting tasks for beginning helpers is to cope with silence.
Trainees often rush to fill voids in sessions out of fear that clients are bored,
anxious, critical, or stuck. Rushing to fill voids can result in superficial and
230
unhelpful comments. Helpers should try to understand their fears about silence
in sessions, asking themselves what concerns they have (e.g., not appearing
competent, not helping the client). Once they figure out these concerns, they
can work on these fears outside of sessions, rather than rushing to fill silences in
sessions.
FEELING AN URGE TO DISCLOSE TOO MUCH
One of the biggest problems beginning helpers have is the urge to disclose too
much. Because client issues are often similar to their own, beginning helpers
want to share their experiences with their clients. It seems natural to disclose and
tell one’s stories, as one would with friends. Helpers also may want help for
themselves and may be distracted by their own problems while listening to
clients. It can be difficult to listen to someone else’s issues when one is going
through the same thing. For example, beginning helpers in their early 20s often
have difficulty listening to students their own age talk about identity issues,
relationship difficulties, problems with parents, and plans for the future because
helpers have these same problems. Beginning helpers who are older might have
difficulty listening to problems about parenting and aging. Adopting the
professional identity of a helper who listens but does not disclose much is a
major and challenging shift in perspective for beginning helpers. However,
because inappropriate self-disclosure can be detrimental and can hinder the
therapeutic relationship, helpers need to learn to restrain themselves and only
disclose for the client’s benefit.
GIVING TOO MUCH (OR PREMATURE) ADVICE
Beginning helpers often rush into giving advice. They feel pressured to provide
answers, fix problems, rescue clients, or have perfect solutions. Many clients and
beginning helpers are under the misguided notion that helpers have a
responsibility to provide solutions to problems. Giving clients answers or
solutions is often detrimental because clients have not come to the solutions on
their own and therefore cannot own them. Furthermore, when given answers,
clients do not learn how to solve future problems without depending on other
people. Clients most often need a sounding board or someone to listen to them
think through their problem or help them figure out how to solve their
problems, rather than someone telling them what to do. It is critical to realize
that the need to provide answers often originates in the helper’s insecurity and
desire to help, which are normal feelings at the start of learning helping skills.
It is important, however, to recognize that some clients 
do
 want answers
from helpers and do not want to explore. It is sometimes appropriate to move
relatively quickly to the action stage with such clients. Sometimes such clients
will be more eager to explore after they have made specific changes in their lives;
231
other clients, however, just want changes without deep exploration and
understanding. Helpers can educate clients about the benefits of coming to their
own solutions after a thorough exploration of their problems, feelings, and
situation, but helpers need to be responsive to client’s preferences and needs in
terms of exploration versus action.
BEING “BUDDIES”
Sometimes beginning helpers err by acting like “buddies” with clients instead of
being helpers. The role of helper necessitates providing a connected yet clearly
defined relationship to maintain objectivity and offer maximum assistance.
Being a buddy can be limiting because helpers might choose interventions to
make clients like them rather than to help clients change. For example, Sam, a
beginning helper, began every session by talking with his client, Tom, about
recent sporting events. Tom responded enthusiastically to talking about sports
but was reluctant to discuss more personal issues. Sam avoided changing the
topic because he wanted to maintain a friendly connection with Tom.
Unfortunately, because of his desire to be buddies, Sam was not able to help
Tom explore his personal issues.
DISCOURAGING INTENSE EXPRESSION OF AFFECT
Beginning helpers sometimes feel awkward when clients express intense affect,
such as despair, intense sadness, or strong anger (especially if the anger is
directed toward the helper). Sometimes helpers are uncomfortable with negative
feelings because they do not allow themselves to feel their own negative feelings.
They may deny or defend against their internal “demons.” For these helpers,
hearing clients’ negative feelings can be stressful. Sometimes helpers feel a need
to make clients feel better immediately because they do not want their clients to
suffer. They mistakenly think that if clients do not talk about their feelings, the
feelings go away. They might be afraid to have clients get into the negative
feelings because they feel inadequate to help. Guilty feelings might emerge for
helpers if their interventions result in clients crying. These helpers err on the side
of keeping things “light” or minimizing feelings so they do not have to face
“tough” situations in which they feel helpless. Recently, an attractive adolescent
client told her helper she felt totally fat and ugly. She expressed disgust with her
body and astonishment that anyone would want to be around her. A helper who
is uncomfortable with intense negative feelings might give the socially
sanctioned response of reassuring this client that she is attractive and suggesting
that her feelings are not accurate. Ironically, this response would negate the
client’s feelings and could make the client feel worse because she would feel
angry and misunderstood.
Now might be a good time to ask yourself how you feel about overt
232
expressions of affect. What do you instinctively want to do when someone
begins to sob? Most of us feel an urge to get the person to stop crying and to feel
better. How do you react when someone is acting hostile and angry toward you?
Many of us get defensive or react with hostility. Helpers need to be aware of
their tendencies to respond in these types of situations so they can practice
other, more therapeutic ways, to respond. The exploration skills can be
particularly valuable tools for helping clients stay with their intense emotions.
DISSOCIATING AND PANICKING
Sometimes novice helpers become so anxious about their performance that they
feel like they are outside their bodies observing themselves, instead of being fully
present and interactive in the helping session. At the worst, these helpers become
completely frozen and cannot say anything. These experiences can frighten
helpers, who then panic and tell themselves they can never be good helpers. In
fact, anxiety is often more of a problem than lack of skills, but fortunately I have
seen many students overcome their anxiety and become gifted helpers.
FEELING DISCOURAGED ABOUT YOUR ABILITY TO BE A
HELPER
At about this point in the course, some students say they feel like they are
getting worse at being able to be a helper rather than getting better. They are so
focused on each skill and on watching everything they do that it is hard to
perform at all. An analogy can be drawn to learning to ski. When you first learn
to ski, you are conscious of every little thing you do. Like beginning skiers,
beginning helpers focus on each thing they do in the helping encounter. In
learning helping skills, helpers practice the individual skills (and often unlearn
habits that were not facilitative to helping) and then put all the skills together.
Although difficult initially, it often begins to feel easier when you put them all
together. Students often feel better after practicing for a few more weeks,
although some students come to realize that they do not want to be helpers.
Coping Strategies for Managing Difficulties
For most students, it is possible to overcome these difficulties! I offer several
coping strategies in this section, primarily based on findings of research with
beginning helpers (Williams, Judge, Hill, & Hoffman, 1997). I hope all helpers
find some strategies they can use.
PRACTICE THE SKILLS
233
First and foremost, helpers can practice the helping skills taught in this book.
Over and over, students in the past have said the practice is what helped them
learn (see also Chui et al., 2013; Jackson et al., 2013; Spangler et al., 2013).
The skills can be compared to tools in a toolbox; helpers learn about the
various tools available for different tasks. Some tools work better than others for
some helpers and some clients. It is important that helpers have many tools (e.g.,
helping skills and methods for managing anxiety) in their toolbox.
Before sessions with clients, helpers can role-play using specific helping
skills. Helpers can also role-play the mechanics of sessions, such as starting and
stopping the session, responding to silence, and dealing with anger directed
toward the helper. By using role-plays with supportive partners (e.g., classmates),
helpers are more likely to learn the skills at a comfortable pace. The more
helpers practice and pay attention to what they do well and how they can
improve, the better and more comfortable they are likely to become in helping
sessions.
DEEP BREATHING
One way helpers can manage anxiety during sessions is to breathe deeply from
the diaphragm instead of taking short breaths from high in the chest. To
determine whether you breathe from the diaphragm, put your hand over your
stomach. When you breathe, you should feel your hand move in and out. Deep
breathing serves several functions. First, it allows one to relax. When the
diaphragm is relaxed, it is harder to be anxious physiologically. Second, taking a
deep breath gives helpers a moment to think about what they want to say.
Helpers can take time to focus their energy instead of being distracted by
thinking about what to say in the next intervention. Third, deep breathing gives
clients a chance to think and consider whether they have anything else to say.
FOCUS ON THE CLIENT
All too often, beginning helpers are so concerned with their own behavior that
they cannot listen attentively to clients. By shifting focus to be more concerned
with the client than with themselves, helpers can listen more attentively
(Williams et al., 1997). The goal is to facilitate clients in exploring feelings, not
for helpers to show off how much they understand clients. By focusing on the
client and attempting to immerse oneself in the client’s world, many helpers
forget about their anxiety.
POSITIVE SELF-TALK
We all talk to ourselves as we do things. We sometimes say positive things like “I
can do this” or negative things like “I think I am going to panic.” Some people
234
have called this the “inner game” because it occurs beneath the surface. Positive
self-talk has a positive influence on performance in helping sessions, whereas
negative self-talk has a negative influence on performance (see Nutt-Williams &
Hill, 1996), so helpers need to be attentive to what they are saying to
themselves. Helpers can practice using positive self-talk before sessions so they
have positive sentences ready to use to coach themselves. Alternatively, helpers
can write down positive self-statements (e.g., “I know the skills,” “I am
competent”) on index cards and glance at them before or during practice
sessions.
OBSERVING MODELS
Watching skilled helpers in helping sessions is an excellent way to observe skills
being used appropriately. The skills come alive when one sees them
demonstrated by experts. Although reading about theories and skills is
important, imagining how they come across is hard unless models are available.
Bandura (1969) showed the effectiveness of watching a model as one step in the
learning process. I recommend watching many different helpers to illustrate that
there are many ways and styles of helping (especially see this book’s
accompanying DVD, 
Helping Skills in Practice: A Three-Stage Model
 and the
new one on dreams, 
Dream Work in Practice,
 both published by the American
Psychological Association).
IMAGERY
Through sports psychology, we know that when athletes have the requisite skills,
practice through imagery can be a beneficial addition to actual practice (Suinn,
1985). Helpers can imagine themselves using appropriate attending behaviors
and helping skills in different situations. For example, a beginning helper who
feels uncomfortable with silence might close her eyes and visualize herself in a
session with a quiet client. She might imagine herself sitting comfortably with
the client and allowing the silence to occur. She might also visualize breaking the
silence after a period of time by asking how the client is feeling.
Example of the Exploration Stage
The following is a sample of an interchange in which the helper facilitates client
exploration through an integration of the exploration skills. This example is not
meant to be perfect but rather a realistic example of what might occur with a
beginning helper. After each helper response, I label the skills used and give an
explanation of what the helper was trying to accomplish. As you go through the
235
example, cover the helper’s responses and formulate your response first. You can
then see how similar the helper’s response is to yours and determine which is
most effective and which you would be most comfortable trying.
Helper:
 
Hi! My name is Sandra. We have 30 minutes today to
explore whatever you would like to talk about. (The helper
intends to set limits by providing information about what the
client can expect from the session.)
Client:
 
Okay.
Helper:
 
So, where would you like to begin? (The helper uses an open
question to focus.)
Client:
 
I’m feeling anxious about a paper I have to write. I always
end up waiting until the last minute to begin, and then I panic
because I don’t have enough time to write it. I know I do this,
but I can’t seem to stop myself.
Helper:
 
You’re really upset with yourself. (The helper gives a
reflection to help the client experience feelings.)
Client:
 
Yeah, I’m worried that I’m going to ruin my chances of
getting into graduate school because I’m not doing as well in
my courses as I should be.
Helper:
 
You feel scared because your current behaviors might limit
your future goals. (The helper gives another reflection because
she wants to stay with the feelings and help the client explore
further.)
Client:
 
Exactly, I really think I could succeed in graduate school,
and I know I need a graduate degree to do what will make me
happy. I’m so worried that I’ll stay in this rut and ruin
everything I’ve worked for.
Helper:
 
Tell me about the last time you had a paper to write. Take
me through what went on inside your head. (The helper wants
information about what goes on and wants to get the client to
talk more concretely about the problem, so uses open questions
and probes about thoughts.)
Client:
 
Well, actually, I have a paper due Friday, and I haven’t
started it yet. I’ve gathered all the material I need, and I’ve
taken notes on the books, but I haven’t written anything. And
I’ve been up late several nights already this week, so I’m short
on sleep.
Helper:
 
I can hear the panic in your voice. (The helper reflects
nonverbal behavior to help the client recognize feelings.)
Client:
 
Yeah, I’m scared that I won’t be able to pull it off this time.
Usually I can just pull an all-nighter and get it done, but it
236
seems too big this time. The paper’s supposed to be 20 pages.
Helper:
 
What are your plans for this evening? (The helper wants the
client to get more specific about the situation to provide a
clearer picture and again focuses by using an open question
about action.)
Client:
 
Well, I just want to go home and sleep. I just don’t want to
do it.
Helper:
 
Is anything else going on in your life that makes it difficult
for you to work on the paper right now? (The helper notes that
the client seems stuck and thinks that perhaps the situation is
more complicated than the client has expressed. Hence, the
helper uses an open question to ask about other issues.)
Client:
 
It’s funny you should ask about that. I just had a big fight
with my boyfriend, and I feel very upset. He wants to get
married and have kids right away, but I really want to go to
graduate school. But if I go to graduate school, I will have to
move away, at least for a while.
Helper:
 
So you feel conflicted between being with your boyfriend
and going on to school. (The helper feels pleased that the client
has opened up about other parts of the situation. Because the
helper wants to get the client to talk about her feelings about
this conflict, the helper uses a reflection that focuses on both
parts of the problem.)
Client:
 
That’s really true. It just feels like everything has to go his
way. Just because he’s already finished his school and is
working, he wants me to be done too.
Helper:
 
I wonder if you’re somewhat confused. (The helper’s intent
is to identify feelings through reflection, but the helper has
inappropriately projected her confusion onto the client because
she is in a similar situation.)
Client:
 
No, not really. As I think about it, I feel angry. I shouldn’t
have to give up my career for his. My mother did that, and she
is very unhappy. She never even learned how to drive. She did
everything for her kids, and now that we have all left home,
she’s depressed and lonesome. I think I want to have a career,
but I don’t know. I don’t know if it’s fair, and I don’t want to
risk losing my relationship with my boyfriend.
Helper:
 
(in a softer voice) It sounds like you are really torn up
inside. (The helper realizes that the last intervention was
inaccurate and shifts focus back to the client’s feelings by using
a reflection.)
Client:
 
(cries softly) Maybe I can’t write the paper because I’m so
237
confused about this fight with my boyfriend and what’s going
on with my mother.
Helper:
 
(The helper is silent for 30 seconds to give the client a
chance to experience her feelings of sadness.)
Client:
 
(cries and then blows her nose)
Helper:
 
(softly) I’m sure this is very difficult for you to talk about.
(The helper wants to support the client and gives approval-
reassurance.)
Client:
 
Yeah, it sure is. What do you think I should do?
Helper:
 
Well, I think you should go talk to your instructor and see if
you can get out of writing the paper tomorrow. Then I think
you need to talk to your boyfriend and try to work things out.
Perhaps you should encourage your mom to get counseling.
(The helper inappropriately gets caught up in the client’s
request for help and gives direct guidance about what client
should do.)
Client:
 
Oh. (silence) Well, I don’t know. (The client stops exploring
and becomes quiet.)
Helper:
 
Sorry, I got carried away with too much advice. How do
you feel about a career? (The helper realizes the client has
stopped exploring and so apologizes briefly. She then tries to go
back to the exploration by using an open question to return to
the last major issue they were discussing before the client got
stuck.)
Client:
 
(Client continues to explore.)
What Do You Think?
How would you have handled the situation as the helper in the extended
example?
How do you explain the client’s being able to gain insight (i.e., “Maybe I
can’t write the paper because of my fight with my boyfriend and what’s
going on with my mother”) in the example when the helper did not
provide interpretations?
Discuss whether you think helpers need to go on to the insight stage or
whether the exploration stage is necessary and sufficient for clients’
change.
Is it possible for clients to explore too much?
Check the obstacles you are likely to face in your development as a helper:
____ inadequate attending and listening
238
____ asking too many closed questions
____ talking too much
____ giving too much or premature advice
____ being “buddies”
____ not allowing silence
____ inappropriately self-disclosing
____ discouraging intense expression of affect
____ dissociating and panicking
____ feeling inadequate
Identify strategies you might use to cope with obstacles as a helper:
____ developing compassion
____ be supportive and listen attentively
____ practice the skills
____ observing models
____ imagery
____ role-playing
____ deep breathing
____ focusing on the client
____ positive self-talk
239
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Silence in Therapy
Citation:
 Hill, C. E., Thompson, B. J., & Ladany, N. (2003). Therapist use of silence in
therapy: A survey. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 59,
 513–524. doi:10.1002/jclp.10155
Rationale:
 Silence is a difficult skill for many beginning therapists, who may feel
uncomfortable with knowing when and how to use it. The theoretical literature provides
little guidance for beginning therapists, given the contradictory advice ranging from
suggestions that silence can be used to communicate tender concern to warning that silence
can convey cruel inhumanity. Likewise, the empirical literature suggests that silence has
been associated with both positive outcomes (e.g., client perceptions of rapport, increased
client involvement in the session) and negative outcomes (e.g., perceptions of therapist as
unempathic, dropout). The current study is a follow-up to a qualitative study conducted by
the same authors (Ladany, Hill, Thompson, & O’Brien, 2004) in which they found that 12
experienced, mostly psychodynamic therapists used silence in various ways: to convey
empathy, facilitate reflection, and gain time for themselves to think about what they
wanted to say. These therapists thought that a solid therapeutic relationship was a
prerequisite to using silence. Hill et al. wanted to replicate Ladany et al.’s (2004) qualitative
findings with a larger, more theoretically diverse sample.
Method:
 Eighty-one therapists from a range of theoretical orientations, most of whom
were in full-time practice, completed a survey. The survey, which was developed based on
the results of the Ladany et al. (2004) study, asked about a silence event (which could have
ranged from several seconds to a few minutes in which neither the client nor the therapist
was speaking) in a recent session with an adult client in individual therapy. They were
asked to describe the event, indicate their reasons for using silence, report their thoughts
and feelings during the silence, and judge the consequences of the silence on the therapy
process and outcome.
Interesting Findings:
Ninety-three percent of therapists reported a recent silence event, most of which had occurred within the previous
4 weeks, were used intentionally, were less than 1 minute, occurred in the middle of sessions and in the middle
phase of long-term treatment, and did not involve an explanation of the rationale for using silence.
Therapists most often used silence to facilitate reflection, encourage responsibility, facilitate experiencing of
feelings, not interrupt the flow, and convey empathy and support. They rarely used silence to create productive
anxiety, to avoid a power struggle, to put up a shield, or because of anxiety or distraction.
During silence events, therapists reported that they were most often focusing on what was going on with the
client, observing the client, thinking about the therapy, and conveying interest. They were rarely trying to
minimize client reactions or daydreaming.
Therapists estimated that they generally intentionally used silence with approximately a third of their clients, with
12% never using silence and 4% using it with all clients. Of those therapists who used silence, it was used on
average once every other session, with each silence lasting under 1 minute.
Therapists indicated that they were most likely to use silence when clients were actively in a problem-solving
mode. They avoided using silence when they thought clients might misunderstand the silence, the client was
psychotic or paranoid, there was a poor therapeutic alliance, the client was exhibiting danger to self or other, or
the client had a history of using silence as a punishment.
Therapists typically indicated that the silence event was helpful given that it enhanced the therapeutic relationship
and the therapeutic work during the session.
240
Conclusions:
Therapists are thoughtful and judicious about using silence.
Therapists seemed to have a great awareness that silence can be misunderstood and thus needs to be used with
caution.
Therapists were internally active during silence. They were thinking about their clients and the therapy process.
Therapists would not use silence if they thought clients could not handle it.
Implications for Therapy:
Silence can be helpful in circumscribed situations but can also create misunderstanding if not used at the right
time.
Therapists may need to educate clients about why they use silence (e.g., to facilitate clients going deeper into their
feelings).
Therapists may need to check with clients about how they experienced the silence.
Therapists need to think carefully about their intentions for using silence.
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
241
242
Daring as it is to investigate the unknown, even more so is it to question the known.
—Kaspar
Juan had been to a helper who taught him relaxation, assertiveness skills, and time
management skills. He was more organized, relaxed, and better able to carry on a
conversation, but he still felt empty inside. He could not understand why he felt life had
no meaning. He went to a different helper, who helped him explore his feelings about
himself and his childhood. Through the new helper’s gentle challenges and
interpretations, he came to understand that his anxiety and loneliness had origins in his
mother’s death and his father sending him to live with his grandparents when he was 2
years old. Although his grandparents were very loving, he had always felt that he was
imposing on them. He realized that in social situations, he distanced himself so that
others would not have the chance to reject him and he could not be hurt. He lived his
life as a defense against being abandoned again. In sessions, he worried that he was
boring and that his helper would rather be elsewhere. Through talking about their
relationship, Juan came to understand that his feelings were a transference onto the
helper of his feelings about his parents abandoning him. Once he understood more
about himself and could accept that the helper indeed cared about him, Juan began to
feel more secure and. He also was able to see that his grandparents loved him and had
chosen to raise him. Juan felt better because he now had some explanations for his
feelings and behaviors.
D
uring the exploration stage, helpers work to establish a therapeutic
relationship with clients, help clients talk about their problems and tell their
narratives, and help them experience feelings related to their problems. For some
clients, this supportive, nonjudgmental listening is all that is needed to help
them get unblocked and able to think about how they want to be and what they
want to do about their problems. Their actualization potential is released, and
they become creative and active self-healers and problem solvers. They no longer
“need” outside intervention, although they might enjoy sharing their thoughts
and feelings with a good helper and benefit from a deeper examination of their
concerns to help them grow and develop.
Unfortunately, not all clients can progress on their own after exploring their
243
thoughts and feelings. Some clients get stuck and need someone to help them
get past obstacles and defenses that protect them against internal pain and
external harm. When painful events occur, these clients often compartmentalize
experiences in their minds so that they do not have to think about them, making
it difficult to integrate these experiences into their lives. Other clients have a
hard time understanding the origins and consequences of their feelings and
behaviors. Some clients have done things a certain way for so long that they
never question their actions or think about the reasons for what they do. Some
clients have been so damaged by their parents that they cannot see the world as a
safe place. Other clients are eager to learn more about themselves and their
motivations but need an outside perspective to help them move beyond their
blind spots. For these situations, it is important for helpers to use insight skills.
Of course, not all clients want or need insight. Some will just need
exploration, others will just need action. Likewise, some helpers will not feel
comfortable using insight skills because they do not fit their personal style.
However, it is good for helpers to be aware of the insight skills and practice
them so that they can use them if needed.
The insight stage builds on the foundation of the exploration stage. Going
beyond exploration to insight and understanding requires a deep sense of
empathy and belief in clients. In this stage, helpers see beyond defenses and
inappropriate behaviors and help clients come to accept and understand
themselves more deeply.
The helper’s role in the insight stage involves coaching the client to gain
insight rather than the helper being the one who provides the insight. Often,
clients are capable of coming up with their own insights when helpers provide
the appropriate atmosphere and ask thoughtful questions. In fact, clients often
feel better about insights they have attained on their own rather than
interpretations that are foisted on them. Some clients, however, want more
input from helpers, and such input can be helpful if offered in a collaborative,
tentative, empathic manner.
What Is Insight?
When clients gain insight, they see things from a new perspective, are able to
make connections between things, or have an understanding of why things
happen as they do (Castonguay & Hill, 2007; Elliott et al., 1994). For a few
clients, gaining insight is like a light bulb going on, a sudden feeling of “aha!”
For example, after talking about it, Yinyin might suddenly realize her strong
reactions to her boyfriend not wanting to go to a party stem from her rarely
having gotten her way as a child. Her anger may be due to perceived past
244
injustices and a belief that her boyfriend is doing the same thing to her that her
parents did. For most clients, however, insight does not occur suddenly. Rogers
(1942) noted that “insight comes gradually, bit by bit, as the individual develops
sufficient psychological strength to endure new perspectives” (p. 177). For
example, Robert might slowly, and only after several challenges and
interpretations, come to realize that his indecision over his career choice might
be due to conflicts with his wife. Hill, Knox, et al. (2007) talked about this
range of insights as gold nuggets versus gold dust—sometimes clients are lucky
and hit a gold nugget of insight, but more often there is a smattering of gold
dust as they work hard to gain insight over time.
INTELLECTUAL VERSUS EMOTIONAL INSIGHT
Insight typically must be emotional as well as intellectual to lead to action (Reid
& Finesinger, 1952; Singer, 1970). In other words, the insight must be deeply
felt as well as cognitively understood. Intellectual insight provides an objective
explanation for a problem (e.g., “I am anxious because of my Oedipal conflict”),
but it has a barren, sterile quality that keeps clients stuck in understandings that
lead nowhere (Gelso & Fretz, 2001). Many of us know people who can give a
comprehensive history of their psychological problems and the sources of their
difficulties but who cannot express their feelings fully. Emotional insight, in
contrast, connects affect to intellect and creates a sense of personal involvement
and responsibility (Gelso & Fretz, 2001). For example, when Nioud realizes that
his conflict with his wife over having her own interests is really due to the hurt
he felt because his father did not spend much time with him, he must also feel
that hurt deep inside himself. This emotional and intellectual insight might help
Nioud decide that it is okay for his wife to have some interests apart from him.
Nioud might start thinking that he needs to develop his own interests and might
begin to question why he allows his whole identity to be based on his wife. The
deep insight Nioud achieves would not have been possible if he had been given
an interpretation that sounded right “on paper” but was not something he could
acknowledge as his own or feel at a deep level.
A client who understands only intellectually that she screams at her
boyfriend because she is angry with her father is not likely to achieve the same
kind of growth and change that emotional insight engenders. If this client were
to experience the feelings associated with this intellectual understanding (e.g.,
how badly she feels about transferring negative feelings toward her mostly
innocent boyfriend, and how deeply frustrated she is that her father continues to
have a negative influence on her life), she might develop the motivation to
change her behavior toward her boyfriend (which then might help her gain
more insight about the problem). Emotional insight is typically easier for clients
to attain when they are fully and actively involved in the helping process. They
245
need to be personally involved and eager to experience their emotions and to try
to understand themselves.
WHY IS INSIGHT NECESSARY?’
According to Frank and Frank (1991), the need to make sense of events is as
fundamental to human beings as the need for food or water. Similarly,
Wampold (2001) suggested that people need an explanation, sometimes any
explanation, to make sense out of their lives. We need to understand why things
happen around us to make sense of our world and to predict what will happen
next.
Frank and Frank suggested that people evaluate internal and external
stimuli in view of their assumptions about what is dangerous, safe, important,
good, bad, and so on. These assumptions become organized into sets of highly
structured, complex, and interacting values, expectations, and images of self that
are closely related to emotional states and feelings. These psychological
structures shape, and in turn are shaped by, a person’s perceptions and
behaviors. Frank and Frank thus viewed insight as a reworking of the past that
leads to the discovery of new facts, as well as a recognition of new relationships
between previously known facts and a reevaluation of their significance.
Similarly, Freud (1923/1963) believed that psychological problems are
developmental and that resolution can only be reached by obtaining insight into
the problems. He noted that symptoms generally make sense in the context of
past and present life experiences. For example, Jenna’s fear of public speaking
made sense in the light of her reluctance to achieve and possibly outdo her
passive and depressed mother. Her insight that she had been limiting herself to
placate her mother led her to understand why she had made the choices she did
throughout her life. This understanding gave her a sense that she could make
different choices in the future.
Frankl (1959) emphasized the importance of having a life philosophy to
transcend suffering and find meaning in existence. He argued that our greatest
human need is to find a core of meaning and a purpose in life. Frankl’s
experience in a German concentration camp bears out his theory: Although he
could not change his life situation, he was able to change the meaning he
attached to this experience. By drawing on the strengths of his Jewish tradition,
he was able to survive and help others survive.
Clients’ interpretations of events determine subsequent behaviors and
feelings, as well as their willingness to work on certain topics in a helping
setting. For example, John, an 18-year-old client, is reluctant to learn to drive. If
he believes his reluctance to drive is due to fears about having a major accident
given that a friend was recently killed in an accident, John might say that fear is
the main problem. If, however, John believes the fear is due to a reluctance to
246
grow up and become independent and leave his depressed mother, he might feel
more of a need to work on separation issues. Helpers need to learn how clients
currently construe events (both consciously and unconsciously) so they can help
them develop more adaptive constructs.
For many clients, it is ideal to attain insight before moving on to action. If
clients did whatever helpers told them to do, with no understanding of or
explanation for why these actions were important or fit into their worldview and
values, they would not have a framework to guide their behavior when new
problems develop. Clients would be dependent on others to tell them what to
do as each new problem arose. In contrast, if clients learn how to think about
their problems, they are more likely in the future to explore their problems,
achieve understanding, and decide what they would like to do differently on
their own. In effect, helpers are teaching clients a problem-solving approach. In
the example of the reluctant driver, if John comes to understand that his
reluctance is due to anxiety and guilt about leaving his sick mother, he can make
an informed decision that fits his values about what he wants to do about his
mother. Hence, insight is especially important in the helping process.
Theoretical Background: Psychoanalytic
Theory
Psychoanalytic theory began with Sigmund Freud and has evolved through
many subsequent theorists (notably Adler, Jung, and Sullivan). Over the time
that psychoanalytic theory has existed, many changes have been made in the
theory (Mitchell, 1993), with current emphasis given to the importance of the
relationship between the therapist and client (e.g., Safran & Muran, 2000;
Strupp & Binder, 1984; Wachtel, 2008).
I have often found that students are quite disdainful of Freud when they
first take helping skills classes. Many have heard in introductory psychology
classes that Freud is outdated and irrelevant. Yet as students progress through
training, and particularly as they become master therapists, they often have
increasing awareness of the richness and relevance of psychodynamic theory as a
way of thinking about the complexity of human nature—people really are
incredibly complicated and full of contradictions. So I encourage you to have an
open mind about psychoanalytic theory and learn to think deeply about human
dynamics.
Psychoanalysis presents a complex, rich description of the development of
personality and treatment. In this section, the focus is on a few important
aspects of psychoanalytic theory that are currently salient and applicable to the
helping skills model. I encourage interested readers to explore other sources to
247
learn more about other psychoanalytic theories (e.g., Basch, 1980; Gelso &
Hayes, 1998; Greenson, 1967; Mahler, 1968; Maroda, 2010; McWilliams,
2004; Mitchell, 1993; Summers & Barber, 2010).
PSYCHODYNAMIC THEORY OF PERSONALITY
Freud (1940/1949) suggested that all children progress through stages of
development. In the first stage, energy is focused on oral (eating) satisfaction,
first with sucking and then with biting. As the child has to learn to control
urination and defecation, energy shifts to the anal region, both with retaining
and expelling. Then Freud suggested that a latent period occurs, in which the
child is more free for other pursuits. As the child develops further, energy shifts
to the genital region and children become attracted to parents of the opposite
sex. The resolution of this conflict (the Oedipal conflict for boys, the Electra
complex for girls) leads children to give up their fixation on the opposite-sex
parent and instead identify and ally with the parent of the same sex and take on
the morals and values of society. As children go through each stage, they can
become stuck if they are either deprived (e.g., given too little to eat) or
overindulged (e.g., given too much to eat). When people have difficulty, they
tend to regress back to a stage in which they felt gratified (e.g., regress to
overeating).
Looking back over 100 years from a different culture, it is clear that Freud’s
developmental sequence was heavily culturally bound and is not completely
relevant for the present day. But rather than dismissing it out of hand, it is
useful to recognize that psychological developmental sequences are important.
Indeed, many theorists since Freud have built on these theories and offered
different stage models (e.g., Erikson, Kohlberg, Mahler). So rather than focus on
specifically whether there is an oral and anal stage, the message to take away is
that we develop through different stages in our lives and that interactions with
others during those stages has a huge impact. Another important notion here is
that we can be either overindulged or underindulged at each of several
developmental stages and that these early experiences influence us in later life.
Furthermore, Freud postulated that at birth, infants are totally governed by
the 
id,
 or primitive urges that seek immediate gratification. As the child
develops, the 
ego
 forms to help the child delay gratification and negotiate with
the outside world. As the child develops further and internalizes society’s morals
and values through resolution of the Oedipal or Electra conflict, she or he
develops a 
superego
 (which involves both morals and ideals). Throughout life,
people struggle with conflicts among primitive impulses, the moderating ego,
and societal restrictions and ideals. For example, Maria continually struggled
with her weight. On the one hand, she wanted to eat whatever and whenever she
wanted (influence of the id), but on the other hand, she relentlessly scolded
248
herself for her lack of control (harsh superego) and compromised by allowing
herself a small dessert every night if she had exercised during the day (the ego at
work). It is important to remember that the id, ego, and superego are metaphors
rather than actual physiological structures that can be found in the brain or
body. Using these metaphors helps us tell a story of how and why people
struggle to cope with life.
A related Freudian concept is consciousness. Freud divided awareness into
the unconscious, preconscious, and conscious. He postulated that the largest
percentage of mental activity is unconscious, or not available to immediate
awareness. Some energy is in the preconscious, where a person can access some
thoughts and experiences by attending to them. And a small amount of energy is
readily available to conscious awareness. Freud proposed that most people act
out of unconscious motivations and are unaware why they act the way they do.
To illustrate the power of the unconscious, think about a recent time you did
something that seemed out of character for you (e.g., became suddenly angry,
acted differently from your values)—these feelings and behaviors may have been
motivated by unconscious feelings.
Yet another important Freudian construct relates to 
defenses.
 Not everything
goes smoothly in the development of personality. Because children do not
receive everything they need to develop psychologically, they cope by developing
defense mechanisms (see 
Exhibit 11.1
 for a list of defenses). Freud (1933) and
more recent psychoanalysts have theorized that defense mechanisms are
unconscious methods for dealing with anxiety through denial or distortion of
reality. Everyone has defense mechanisms because we all have to cope with the
anxiety inherent in living. Defense mechanisms can be healthy if used
appropriately and in moderation, but repeated and frequent use of defense
mechanisms is problematic.
249
EXHIBIT 11.1
Defenses
For example, Antonio has marital problems because he 
projects
 onto his wife
that she is dominating like his mother. He is unable to see that her questions are
motivated by concern rather than by a desire to control (of course she has issues
of her own that play out in the relationship). He is afraid of telling his wife
about his anger at her for being dominating, and so he 
displaces
 his feelings by
kicking the dog. If asked about his anger, he 
denies
 it and 
regresses
 to acting like a
whiny 7-year-old who expects to be punished. These defense mechanisms
protect Antonio from the anxiety that comes from being aware of how he felt
toward his mother when he was a child and from learning how to deal with his
feelings more appropriately to the current situation with his wife.
A more current way of understanding the unconscious dynamics or the
interplay between the id, ego, and superego is to consider the centrality of
conflict in human functioning (Summers & Barber, 2010). From this
perspective, all mental life can be conceptualized as inner turmoil arising from
competing wishes, fears, and prohibitions, along with the attempts to resolve
these contradictions is an acceptable way. Thus, we all have intense drives and
impulses. Freud identified sex and aggression as the major drives, but Summers
and Barber added attachment, bonding, mastery, and affiliation. These wishes
can be in conflict (e.g., between love and aggression, between the wish to be
close and the wish for independence), or the conflict can be between wishes and
the outside world (e.g., the wish to be close vs. the lack of a suitable partner).
The classic formulation is that the wish (impulse, drive), prohibition (fear or
conscience), and defense (means of coping) all work together to lead to a
compromise, which can be either negative, as in a symptom, or positive, as in
250
creative expression. Thus, psychodynamic therapists look at the urges, their
imagined consequences, and the associated fantasies, thoughts, and feelings, with
the idea that examining this conflict openly can lead to compromise.
ATTACHMENT THEORY
Another important analytic construct is attachment, which has been the focus of
much recent theorizing and research (e.g., Bowlby, 1969, 1988; Cassidy, &
Shaver, 2008; Meyer & Pilkonis, 2002). Bowlby developed attachment theory
to explain the behavioral and emotional responses that keep young children in
close proximity to caregivers. According to Bowlby, infants are born with the
ability to form attachment bonds with others. When facing threat, the
attachment system becomes activated, and the infant seeks proximity and
protection from the attachment figure.
In optimal attachment, caregivers provide a comfortable presence that
reduces anxiety and promotes a feeling of security. From this secure base, infants
feel a sense of security that allows them to “explore the environment curiously
and confidently and to engage rewardingly with other people” (Mikulincer &
Shaver, 2007, p. 21).
Unfortunately, the attachment system is disrupted when the attachment
figure is unavailable, unresponsive, or ineffective in soothing the needy infant
(Mikulincer & Shaver, 2007). When this happens, the child feels insecure and
worries about whether she or he can rely on others, deal with emotions, or is
worthy of care. If the caretaker repeatedly withdraws when the child seeks
proximity, the child learns not to rely on others for help when threatened. In
contrast, if the attachment figure is unpredictable, the child typically tries even
harder to get a response from the caregiver.
Repeated experiences with attachment figures become organized into
internal working models, which are mental representations of self, others, and
relationships (Bowlby, 1969, 1988). These internal working models help people
predict what they can expect from others, whether others will respond when
needed, and whether the world is safe.
Through an observational study of young children, Ainsworth, Blehar,
Waters, and Wall (1978) found three patterns of attachment: secure, anxious–
ambivalent, and anxious–avoidant. Infants who were securely attached explored
freely in their mother’s presence, showed some anxiety upon separation, and
were easily comforted when reunited. Infants with an anxious–ambivalent
pattern were excessively anxious and angry, and they tended to cling to their
mothers to an extent that interfered with their exploration. They were also
distressed during separation and were difficult to comfort on reunion with
mothers. Anxious–avoidant infants showed minimal interest in their mothers
and displayed minimal affect throughout the observation. These observations
251
have been replicated with other children, and the results have been extended to
adulthood, suggesting that attachment patterns in childhood carry over to
relationships in adulthood (Ainsworth, 1989). Indeed, extensive research has
shown that the major determinant of attachment security is parenting (Fonagy,
Gergely, & Target, 2008).
Thankfully, as Bowlby (1988) noted, “change continues through the life
cycle so that changes for the better or worse are always possible” (p. 136).
Bowlby specifically noted the possibility of change as a result of therapy in that
the therapist becomes a safe haven for the client, giving comfort when the client
feels threatened.
TREATMENT FROM A PSYCHOANALYTIC PERSPECTIVE
McWilliams (2004) had a nice way of conceptualizing psychodynamic
treatment. She noted the importance of curiosity and awe, respect for
complexity, a disposition of identification and empathy, a valuing of subjectivity
and affect, an appreciation of attachment, and a capacity for faith. Thus, like
Rogers (1957), she was more concerned with the helping attitudes than the
specific techniques. I particularly like the emphasis on curiosity and awe,
because this exemplifies what we try to do in the insight stage by engaging
clients in deep thinking about their underlying dynamics.
A great deal has been written about specific interventions to use in
psychodynamic work. Freud (1923/1963) believed that deep examination and
insight into troubling issues could assist in the resolution of problems. As a
foundation for treatment, the helper listens patiently, empathically, uncritically,
and receptively to the client (Arlow, 1995). The helper focuses on incidents in
the present reality, the past, and the relationship with the helper (Summers &
Barber, 2010). Freud (1912/1958) spoke of helpers having an “evenly suspended
attention,” or of being aware both of what the client says and does as well as
paying attention to his or her own internal feelings, thoughts, and fantasies.
To facilitate insight, the helper encourages the client to free associate—to
say whatever thoughts come to mind without censure—to help the client get to
underlying conflicts. When appropriate, the helper offers interpretations that are
just beyond the client’s current understanding to encourage the client to think
more deeply about the issues (Speisman, 1959). The focus of interpretations is
typically about the origins of behaviors and the influence of early childhood
experiences on current behaviors. Psychoanalysts talk about the importance of
doing an “archeological dig” to determine the early reasons for current
behaviors.
A goal of psychoanalytic treatment is to work with the unconscious conflicts
(to replace the id with the ego) or to help the person become more rational and
intentional rather than acting on primitive impulses. Thus, rather than just
252
eating constantly to gratify oral urges, the helper works with the client to
understand these urges and make a conscious decision to change. The goal is
also to free the person up to feel and experience life as it happens (to laugh when
happy, to cry when sad).
Another related goal is to make the unconscious conscious. Although the
majority of the mind is unconscious, according to Freud, one can strive to make
oneself as aware as possible of these primitive influences. Because of the
difficulty of dealing with unconscious material, Freud proposed analyzing
dreams, fantasies, or slips of the tongue, where the ego and superego do not have
as strong a control. Psychoanalytic helpers also assist clients in developing an
awareness of frequently used defense mechanisms and in gaining more control
over the use of these unconscious strategies to reduce anxiety.
Freud believed that manifestations of unresolved problems from early in
childhood are repeated (reenacted) throughout the client’s life. Often, the
reenactment is uncovered by analyzing how the client relates to the therapist.
For example, a client whose mother was cold and unable to fulfill the client’s
attachment needs as an infant may demonstrate neediness in her relationship
with the therapist. The client might call the therapist at home, ask for extra
sessions, and try to get the therapist to extend the time limits of each session.
The client might also project that the therapist is cold and unable to meet her
needs. Placing on the therapist characteristics that belong to other people with
whom one has unresolved issues is called 
transference
 (Freud, 1920/1943). Freud
indicated that the analysis and interpretation of transference can be a powerful
therapeutic tool to facilitate understanding of the client’s relationships with
others (see also Gelso & Carter, 1985, 1994).
The helper’s unresolved issues (
countertransference
) can also influence the
process and outcome of helping. Countertransference (see also Gelso & Hayes,
1998, 2007) can be defined as the helper’s reactions to the client that originate
in the unresolved issues of the helper. In the previous example, the therapist may
have had unresolved needs to take care of others (perhaps related to having an
alcoholic mother who relied on the helper to care for younger siblings) and so
might respond to the client’s neediness by allowing the client to call her at
home, stop by the office at any time, and delay payment until the client earns
more money. If unrecognized, countertransference behaviors can have a negative
influence on therapy. However, awareness of countertransference feelings can
actually facilitate the process. For example, if Jeff becomes aware that he has a
hard time empathizing with a passive older female client because the client
reminds him of his mother, Jeff can talk with his own therapist about his issues
with his mother and talk with his supervisor about how to understand the client.
Thus, Jeff can come to separate his reactions to the client from his own
difficulties with his mother.
An important consideration is that both transference and
253
countertransference can be influenced by cultural factors. We all clearly have
prejudices and stereotypes about people who come from other cultural groups
(refer back to 
Chapter 5
), so we need to carefully examine our thoughts about
our clients.
One change since Freud’s time in psychoanalytic treatment is the
recognition that the therapist is not a blank screen (what is called a 
one-person
psychology
) but rather plays a key role in the therapeutic relationship (referred to
as 
two-person psychology
). In Freud’s time, it was thought that the therapist
should be a blank screen so that the client could project (transfer) conflicts onto
the therapist. There has been a growing recognition, however, that it is
impossible for the therapist to truly be a blank screen. In addition, for many
clients, having the therapist be a blank screen is not helpful because they need a
genuine connection with another person.
Thus, the more recent theorizing emphasizes that both therapist and client
contribute to the relationship based on their own issues (see the review in Hill &
Knox, 2009). From this perspective, it is not possible to talk about client
transference and therapist countertransference as separate issues. Building on
this idea, relational psychoanalytic and interpersonal helpers view working on
the therapeutic relationship as a central change mechanism within therapy. By
talking openly about what is going on between the helper and client, it is
possible to work through problems in the relationship, clarify distortions in the
transference and countertransference, model healthy interpersonal functioning,
and encourage clients to interact differently with others outside of therapy.
HOW PSYCHOANALYTIC THEORIES RELATE TO THE
THREE-STAGE MODEL
The emphasis in psychoanalytic theories on the importance of early
relationships, defenses, insight, and dealing with the therapeutic relationship is
consistent with my thinking about the insight stage. More specifically, the
emphasis on the importance of early childhood experiences is in concert with my
thinking about the importance of early experiences, particularly with significant
others. Similarly, the emphasis on defenses is important in helping clients cope
with establishing moderate levels of defenses that protect them yet allow them to
interact with others. I also believe strongly that insight is helpful in enabling
clients to make lasting changes and to solve new problems as they arise.
Furthermore, to me, psychotherapy would indeed be dull and lack depth if we
just focused on exploration or behavior change instead of asking deeper
questions about meaning. Finally, dealing with problems as they occur in the
therapeutic relationship is crucial because it provides clients with corrective
relational experiences and teaches skills to handle relationships outside of
therapy more effectively.
254
One criticism I have with the classic Freudian model is that too much
emphasis is placed on childhood. Although obviously childhood experiences are
formative, experiences later in life can also have a huge impact on people. An
example of a positive impact is a person who finds a loving relationship and
becomes more trusting. An example of a negative impact is a person who is
raped or caught in a terrorist attack and becomes fearful. In addition, the classic
Freudian model does not focus on people’s aspirations for the future as a driving
force. As Yalom (1980) noted, we are also driven by our need to construct
meaning in life and make sense of what we want to accomplish during life.
Another departure I make with psychoanalytic theory is with regard to
helping clients move to the action stage. Helpers using psychoanalytic theories
do not usually focus on helping clients make specific behavior changes (Crits-
Christoph, Barber, & Kurcias, 1991). In contrast, I contend that the action
stage can be very useful, especially when it follows the insight stage (although
some clients want or need action before insight). Despite some differences in
theoretical assertions, however, I stress that psychoanalytic techniques are helpful
for guiding clients toward increased insight and self-understanding (which set
the foundation for action).
Developing Conceptualizations About
Client Dynamics
To make decisions about how to intervene in the insight stage, helpers need to
have some idea about what is going on at a deeper level for the client (Eells,
2007). Helpers need to start thinking and hypothesizing about client dynamics.
To do so, they rely in part on their perceptions and intuitions of the client
dynamics. They use themselves as barometers of what is going on in the
relationship. Helpers have to allow themselves to have inner reactions and then
think about how the client contributes to these reactions. Helpers can ask
themselves the following questions to begin to assess client dynamics:
Is the client expressing discrepancies or contradictions in feelings,
actions, or thoughts?
What might be causing the client to behave this way at this time?
What contributes to keeping this client from changing at this time?
What defenses, resistances, and transferences are operating?
How am I feeling in the therapeutic relationship?
Teaching students about conceptualization skills can be built into training
programs. After role-plays, the instructor can ask students to begin to think
about client dynamics. For example, in one training session, Kunal (a student in
255
class who was the volunteer client) talked about not having been accepted into
graduate school and feeling unsure about what he wanted to do—did he really
want to go to graduate school, or did he want to do something else with his life?
After we went through the exploration stage, I stopped the interaction, asked
Kunal to sit quietly and observe but not respond, and initiated a discussion with
the other students about their ideas about what might be going on with Kunal.
We wondered, respectfully of course, whether Kunal had problems with
indecision more generally, and we speculated about family pressures with regard
to attending graduate school. These speculations were helpful in identifying
issues for further probing in the insight stage. Our speculations were not all on
target, but they did provide ideas about where to go, always recalling the need to
be flexible and revise ideas based on emerging information. Similarly, it could be
helpful for helpers to talk with supervisors about conceptualizations as a way to
stimulate one’s thinking.
On the basis of their conceptualizations, helpers can develop clearer
intentions for how to intervene. Thus, by hypothesizing about the client’s
problem, the reason the client is talking about the problem at this particular
time, and what the helper can do to help, the helper is able to better determine
what to do next in the session. Conceptualization thus enables helpers to have a
focus and intentions for interventions instead of just wandering aimlessly
without a clear focus in sessions. Of course, one must always be tentative with
conceptualizations because they can be wrong, especially when based on limited
information, but just as clients need insight about their lives, helpers need
conceptualizations about clients.
Goals and Skills of the Insight Stage
In the insight stage, I focus on three main goals to help clients move to new
depths of self-understanding: challenging clients to foster awareness, facilitating
insight, and working with the therapeutic relationship through immediacy. A
number of skills are used to implement these goals. See 
Exhibit 11.2
 for a list of
the goals and the skills to facilitate those goals.
256
EXHIBIT 11.2
List of Skills to Facilitate Goals of the Insight Stage
Not all of these skills will be used with any given client. Rather, helpers look
for markers to indicate that clients could profit from working in each of these
areas. After describing the skills thoroughly in 
Chapters 12
 through 
14
, I talk
more in detail in 
Chapter 15
 about how to recognize when each skill can
potentially be useful and how to integrate the skills.
In addition, because clients (especially those from other cultures) are often
not as familiar with these insight skills as they are with exploration and action
skills, it can sometimes be helpful to educate clients about why and how insight
skills are to be used. Thus, hearing that gaining insight can be helpful for
providing a new way of looking at things, which can ultimately help the client
make better decisions, can give clients a rationale that makes it more likely that
they will cooperate with the helper.
CHALLENGING TO FOSTER AWARENESS
It is important that clients become aware of their thoughts and behaviors.
People have lived with themselves for so long and developed defenses to protect
themselves from interpersonal injuries, so they are often unaware of thoughts
and behaviors that are not adaptive. They need to hear how others honestly react
to them so they can begin the self-examination process. For example, a client
may be unaware that he comes across in a hostile manner, which makes others
avoid him. Awareness involves becoming more conscious about one’s thoughts,
feelings, behaviors, and impact on others. Thus, awareness is often a
precondition for insight. To facilitate awareness, helpers primarily challenge
discrepancies and thoughts.
257
FACILITATING INSIGHT
In addition to gaining awareness of feelings, thoughts, or behaviors, it is
important to help clients understand themselves at a deeper level. One of the
hallmarks of our existence as human beings is the desire for an explanation for
our thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Explanations help most people feel more
in control of their world and are a potent ingredient in therapeutic change
(Hanna & Ritchie, 1995). In the insight stage, helpers search for clues regarding
what motivates clients, what causes them pain and happiness, and what hinders
them from achieving their potential, remembering to be empathic,
compassionate, and tentative. Here, helpers use open questions and probes for
insight, interpretations, and disclosures of insight.
WORKING WITH THE THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP
THROUGH IMMEDIACY
Another specific goal of the insight stage is for clients to gain awareness and
insight into their interpersonal interactions by examining the therapeutic
relationship. Because clients are often unaware how they come across to others,
one goal of helping is to provide clients with feedback about how they come
across in the helping relationship. The assumption is that they act toward others
in similar ways as they do toward the helper, so looking closely at the therapy
relationships provides a microcosm of clients’ interpersonal relationships. Of
course, clients do not behave exactly the same with everybody as they do with
helpers (especially given that helpers do not necessarily have the same personal
styles and countertransference issues as significant others), but observations of
the therapy relationship provide an opportunity to work on one immediate
relationship. Helpers can then work with clients in the action stage to generalize
that learning to other relationships. To work on the therapeutic relationship,
helpers use immediacy (again with empathy, compassion, and tentativeness).
Concluding Comments
In comparison with the exploration stage, in the insight stage helpers rely
somewhat more on their own perspectives and reactions to help clients
understand where they are getting stuck and what might be motivating them.
Thus, helpers maintain their receptive, empathic stance of the exploration stage
but occasionally present their own thoughts and conceptualizations when it
seems likely to help the client go to deeper levels of awareness and
understanding. I emphasize that helpers do not have “the” insight or right
perspective and should not force clients to accept their perspectives. Rather, they
258
primarily encourage clients to discover new things about themselves and
occasionally and tentatively offer their own perspectives to help clients come to
new awarenesses and insights.
There remains a sense of working together, with helpers aiding clients in
discovering things about themselves. The goal is for clients to have a sense of
discovery of the new understandings. Even when helpers suggest insights, clients
need to try them out and explore how well they fit rather than accepting them
unreservedly.
Helpers have to be careful when using their own perspective to make sure
they are motivated by the best interests of the clients rather than by their own
needs. When helpers are motivated by their own needs (i.e.,
countertransference), their interventions tend to be less helpful and are
sometimes even harmful. Helpers need to be aware of their countertransference
reactions so they do not inappropriately act on them in sessions.
Helpers also have to be prepared for clients not agreeing with their
challenges or interpretations. Sometimes these skills are used prematurely or are
inaccurate or inappropriate, some are done insensitively, and sometimes clients
become defensive and anxious. Helpers need to pay attention to these reactions
to see how they can intervene differently with the client. It is important not to
blame the client (e.g., saying the client is resistant) but to figure out how to
intervene in a way that the client can accept and use.
The skills unique to the insight stage (challenges, interpretations, disclosures
of insight, open questions and probes for insight, and immediacy) are much
harder to learn and use than the skills in the exploration stage (restatements,
reflections of feelings, open questions and probes). Students tend not to master
the insight skills in their initial exposure to the model. In fact, it takes most
students many years and much practice to learn the insight skills and apply them
in the appropriate situations in a helping setting. But it is important for
beginning helpers to be aware of the insight skills, even though they should
initially be appropriately cautious in using these skills. Similarly, helpers will not
use every insight skill with every client, especially early in the helping process,
but it is valuable to have an awareness of the various skills and learn how they
can be used.
It is also important to remind beginning helpers that the exploration skills
(attending and listening, restatement, reflection of feelings, open questions and
probes about thoughts and feelings) are frequently used to help clients gain
insight. Once the helper has presented a challenge, interpretation, disclosure of
insight, or immediacy, the client needs help to work to think and explore the
new ideas and so helpers return to using the exploration skills to help them
explore this new level of awareness. It is also important to maintain empathy for
the client and remember how difficult it is to change.
259
What Do You Think?
What is the role of insight in your life? Describe several situations in
which you naturally sought out (or avoided) insight.
Describe your thoughts about whether insight is necessary before
action.
Describe your thoughts about how much interpretive input the helper
should provide and how it should be done.
Compare and contrast psychoanalytic theory with Rogers’s client-
centered theory. Which theory makes most sense to you in terms of
personality development and therapy?
Debate the role of defense mechanisms. What do you think about the
idea that a certain amount of defense mechanisms can be healthy but
that too many can be debilitating?
Debate whether psychoanalytic theory has any relevance in today’s
world.
How would you modify psychoanalytic theory to make it most
relevant to you?
260
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Insight in Dreams
Citation:
 Baumann, E., & Hill, C. E. (2008). The attainment of insight in the insight
stage of the Hill dream model: The influence of client reactance and therapist
interventions. 
Dreaming,
 18, 127–137. doi:10.1037/1053-0797.18.2.127
Rationale:
 Insight is an important outcome of therapy and particularly of dream work in
therapy, so the authors wanted to examine factors related to insight gains during dream
work. The authors were particularly interested in identifying the therapist skills and the
client factors that might be associated with gains in dream work.
Method:
 Therapists were paired with undergraduates who volunteered to participate
because they had a dream they wanted to understand. Before the session, clients completed
a measure of reactance (i.e., amount they feel compelled to resist external demands).
Therapists then guided the volunteer clients through one 90-minute dream session, using
Hill’s (2004) three-stage (exploration, insight, and action) model of dream work, which is
similar to the helping skills approach. Before and after the insight stage, the therapist asked
the client to say what the dream meant. Trained judges coded the amount of insight in the
interpretations from before and after the insight stage. From the total data set of 157 cases,
the authors selected for further analysis the 10 cases with high insight gains and high
reactance, 10 cases with high insight gains and low reactance, 10 cases with low insight
gains and high reactance, and 10 cases with low insight gains and low reactance. Trained
judges listened to the insight stage and coded the therapist skills and client insight in each
speaking turn.
Interesting Findings:
Therapists used mostly probes for insight (45%), paraphrases (i.e., restatements or reflections of feelings, 21%),
and interpretatives (i.e., interpretations or self-disclosures of insight, 7%) in the insight stage. (“Other” skills such
as approval-reassurance, closed questions, open questions and probes other than for insight, challenges, self-
disclosures other than for insight, immediacy, information, direct guidance, and other accounted for 28% of the
skills.)
Therapists did not differ in the skills used with clients high and low in reactance.
Therapists used fewer probes for insight, more interpretatives, and more “other” with clients who gained more
insight across the insight stage than with clients who gained less insight.
The highest levels of client insight followed therapist interpretatives and probes for insight, somewhat less
followed after paraphrases, and even less followed “other” skills.
Conclusions:
Interpretations, self-disclosures for insight, and probes for insight all seemed to be effective means of helping
clients gain insight. Restatements and reflections of feelings were somewhat less helpful but were still more helpful
than other therapist skills (e.g., approval, reassurance, information).
Implications for Therapy:
Therapists might consider using interpretations, self-disclosures of insight, and probes for insight to help clients
gain insight.
Although client reactance did not turn out to predict which therapist skills were used or how much insight was
gained, other client variables may be relevant. It is always good to remember that clients do not all react the same
way to various therapist interventions.
261
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
262
And the trouble is, if you don’t risk anything, you risk even more.
—Erica Jong
Ethan says he wants to go to graduate school, but then he doesn’t study and so ends up
with bad grades. The helper gently challenges Ethan by saying, “Hmmm, on the one
hand you say that you want to go to graduate school, but on the other hand, you don’t
seem to want to study.” This challenge, which was presented in a gentle, nonthreatening
manner, raised Ethan’s awareness about his behaviors and encouraged him to think
more about his commitment to attending graduate school. Ethan realized he was not
ready for graduate school and began pondering why he might be sabotaging himself.
Rationale for Using Challenges
Challenges are used to help clients recognize maladaptive feelings, motives, and
desires of which they are not aware or unwilling to change (see 
Exhibit 12.1
). If
a client is sad but cannot bring himself to feel the sadness, he may end up feeling
stuck and blocked emotionally. Similarly, if a client is angry at others but unable
to admit it, she might make a lot of sarcastic comments and inadvertently
wound others because her anger “leaks” out. Furthermore, clients might be
invested in not being aware of their inappropriate behaviors. They may blame
other people rather than take responsibility for their actions. For example, a
middle-aged person might continue to blame his parents for all of his problems
rather than take responsibility for them, because taking responsibility would
mean he would have to give up his rage at his parents and change his unhealthy
behaviors. Challenges are often needed to nudge such clients out of denial, help
them see their problems in a different light, and encourage them to take
appropriate responsibility for their problems.
263
EXHIBIT 12.1
Overview of Challenge
264
EXHIBIT 12.1 (
Continued
)
Overview of Challenge
Challenges can also help clients become aware of ambivalent feelings. Most
of us have ambivalent feelings but cannot allow ourselves to feel both sides of
issues because of beliefs about how we “ought” to be (e.g., “Nice girls don’t get
angry”). We also tend to compartmentalize unowned feelings and thoughts so
that we do not have to think about them because we do not like what they reveal
about us. Challenges can be used to unearth thoughts and feelings so that clients
begin to experience and take responsibility for thoughts and feelings.
Challenges also enable clients to admit to having different or deeper feelings
than they were previously able to acknowledge. Recall that we mentioned in
Chapter 9
 that feelings are often quite complex. For example, Angela said over
and over that everything was going well until the helper challenged her about
her poor grades. This challenge encouraged Angela to think about what might
be going on at a deeper level and helped her realize that she was trying too hard
to ignore problems.
These interventions can also be used to help clients become aware of their
defenses (see 
Chapters 6
 and 
11
 for more discussion of defenses). Defenses exist
for a reason—they help us cope. All of us need some defenses to survive in the
world. However, most of us have defenses that are not adaptive. We developed
these defenses to protect ourselves from unreliable, punitive, or abusive parents
or others, and we rigidly continue to use these defenses even when they are no
longer needed. Although everyone needs defenses sometimes, the helper’s goal is
to help clients become aware of their defenses and make choices about when and
how much to use them. For example, a helper might challenge a client by
265
saying, “You say that you keep up a wall to protect yourself against everyone,
but I wonder if you really need to keep it so high with everyone. Maybe there
are some people you can trust.” By providing a safe place to examine defenses,
helpers can work with clients to distinguish situations in which defenses are
needed to protect the client and when it is safe to let go of unnecessary defenses.
Our goal as helpers is not to break down or remove all of the defenses but
to give clients the option of choosing when and how often to use defenses. We
need to help clients look carefully at their reasons for maintaining defenses and
determine whether the defenses are still needed. For example, in the face of a
hostile attacker, a defense of withdrawal might be appropriate, whereas
withdrawal might be counterproductive in an intimate relationship with a loving
partner.
In the exploration stage, the emphasis is more toward support, whereas in
the insight stage, once there is a relationship established and the helper thinks
the client can tolerate being gently challenged, there can be more of a balance
between support and challenge. A parallel can be drawn to how students want
school to be challenging to help them learn but do not want it to be so
challenging that they become anxious.
Even though the goal of challenges is to raise awareness (i.e., to become
alerted to thoughts, feelings, and behaviors), sometimes challenges help clients
gain insight. Although helpers are not interpreting or providing reasons when
they challenge, sometimes simply hearing a challenge can lead clients to want to
understand themselves at a deeper level. For example, a helper might challenge
Jerald by telling him that he says he wants help, but he does not disclose
anything about his situation. Jerald might be prompted to think about why he
does not disclose; he might come to realize after exploration that he is reluctant
to reveal anything because he is afraid of being rejected given that when he
disclosed as a child, his father made fun of him. Being in a therapeutic
relationship in which he feels safe can help Jerald question his assumptions and
test whether his helper is actually like his father.
Furthermore, the need for challenges varies on the basis of where the client
is in the change process. Clients who are at precontemplation and
contemplation stages of change (see 
Chapter 2
 for details) are more likely to
need challenges to jolt them out of their complacency and encourage them to
change but may be less likely to appreciate them (Prochaska, DiClemente, &
Norcross, 1992). Clients in the later stages of the helping process (e.g., action,
termination, and maintenance) may be less likely to require challenges to get
them past defenses and barriers to changing and may be more open to
examining themselves.
Theoretical Perspectives on Challenges
266
Several theorists have talked about the benefits of challenges. They have used the
more traditional term 
confrontation,
 however, so I use both terms in this section.
Carkhuff and Berenson (1967), humanistic theorists, stated that the
purpose of pointing out discrepancies is to help reduce ambiguities and
incongruities in the client’s experiencing and communication. They suggested
that confrontations encourage clients to accept themselves and become fully
functioning. Confronting clients with the discrepant facets of their behaviors
challenges them to understand themselves more fully. As Carkhuff (1969)
noted, “At the point of confrontation the client is pressed to consider the
possibility of changing and, in order to do so, utilizing resources that he [or she]
has not yet employed” (p. 93). Furthermore,
The challenge in a sense creates a crisis in the client’s life. The crisis poses the client with the
choice between continuing in his [or her] present mode of functioning or making a
commitment to attempt to achieve a higher-level, more fulfilling way of life. (p. 92)
Another perspective about confrontation comes from Greenson (1967), a
psychoanalyst. Greenson defined confrontation as a demonstration to the client
of his or her resistance: “all the forces within the patient that oppose the
procedures and processes of psychoanalytic work” (p. 35). He suggested that
confrontations should be delivered before interpretations because defenses first
need to be confronted and brought into awareness before they can be
understood. For example, he noted that before he could interpret why a client
was avoiding a certain subject, he would first have to get the client to face that
she or he was avoiding something. Thus, the confrontation points out that the
client is resisting; the questions of how and what the client is resisting are then
addressed through clarification and interpretation.
Yet another relevant perspective is Stiles’s (Honos-Webb & Stiles, 1998)
notion about each of us being composed of a community of voices. He theorized
that we incorporate significant others into ourselves such that each other person
becomes a voice (e.g., Ashley might suddenly sound like her mother when she
condemns herself for smoking, and then sound like her younger self when she
whines about how she cannot be any different, and then sound like her father
when she blames others). If voices are in discord, some may get silenced or
rejected. The goal of therapy is to initiate a dialogue between the different voices
and foster integration such that all voices can be heard and operate more
harmoniously. This perspective reminds us that we all are complicated people
with lots of opposing feelings and thoughts.
Types of Challenges
267
The most gentle and typical challenge is of discrepancies. I also briefly describe
challenges of thoughts based on a cognitive therapy framework. Finally, I
present chair work, humor, silence, taking responsibility, nonverbal behaviors,
and questions as additional types of challenges.
CHALLENGES OF DISCREPANCIES
Discrepancies and contradictions are important because they are often signs of
unresolved issues, ambivalence (mixed feelings), or suppressed (or repressed)
feelings. Often these discrepancies come up because clients have not been able to
deal effectively with feelings as they arise. With challenges of discrepancies,
helpers juxtapose two things to make the client aware of the contradiction
between them, thus paving the way to understanding the cause of the
discrepancy and making changes. Helpers can focus on several types of
discrepancies:
between two verbal statements (e.g., “You say there’s no problem, but
then you say you’re annoyed with him”),
between words and actions (e.g., “You say you want to get good grades,
but you spend most of your time partying and sleeping”),
between two behaviors (e.g., “You’re smiling, but your teeth are
clenched”),
between two feelings (e.g., “You feel angry at your sister, but you also
feel pleased that now everyone will see what kind of person she really
is”),
between values and behaviors (e.g., “You say you believe in respecting
others’ choices, but then you try to convince them that they are wrong
about abortion”),
between one’s perception of self and experience (e.g., “You say no one
likes you, but earlier you described an instance in which someone
invited you to have lunch”),
between one’s ideal and real self (e.g., “You want to meet your
mother’s high standards, but you feel like you’re just average”),
between the helper’s and the client’s opinions (e.g., “You say you are
not working hard, but I think you are doing a great job”), and
between values and feelings (e.g., “You would like to be a good
charitable person who volunteers for everything, but you feel angry
about having to help out”).
It is important to note that not all challenges of discrepancies relate to
pointing out negative aspects that the client is not ready to face. Some relate to
positive things that clients are not ready to admit to themselves. For example,
Marita constantly put herself down in front of other people, making disparaging
268
remarks about what a klutz she was or how anyone else could do things better.
Her helper challenged her gently that in fact she was quite competent at
expressing her feelings and interacting with him. She was surprised and then
started crying, later saying that no one had ever said anything positive to her
before.
A major task for helpers challenging discrepancies is to do so in such a way
that clients can hear them and feel supported rather than attacked. Quite unlike
the exploration skills that convey acceptance, challenges can imply criticism.
With challenges, helpers indicate that some aspect of a client’s life is incongruent
or problematic and imply that a client should change to feel, think, or act
differently, and so the helper needs to be careful about how the challenge is
phrased and presented. Challenges should be done carefully, gently, respectfully,
tentatively, thoughtfully, and with empathy.
One might think of the client as building a wall around himself or herself.
Rather than attacking the wall directly with major weapons or armaments, the
helper might do better to point out the wall. When the client is aware of the
wall, the helper and client together can try to understand the purpose for the
wall and decide whether the wall is needed. Rather than battering down the
wall, the helper might encourage the client to build a door in the wall and learn
when to open and close that door.
The helper’s manner might reflect puzzlement, of trying to help the client
figure out a puzzle and make sense of discrepant pieces. One can simply point
out the discrepancy in a nonthreatening manner and ask the client to clarify.
Similarly, Lauver and Harvey (1997) suggested using “collegial confrontations,”
which point out the helper’s confusion about what he or she perceives as
discrepant; they recommended against trying to persuade the client to come
around to the helper’s viewpoint. In essence, helpers empathically point out
discrepancies and then follow these challenges with reflections of feelings and
open questions and probes about how it felt to be challenged.
Furthermore, it is important that helpers not make judgments when they
challenge. A challenge should not be a criticism but an encouragement to
examine oneself more deeply. The goal is to work collaboratively with clients in
raising awareness. If helpers are judgmental, clients may feel shamed and
embarrassed and hence be more resistant to recognizing problems. Helpers need
to remember that all of us have discrepancies and irrationalities and that we are
not “better than” our clients. We need to be humble and empathize with how
difficult it is to understand ourselves and make changes. It is usually easier to see
someone else’s inconsistencies than it is to see one’s own.
Although sometimes painfully difficult to hear, if can be a gift for helpers to
tackle obvious issues that others would shy away from. If you had spinach in
your teeth, you would want someone to tell you. Similarly, if clients are doing
things that turn others off, it is a gift to gently and lovingly point the behaviors
269
out in a way that clients can hear. Clients often need someone outside to help
them become aware of self-defeating behaviors, but they can only absorb the
challenges if this is done in a way that they can hear.
When learning to challenge discrepancies, I recommend that helpers use the
following formats to make sure they include both parts of the intervention:
On the one hand ________, but on the other hand _________.
You say ________, but you also say ________.
You say ________, but nonverbally you seem _________.
I’m hearing ________, but I’m also hearing ________.
Sometimes the first part of the discrepancy is implied, and the helper states
only the “but” clause. For example, the client might say that there are no
problems, and the helper might respond, “But you said he was angry at you”
(implying “You just said there were no problems, but . . . ”).
CHALLENGES OF THOUGHTS
Cognitive theorists suggest that irrational thinking keeps people from coping
effectively and makes them unhappy. For example, Ellis (1962, 1995) suggested
that people say irrational things to themselves, such as “I must be loved by
everyone,” “I must be completely competent and perfect to be worthwhile,” “It
is awful if things are not the way I want them to be,” “There should be someone
stronger than me who will take care of me,” and “There is a perfect solution to
human problems, and it is terrible if I don’t find it.”
Ellis noted that most clients make the assumption that events cause
emotions, but he strongly argued that it is the irrational beliefs that lead to
negative emotions. For example, if Sam gets a 
C
 on an exam, he might think
that the failure makes him feel bad. But Ellis would have contended that it is
what he tells himself about getting a 
C
 on the exam (e.g., “I’m a failure as a
person; I should be perfect”) that makes him feel bad rather than the 
C
 itself.
Hence, Ellis suggested that if they replace the irrational beliefs with more
rational cognitions, clients would have more positive emotions. In this example,
Sam might be taught a more rational thought such as, “It’s too bad that I got a
C
 on the exam but that doesn’t make me a bad person. It just means that I have
to study harder next time, instead of going out drinking the night before.”
Beck and his colleagues (A. T. Beck, 1976; A. T. Beck & Emery, 1985; A.
T. Beck & Freeman, 1990; A. T. Beck, Rush, Shaw, & Emery, 1979; J. S. Beck,
1995) developed a cognitive theory that is slightly different from Ellis’s theory.
They postulated that automatic thoughts and dysfunctional interpretations are
the major source of problems for clients and that clients misconstrue events on
the basis of faulty logic and beliefs in the cognitive triad of the self, world, and
future. Hence, clients often view themselves as defective, inadequate, or
270
unlovable; the world as unmanageable, uncontrollable, or overwhelming; and
the future as bleak and hopeless.
Beck’s gentle therapeutic approach is quite different from Ellis’s direct
confrontational style. He recommended that helpers work collaboratively with
clients as scientists to uncover faulty logic and examine its impact. Helpers ask a
series of questions to help clients arrive at logical conclusions (“What happens
when you say X to yourself?”). Helpers also actively point out cognitive themes
and underlying assumptions that work against clients. Beck suggested that
people often draw conclusions without having adequate evidence (e.g., a person
might conclude that he is unlovable just because he has no one with whom to
eat lunch one day). People also take details out of context (e.g., focus on one
negative comment about a presentation in class and ignore several positive ones),
develop general rules out of a few instances (e.g., because she made a mistake
one time, a person generalizes that she cannot handle any responsibility), and
make something more or less important than it needs to be (e.g., perceive a
person’s not saying “hello” as meaning that he is angry, minimizing the
importance of failing a course). In addition, people attribute blame to
themselves without adequate evidence (e.g., a secretary believing that a
company’s going out of business is due to her not coming into work one day)
and engage in rigid, either–or thinking (e.g., a man may think that women are
either goddesses or whores). For those who want to learn more about cognitive
therapy, I recommend the widely used self-help book by Burns (1999).
Thus, we as helpers can challenge these irrational thoughts to help clients
recognize their faulty thinking and change it. Helpers can ask, “What are you
telling yourself now?” Or they might ask (remembering to only ask one question
at a time), “What would be the worst thing that would happen if you did not
succeed at being a physicist?” “What would be so horrible about that?” “You say
you can’t stand it, but is that true, would you fall apart?” “It might not be
pleasant, but would it actually be catastrophic?” When asking such questions, it
is important to remember that helpers attack the beliefs, not the person.
CHALLENGING THROUGH CHAIR WORK
Chair work can be particularly useful for challenging clients to become aware of
conflicting feelings (e.g., love–hate) or unfinished business (e.g., feeling
unresolved about a relationship ending). This technique originally comes from
gestalt therapy (Perls, 1969; Perls, Hefferline, & Goodman, 1951) and more
recently has been used in process-experiential therapy and emotion-focused
therapy (Elliott et al., 2004; Greenberg, 2011; Greenberg, Rice, & Elliott, 1993)
to help clients become aware of and integrate feelings. Sometimes doing and
acting out feeling is easier and has more impact than talking about feeling.
271
Two-Chair Work
A two-chair technique can be used when the client expresses a major conflict
between two opposing sides (e.g., “I wish I could, but I’m scared”; “I’d like to,
but I stop myself”). These conflicts often arise due to internalized “shoulds,”
which come from early experiences of being told what to do. People begin to live
according to these standards but typically have not thought through and
determined for themselves how to live their lives based on their own feelings.
The helper asks the client to sit in one chair and try to experience and
express the feelings from one side of the conflict. Once the client has expressed
feelings, she or he is asked to move to other chair and talk from that side with
full expression of feelings. Usually what happens is that one side, called the
topdog
 in gestalt therapy because it is the controlling and dominant voice,
engages in a lot of criticism (the “shoulds”), whereas the other side, called the
underdog
 in gestalt therapy because it is usually the passive voice, whines, and
acts helpless. Because of the conflict, the person feels stuck, immobilized, and
angry, all of which are often outside of awareness. In typical conversations in the
real world, when these two sides try to talk, they tune each other out and
therefore cannot complete a dialogue. By having both sides speak fully and
express their feelings as well as listen to the other side talk, the client comes to
allow both sides to emerge and exist equally and thus can integrate them both
into a more complete whole. The marker, or indicator, that a two-chair
technique might prove beneficial to help the client explore more deeply, is when
the client expresses having opposing feelings or seems to have feelings that she or
he cannot seem to express because they seem unacceptable to him or her.
The following steps can be used to facilitate two-chair work. They need not
be followed exactly but are provided here to give a clear sense of how this
exercise can be done.
1.
 
The helper identifies a conflict split in what the client says, for example, “I should
love him, but I don’t know how I feel” or “I should go to see my parents, but I
just can’t seem to make myself do it.” Importantly, the helper first determines
that the client has enough ego strength (resiliency) to be able to participate in the
chair work given the potential intensity of this kind of work.
2.
 
The helper asks the client if she or he would like to try an exercise to deepen the
conflicting feelings so that they can try to understand them more. More
education may be needed given that chair work can seem awkward to some
people, but it is important for the helper not to be apologetic or unsure about
whether chair work is a useful exercise.
3.
 
If the client agrees, the helper pulls up another chair and invites the client to move
to the new chair and talk directly to the other side of the self. It is important for
the helper to be positioned equidistant from both chairs and be aligned equally
with both sides, given that the ultimate hope is for both sides to express
272
themselves openly and negotiate. The helper might start by asking the client to
take the critic or topdog (“should”) side. Alternatively, the helper could ask the
client which side she or he feels most in touch with or which side feels more alive
and ask the client to start with that side. The helper directs the client to say what
the chosen side would say to the other side (e.g., “You shouldn’t do that” or
“Don’t say that”). The helper attends to making sure that this side expresses itself
clearly and forcefully.
4.
 
The helper then asks the client to move to the other chair and express what it feels
like to hear what the other side said. Again, the helper encourages the client to be
direct and clear about his or her reactions, perhaps asking the client to repeat if
the client did not state the feelings strongly. If the client starts to talk to the
helper instead of the other chair, the helper gently encourages the client to talk
directly to the chair.
5.
 
The helper again asks the client to switch chairs and respond. The switching
continues with the helper encouraging each side to fully express the underling
feelings and needs (this step often requires quite a bit of coaching from the
helper). With both sides fully expressing themselves, the client can come to
accept and negotiate the conflicting views. Typically, the critic softens, the
passive side becomes stronger, and the struggle is resolved.
6.
 
It is important to process the experience with the client. The helper can ask how it
felt to engage in the exercise.
The following is an example of two-chair work. Jason has been talking
about his depression and both his desire to change and resistance to change. He
has been talking about being stuck for a couple of sessions.
Helper:
 
I wonder if you would like to try an exercise where we try to
explore these two sides of yourself to try to get a better
understanding of what’s going on for you?
Client:
 
Well, I don’t know if it will do any good, but I guess I’m
willing to try if you think it will be helpful.
Helper:
 
Let’s try it and see how it goes. You can stop at any time you
wish. (Pause while helper moves another chair over) Okay, let’s
start with the side of you that wants to change. Would you be
that side and talk to the other side of you that doesn’t want to
change; we’ll put that other side of you in this other chair and
you can talk directly to him.
Client:
 
What I would say is . . .
Helper:
 
Look directly at the other chair and talk as if that side of you
were sitting there.
Client:
 
Okay. (Pauses and takes a deep breath) You are miserable
right now. You really should do something about it (said rather
273
meekly).
Helper:
 
Can you be a bit more indignant and express how you really
feel?
Client:
 
(in a louder voice) You really are disgusting because you
know you should change but you don’t do anything about it.
You say you’re going to therapy, but then you get there and
you clam up. How can you expect to change if you don’t get
into it?
Helper:
 
Okay, good. Now go to the other chair and respond from
the side of you that doesn’t want to change.
Client:
 
(to therapist) This feels a little silly.
Helper:
 
Yes, it does, but maybe try it and let’s see how it goes.
Client:
 
(in a flat voice) Well, I don’t know why you go on and on
about this. Things aren’t that bad. Just leave me alone.
Helper:
 
Can you try to get into it a little bit more? You sound a little
whiny. Can you play that up some more?
Client:
 
I don’t want to change. I wish you’d leave me alone. I like
being depressed.
Helper:
 
Can you say that last part louder?
Client:
 
I like being depressed. It feels good. No one ever paid any
attention to me, so at least I can pay attention to myself. I’m
not so sure that I want to change.
Helper:
 
Okay, go back over to the other chair. Did you hear what
the other side said?
Client:
 
Yeah, I’m feeling bad that you think no one ever paid
attention to you. Can you say more about that?
Helper:
 
Switch chairs and respond.
Client:
 
I just felt left out a lot as a kid. My dad was pretty tough and
beat me whenever he thought I got out of line. I felt sad a lot as
a kid.
Helper:
 
Switch chairs.
Client:
 
I know that’s been hard for you to even talk about your
father. I’m sorry that I was so rough on you, always trying to
make you change.
Helper:
 
Switch again.
Client:
 
Well, I do want to change, but I just feel so scared. And I’m
not sure that I’m going to be able to really change. I feel so
alone.
Helper:
 
Let’s stop there for right now. What are you feeling right
now?
Client:
 
Wow! I was surprised that so much came out so quickly. I
guess I can begin to see why I feel so stuck. I would really like
274
to explore more about my feelings about my father.
Helpe
r:
 
Yeah, it’s interesting that earlier you had told me that
everything was so idyllic in your childhood, and now it seems
like more was going on inside than you were comfortable
admitting out loud.
Client:
 
Yeah, there’s so much more there underneath.
Helper:
 
Tell me about how you felt in each chair.
Client:
 
In the chair demanding that I change, I could kind of hear
my father’s voice . . . that scares me because he was so mean. In
the chair saying I couldn’t change, I just felt so defeated.
(session continues)
Notice how the first “You better shape up” side softened and listened to the
other “whiny I can’t change” side. Also notice how the “I can’t change” side
started to open up and explore a little more openly. Interestingly, talking
between the two sides helped the client get away from “talking about” and into
the experience of the conflict. Had the helper tried to interpret for the client
what was going on, the client might have ignored it, but being in the situation
allowed the client to experience the conflict more directly. Of course, this
example is much shorter than would typically be true of an actual session, but I
hope it gives an idea of how a helper could conduct this exercise.
Empty-Chair Work
Another version of this technique involves empty-chair work for clients with
unfinished business, often feelings of anger, sadness, resentment, and hurt
toward a significant other that the client has carried around since childhood. In
this case, the helper works with the client to imagine what she or he wants to say
to the person, talk to the person as if the person were sitting in an empty chair
and then imagine how the other person might respond. The helper guides the
client in expressing difficult feelings when talking to the significant other and
coaches the client to express other possible feelings when talking from the side of
the significant other. The same steps apply as above for two-chair work, such
that the client goes back and forth between self and other.
Thus, two-chair work involves working with different parts of self, whereas
empty chair work focuses on work with another person, although it is always
important to remember that much of what we expect from another person
involves projections. Note that although chair work is used in the insight stage
to challenge clients to experience deeper feelings and conflicts, it is also
appropriate in the action stage when the client is torn between different
alternative actions (see 
Chapter 16
).
Difficulties Helpers Experience When Doing Chair Work
275
One difficulty helpers have using chair work is a hesitance to try it because it is
different from other skills and feels risky. It is also difficult to do without seeing
a model of someone else demonstrating it. Another difficulty is figuring out how
and when to do each step, so that for example, helpers might move too fast
through the steps without giving the clients enough time to work through
feelings. A concern that beginning helpers often voice is not knowing how much
to push clients to do chair work if they seem reluctant or in knowing whether
clients have enough ego strength to tolerate chair work. A final difficulty is in
remembering to coach clients so that they learn how to do the steps and do
them with adequate emotional expression. These difficulties can usually be
overcome with adequate practice, and I highly recommend that beginning
trainees practice chair work with peers before trying it on clients.
HUMOR AS A TYPE OF CHALLENGE
Sometimes challenges can be softened by using humor, as long as the client feels
that the helper is laughing 
with
 rather than 
at
 him or her. Helping clients laugh
at themselves can help them think about their problems in a different way. An
example from Falk and Hill’s (1992) study of the effects of therapist humor
involved a case in which the therapist and client were dealing with issues related
to control and perfectionism in the client’s life, particularly with regard to eating
and schoolwork. The client excitedly described her weekend in which she
contacted several friends, coordinated their activities, and eagerly took on the
role of the designated driver. She exclaimed, “I had so much fun.” The helper
commented, “And so much control.” They both laughed, and the client began
to talk about how her need for control pervaded many aspects of her life. If
clients can start laughing, they can sometimes begin to see things in a different
light. Of course, as with other types of challenges, helpers need to have
established a relationship with clients and use the humor to raise awareness
rather than to make fun of the client.
SILENCE AS A TYPE OF CHALLENGE
In contrast to the use of silence to provide empathy and warmth as described in
Chapter 7
, silence can also be used to challenge (Hill, Thompson, & Ladany,
2003; Ladany et al., 2004). In this use of silence, helpers challenge clients to
take responsibility for what they want to say. Rather than rushing in and taking
care of the client, helpers wait and encourage the client to say something. Silence
sometimes increases discomfort and forces clients to rely on their inner resources
and examine their thoughts or, as one therapist said, “to stew in their juices.”
Although challenging silences may be helpful in long-term therapy when
there is a good working alliance, it can be potentially damaging to use silence for
these reasons if the client does not trust the helper or understand the purpose of
276
the silence. Silence can be frightening for clients who feel isolated and out of
touch with the helper or who do not know how to express themselves. Helpers
have to assess what is going on for clients during the silence and determine
whether it is better to continue the silence or break it.
CHALLENGING CLIENTS TO TAKE RESPONSIBILITY
Another way to challenge clients is to urge them to take appropriate
responsibility for their behavior. One way of identifying whether clients are
owning responsibility is to listen to the language they use. Some people in
conversation use “you” and “everyone” instead of saying “I” (e.g., “Everyone gets
upset at their parents” rather than “I am upset at my parents”). In other words,
these clients make it seem that everyone feels or acts a certain way rather than
taking responsibility for their own thoughts and feelings. Simply asking the
client to say “I” and make the statement for himself or herself can raise the
client’s awareness and encourage him or her to take responsibility and
differentiate from other people. Other phrases that indicate a lack of taking
responsibility can also be challenged. For instance, the client can be asked to
change “can’t” to “won’t” (e.g., “I can’t ask for a raise” to “I won’t ask for a
raise”) and “shouldn’t” to “I choose to” (e.g., “I shouldn’t play computer games”
to “I choose to play computer games”). Once they change their language, clients
can be asked to talk about how it feels to use different phrases. Once again,
helpers should use such interventions gently and infrequently so that clients do
not feel blamed and shamed.
USING NONVERBAL BEHAVIORS TO CHALLENGE
Helpers can also point out a nonverbal behavior that may reflect a discrepancy
or underlying feelings that the client is denying. If we assume that sometimes
feelings leak out through nonverbal behaviors, we might be able to encourage
clients to examine what might be going on. Clients might thus be encouraged to
become aware of what their bodies might be saying to them. The helper might
direct the client who is tapping his foot to “be your foot. What are you saying
right now?” And the helper might even ask the client to exaggerate the feeling to
help him or her begin to identify the feeling. By asking the client to be the body
part, helpers enable clients to get out of rationalization and into their
experiencing—the client has to look inward to see whether there is something
going on (e.g., “What am I feeling?”). Of course this intervention needs to be
done cautiously and for the benefit of the client. It is often easy for helpers to
use this type of intervention to show-off (e.g., “Aha, I caught you”).
CHALLENGING THROUGH QUESTIONS
277
The helper might also challenge by simply saying, “Really?” “Oh yeah?” or
“Hmmm?” These interventions question the client in a gentle challenging
manner and encourage the client to think about what he or she is thinking.
Guidelines for Presenting Challenges
Challenges are typically most effective if used in close proximity to the client’s
behavior. If a helper waits too long, the client might not remember what the
helper is talking about. For instance, if the helper says, “Last session when you
spoke about being angry at your mother, you smiled,” the client is not likely to
remember the incident. Thus, helpers should act fairly quickly (if they have
enough data), while the behaviors and feelings are still recent (e.g., “Just then
you smiled. I wonder what’s going on?”).
Helpers need to adapt their approach to using challenges to fit the client.
For example, helpers can think about whether challenges are appropriate for the
particular client. Direct, blunt challenges are not likely to be as effective with
Asian, Latino/Latina, and Native American clients (Ivey, 1994) because they are
not culturally appropriate. Ivey presented the example of a Chinese counselor’s
first efforts to counsel in China after training in the United States. He
confronted an older Chinese man using the standard format for challenges: “On
the one hand you do X, but on the other hand you do Y; how do you put these
two together?” The older man politely said his farewell and never came back.
The counselor had forgotten that when Chinese people see the need to express
disagreement, they generally take great care not to hurt the other person’s
feelings or cause the other person to “lose face.” His direct confrontive technique
was considered ill-mannered and insensitive, especially because it came from a
younger person. Ivey suggested that it is possible to confront a Chinese person
but that helpers need to be sensitive and gentle when doing so, perhaps by
presenting the challenge in a tentative manner and preceding it with something
positive. On the other hand, direct (but still empathic and respectful)
confrontation may be especially appropriate with some male European
American or African American clients who find the soft and gentle approach
meaningless and who may even denigrate the helper for using it. Ivey (1994)
stressed the need for flexibility and responsiveness to each person.
Because challenges can have such a strong impact on clients, helpers need to
observe clients’ reactions carefully by listening attentively and observing the
client’s nonverbal behavior (recall the research cited in 
Chapter 2
 that clients
often hide negative reactions). Thus, helpers should not expect that they
necessarily know when clients feel badly after a challenge. Clients could
withdraw, and helpers would not know that they were upset. Hence, helpers
278
often have to ask clients how they reacted to challenges and probe beneath the
surface to understand the complete reaction (e.g., “You just got quiet. What are
you thinking?”). In addition, helpers need to remember to reflect feelings to
encourage clients to talk about their reactions to challenges (e.g., “You seem
upset”).
From observing the client’s reactions, a helper can make more informed
decisions about how to proceed:
If the client responds to challenges with denial, the helper needs to
rethink how he or she is presenting the challenges, whether the client is
ready to hear the challenge, or whether a challenge was a good
intervention.
If the client says that she or he has no reaction to the challenge, the
helper might evaluate whether she or he presented the challenges
effectively, whether the challenge was accurate, or whether the client
was defensive.
If the client responds with partial examination or acceptance and
recognition but no change, the helper can continue to confront gently
to help the client move further. The helper also can reflect how scary it
is to change and help the client to explore fears.
If the client responds with new awareness and acceptance, the helper
can summarize and then help the client explore more or move on to
interpretation.
Helpers should not be surprised when clients react strongly to challenges.
Instead, they should help clients express and work through their emotions.
These reactions are the exciting and potentially potent, albeit scary for both
clients and helpers, stuff of helping.
A final issue is the timing of challenges. If you think your challenge was
accurate but your client denies or dismisses it, you may need to back off until
the client can handle the challenge or until you have more evidence for your
observations. For example, you may experience a client as being extremely
hostile and pushy with you, although he perceives himself as being friendly and
accommodating. Your first challenge, “You say you’re easygoing, but you sound
like you act somewhat aggressively with your friends,” might be negated by the
client (“Nah, they all love me”). You might want to obtain more examples from
the client about how he behaves with friends, or you may want to ask the client
to observe his own behavior or ask the client to ask his friends for feedback.
Despite his reaction, you can trust your impression that this client was aggressive
with you (although of course you need to search yourself for countertransference
issues related to aggression). In time, you might present another challenge with
more specific behavioral evidence. For example:
279
You say you are never hostile, but you sounded like you were hostile in your interaction with
your friend yesterday. From what you said, you completely disagreed with everything your
friend said and refused to talk about it. I wonder what your experience was?
The following shows a helper using challenges (in italics) in a session:
Client:
 
My husband wants his parents to come and live with us. His
father has Alzheimer’s, and his mother takes care of his father,
but she can’t drive and is not feeling too well herself. They are
both old and need more help around the house.
Helper:
 
How do you feel about them moving in with you?
Client:
 
Well, I think they need to do something. The situation is
not improving, and they are getting old. My husband really
wants to take care of them. He feels some obligation since he’s
the oldest child.
Helper:
 
(gently) 
I hear that your husband wants to take care of them,
but I am not hearing what you want to do.
Client:
 
I have been brought up to believe that family takes care of
family when they need help. I didn’t take care of my parents, so
I feel like we should do what we can to help them if they want
it. They may not even want to move in. They might rather do
something else.
Helper:
 
I’m struck by how hard it is for you to talk about your feelings.
Client:
 
That’s interesting. You’re really right. I feel like I don’t have
a right to my feelings. I feel like it’s something I “should” do. I
don’t have any choice, so I’m trying not to have any feelings. If
I’m really honest with myself, I’m terrified of what it will be
like if they move in. His mother can be very critical.
Helper:
 
You sound upset.
Client:
 
Yeah, but it makes me feel guilty. I just don’t know what to
do. I guess I’ve always had a hard time standing up to his
parents. Actually, I have a hard time standing up to most
people, so this is just another example. I think it stems from my
childhood. (Client continues to talk.)
Difficulties Helpers Experience Using
Challenges
Challenges are difficult interventions for many beginning helpers. One set of
difficulties relates to helpers not doing enough challenges. Many beginning
helpers use too few challenges because they are afraid of being intrusive, forcing
clients to examine their “dirty laundry,” offending clients, sounding accusatory
280
or blaming, destroying the therapeutic relationship, causing clients to feel
unsupported, or afraid that clients will not like them. Furthermore, confronting
people is not considered polite in some cultures, so helpers from such cultures
may feel reluctant to use challenges. However, if clients are being contradictory
or confusing or are stuck, it is difficult for them to clarify their thinking without
outside feedback. In fact, if done appropriately, challenges can be a gift that lets
the client know the helper is willing to say unpleasant things that others may not
say (e.g., “You say you want to have friends, but you criticize everything anyone
does”). Remember, however, that challenges need to be presented gently and
with compassion, and that you may need to educate your client about why you
are challenging because it can be such a change in style from the exploration
stage.
Another set of difficulties involves using challenges inappropriately. Some
helpers who feel afraid of negative feelings might use challenges to deny or
minimize negative feelings. For example, if a client talks about suicidal feelings,
a helper might use a challenge that indicates that the client has a lot to live for
and should not be thinking about suicide. A statement that a client has a lot to
live for might sound like the helper is pointing out strengths, but in this
situation the helper is minimizing the negative feelings and falsely reassuring the
client so he or she does not have to deal with the suicidal feelings. Such
challenges can actually make clients feel misunderstood and worse about
themselves.
A third set of difficulties involves using too many challenges or using
challenges too harshly. Some helpers become too invested in having clients
recognize their discrepancies. They might argue with clients to convince them of
their observations. Or they become like detectives who present the evidence and
want to force clients to admit their problems and confess that they are not being
consistent. Or they might act like lawyers cross-examining witnesses in the
courtroom; they seem eager to “catch” clients in their discrepancies. Other
helpers use challenges, often unconsciously, as an opportunity to get back at
clients they do not like or who upset them in some way. Because such challenges
can make clients feel unsupported, helpers will probably want to become aware
of their motives, intentions, and countertransferences so that they do not harm
clients.
Finally, helpers often have trouble knowing how to respond when clients
disagree and challenge the helper in return. For example, the helper might say it
seems like the client is coming across hostilely or seductively, and the client
might deny it and say it is the helper’s problem (one client even told the helper
to go see a therapist to work on her problems). Some helpers do not know
whether to keep trying to get clients to see the evidence or whether to give up
and try again later after they have more data to support the challenge. Helpers
may even begin to distrust their perceptions when clients challenge them. At
281
times, helpers might misperceive the situation because of their own issues or
insufficient data. At other times, however, clients might be defensive, unwilling
to examine themselves, or have a hard time acknowledging their behaviors.
Having supervisors listen to tapes of sessions and provide feedback can be useful
to allow helpers to determine whether they were distorting because of their own
needs, whether the challenge was accurate but presented in a nontherapeutic
manner, or whether the client was not ready to hear a challenge.
What Do You Think?
Do you think that there is a benefit to awareness, or should helpers just
focus on behavior change?
Are challenges of discrepancies necessary and helpful?
Compare and contrast challenges of discrepancies and challenges of
thoughts.
How can helpers maintain an attitude of curiosity and compassion for
clients with their challenges rather than attacking them and getting
invested in confronting clients?
What types of helpers might be likely to use challenges
inappropriately?
Discuss the idea of a balance between support and challenge.
How do you think culture plays a role in the use of these challenge
skills?
282
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Effects of Confrontation Versus Support
Citation:
 Miller, W. R., Benefield, R. G., & Tonigan, J. S. (1993). Enhancing motivation
for change in problem drinking: A controlled comparison of two therapist styles. 
Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61,
 455–461. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.61.3.455
Rationale:
 Client lack of motivation is a big problem in addiction work, leading clients to
not comply with treatment recommendations, to not seek or to drop out of treatment, and
leading to unsuccessful treatment outcomes. Although in the past this lack of motivation
was blamed on client traits or defense mechanisms, Miller et al. wondered about the
influence of therapist behaviors. In particular, addictions treatment used to emphasize a
hard-hitting, directive, confrontational style meant to break through defense mechanisms,
but Miller et al. suggested that a more empathic, supportive approach might be more
effective. Therefore, they sought to compare a directive, confrontational approach with a
client-centered approach.
Method:
 Participants, who were recruited for an assessment of their drinking behavior, first
completed preintervention measures of their drinking behavior. They were then assigned to
either an evaluation session to assess their alcohol risk and impairment within a week or to
a delayed evaluation after a 6-week waiting period. Approximately one week after the
evaluation, participants were randomly assigned to get feedback about their alcohol risk
from interviewers who used either a directive (confronted about alcoholism, gave advice,
and disagreed with clients about minimization of alcoholism) or client-centered approach
(used empathy, reflective listening, deemphasized labeling of alcoholism in favor of
considering the negative effects of alcohol and what the client might need to do about it).
Tapes of sessions were coded for interviewer and client behavior.
Interesting Findings:
Therapists in the directive condition confronted more, listened less, questioned less, and restructured (similar to
interpretations) less than did therapists in the client-centered condition.
Clients who received the directive style were more likely than clients in the client-centered approach to argue with
the therapist, interrupt or ignore the therapist, and deny or not acknowledge problems.
The more the therapist (in either condition) confronted the client (e.g., challenged, disagreed, engaged in head-on
disputes, expressed incredulity, emphasized negative attributes, used sarcasm), the more alcohol the client drank 1
year later.
Clients gave positive, self-motivational statements more often when therapists listened and restructured.
Conclusions:
A confrontational style is associated with client resistance. Therapists may be more confrontational with resistant
clients, and clients may become more resistant with confrontational therapists.
The authors noted that confrontation and empathy are not inherently incompatible, but from the description, it
sounds like the therapists in the confrontation condition in this study were more argumentative than is advocated
in the current text.
Implications for Therapy:
Challenges need to be presented carefully, with a lot of listening and empathy.
Helpers need to avoid being argumentative with clients.
283
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
284
Men go abroad to wonder at the heights of mountains, at the huge waves of the sea, at
the long courses of the rivers, at the vast compass of the ocean, at the circular motions
of the stars; and they pass by themselves without wondering.
—St. Augustine
Jim told his helper that he was feeling depressed and aimless. He felt that nothing made
sense and that he had no purpose in life. He also talked extensively about how his
parents were anxious about him taking risks since his older brother had died in a
motorcycle accident. On the basis of this and other information the helper had learned
about Jim through several sessions, the helper said, “I wonder whether your lack of
purpose in life is because you are still grieving the loss of your brother and you haven’t
been able to make your own decisions and figure out who you are as a person.” This
interpretation helped Jim make sense of his depression and aimlessness. After talking
further with the helper and trying to understand what was going on inside, Jim was able
to see his life in a new perspective and to think about how he wanted to be.
H
elpers ideally begin the interpretive process with an attitude of empathic
curiosity. They wonder what it is that makes clients act a certain way. And they
invite clients to think more deeply about what causes and maintains their
problems. Furthermore, they help clients develop their own insights because
discovered insights are typically better than those that are imposed. The skills
that helpers use to facilitate insight are open questions and probes for insight,
interpretations, and disclosures of insight.
Open Questions and Probes for Insight
Some clients come up with insights on their own if granted the space and
support to do so. They just need helpers to give them permission to be curious
and to join them in the process of trying to figure out what is going on. Open
questions and probes for insight, which are questions or probes that invite
285
clients to think about deeper meanings for their thoughts, feelings, or behaviors,
can be used for this purpose (see 
Exhibit 13.1
). These questions and probes
gently guide the client to explore and become curious about possible
explanations. These open questions and probes might be phrased in the
following ways:
“What are your thoughts about what is going on there?”
“What do you make of your feelings about the ending of the
relationship?”
“What connection do you make between your feelings and the event?”
286
EXHIBIT 13.1
Overview of Open Questions and Probes for Insight
Open questions and probes for insight are similar to those used for thoughts
and feelings (see 
Chapters 8
 and 
9
). The only difference is that the focus is on
asking the client to think about insight rather than about thoughts or feelings.
As discussed with open questions and probes for thoughts and feelings, open
questions and probes for insight should be done gently and with an air of
curiosity. The helper is collaboratively inquiring and helping the client to think
about insight. Helpers do not ask too many questions at one time, do give
clients time to respond, and vary questions with other skills so that they do not
sound repetitive.
Whereas open questions are phrased in the form of a question (e.g., “What
are your thoughts about that?”), probes are phrased in the form of a statement or
directive (e.g., “Tell me more about your thoughts”). The phrasing is different,
but the intent for both is to facilitate exploration.
One way to develop open questions and probes is to think about aspects of
the narrative that do not quite fit. For example, in one session when a client was
talking about her inexplicable and sudden bursts of anger at her boyfriend, the
helper asked, “What is it about your boyfriend that allows you to blow up at
him?” and then later “What might be some reasons that he doesn’t deserve your
respect?” These questions came directly from what the client was talking about
and helped the client think about her anger in a different way.
287
Although I advised against asking “why” questions in the exploration stage,
they are more appropriate in the insight stage if done tentatively and
infrequently. Because the aim of the insight stage is to achieve insight, it can be
useful to ask clients about their understanding, as long as helpers are careful not
to sound blaming, accusatory, or demanding. Again, the goal is for the helper
and the client to work together to construct meanings, so helpers need to be
respectful, gentle, and genuinely eager to help the client attain insight when
asking “why” questions. So rather than demandingly saying, “Why do you do
that?” in an accusatory tone, the helper might empathically say, “I wonder if you
could think about why you do that?” The helper’s goal, of course, is to stimulate
curiosity rather than defensiveness.
Open questions and probes for insight are ideal as a first step into the
interpretive process because they allow helpers to find out what clients think and
give clients a chance to integrate what they have learned in the exploration stage.
Interspersed with open questions and probes, helpers can use a few
interpretations and disclosures of insight.
Interpretations
Interpretations are interventions that go beyond what a client has overtly stated
or recognized and present a new meaning, reason, or explanation for behaviors,
thoughts, or feelings so clients can see problems in a new way (see 
Exhibit 13.2
).
Interpretations can work in the following ways:
make connections between seemingly isolated statements or events
(e.g., “Could your anger at your husband right now be connected to
your grief over your mother’s death?”);
point out themes or patterns in a client’s behaviors, thoughts, or
feelings (e.g., “It seems that you get fired from every job after about 6
months. I wonder if somehow your fear of success makes it difficult for
you to keep a job longer”);
explicate defenses, resistance, or transference (e.g., “I wonder if you’re
expecting me to respond like your father does”); and
offer a new framework or explanation to understand behaviors,
thoughts, feelings, or problems (e.g., “You say you were spoiled as a
child, but it seems to me that you often felt abandoned and anxious as
a child and that leads you to cling to other people”).
288
EXHIBIT 13.2
Overview of Interpretation
289
EXHIBIT 13.2 
(
Continued
)
Overview of Interpretation
RATIONALE FOR GIVING INTERPRETATIONS
Interpretations can provide clients with a conceptual framework that explains
their problems and offers a rationale for overcoming their concerns. Frank and
Frank (1991) noted that interpretations increase clients’ sense of security,
mastery, and self-efficacy by providing labels for experiences that seem
confusing, haphazard, or inexplicable. Frank and Frank asserted that
interpretations relieve distress in part by relabeling client emotions to make
them more understandable. They noted that the inexplicable loses much of its
power to terrify when it is put in words. For example, if a helper interprets that
Pablo’s vague uneasiness at work is anger at the boss, who is a stand-in for the
client’s father, Pablo’s uneasiness loses its power. Pablo is no longer
unrealistically angry at his boss and instead can work on his feelings toward his
father.
From a psychoanalytic perspective (e.g., Bibring, 1954; Blanck, 1966;
Freud, 1914/1953b; Fromm-Reichmann, 1950), interpretations are used
infrequently but are the “pure gold” of therapy—the central technique for
producing self-knowledge and change in clients. Psychoanalytic therapists create
interpretations from client material that has been repressed and is unconscious.
290
They postulate that interpretations are effective because they stimulate insight,
which can lead to more reality-oriented feelings and behavior. Interpretations
are thought to work by replacing unconscious processes with conscious ones,
thus enabling clients to resolve unconscious conflicts. Although the exact
mechanism through which insight works is vague and needs further explication,
it is clear that insight plays a central role in the therapeutic change process.
In psychoanalytic theory, the role of early childhood is important because it
serves as the template for everything that comes afterward. Hence, early
childhood experiences are often the focus of interpretive behavior, although the
childhood events that are focused on vary for different theorists. For Freudians
(Freud, 1940/1949), the crucial early childhood event is the Electra–Oedipal
conflict, in which the child seeks to have a romantic alliance with the parent of
the opposite gender and to eliminate the parent of the same gender; the child
must resolve this conflict to progress to maturity. Erikson (1963) postulated that
the important early childhood events are interpersonal relationships, although he
also believed that identity continues to develop across the life span. For Mahler
(1968), the important early childhood event involves the symbiosis with the
primary caregivers in very early years and the subsequent movement toward
separation and individuation. Bowlby (1969, 1988) believed that attachment to
the caregiver is the crucial event in childhood.
Because psychoanalytic helpers believe that early childhood relationships
form the foundation for all ensuing relationships, interpreting the transference
(i.e., a distortion by the client of the helper based on early childhood
relationships) is an important type of interpretation. The assumption is that the
client recreates the problematic early relationship patterns with the helper either
as a way to confirm or reject that the helper will act in the same way as the early
caregiver (Weiss, Sampson, & the Mount Zion Psychotherapy Research Group,
1986). The client might sometimes act as he or she did as a child (the passive
victim) and expect the helper to play the complementary role (the dominant or
oppressive dictator). Conversely, the client might sometimes take on the role
that the parent played in the relationship (the dominant one) and expect the
helper to act like the client did as a child (the passive victim). The helper’s
reaction to the client’s behavior is crucial for confirming or disconfirming the
client’s expectations. For example, the helper might say to Amanda, “I wonder if
you get so furious at me for seeing other clients because you always felt that your
mother preferred your brother to you, and you don’t like to have to share me
with other clients.”
Although psychoanalytic theory is the basis for our thinking about using
interpretations, other theoretical orientations also use interpretations but
postulate different mechanisms by which they work. From an information-
processing perspective, Levy (1963) suggested that interpretations reveal
discrepancies between the views of the therapist and client. In other words, an
291
interpretation makes it clear that the helper has a different perspective than the
client. The helper does not “buy” the client’s view about the issue and postulates
a different explanation. If there is a discrepancy in perspectives, the client has
three choices: to change in the direction of the helper’s viewpoint, to try to
change the helper’s mind, or to discredit the helper. If the client resolves the
discrepancy in the direction of the helper’s interpretation, the client is able to
reconstrue how she or he views the issue. Research has shown that clients are
more likely to change in the direction of the helper’s interpretation if they view
the helper as expert, attractive, and trustworthy (Strong & Claiborn, 1982).
An example may help to illustrate the information-processing perspective.
Joe explained his depression as a chemical imbalance and thus sought help as a
way to get medication. His helper suggested instead that Joe’s depression was
due to unresolved feelings about his mother’s suicide and subsequent
abandonment by his father. Because Joe valued the helper’s opinion, he
struggled to understand what the helper was saying about his depression.
Initially, he argued with the helper, but then came to agree that in fact he did
have anger at both of his parents. By shifting his perspective, he was then able to
engage in the helping process to work through his feelings about his parents.
Cognitive psychologists (e.g., Glass & Holyoak, 1986; Medin & Ross,
1992) also construe the effectiveness of interpretations in different terms than do
psychoanalytic theorists. Cognitive theorists believe that all thoughts, feelings,
sensations, memories, and actions are stored in 
schemas
 (i.e., clusters of related
thoughts, feelings, actions, and images). With interpretations, helpers attempt to
change the way that schemas are structured. They bring back the memories and
try to come to new understandings about them on the basis of more current and
complete information. In effect, the schemas are changed and restructured. The
client has a new way of thinking, which must be reinforced or else it erodes.
Hence, repeated interpretations with expansions to different areas of the client’s
life may be necessary for the connections to be made and retained. In addition,
action and behavior change may be necessary to consolidate the changes in
thinking. In fact, new research on the brain suggests that there may actually be
neurological changes in the brain resulting from psychotherapy (Etkin,
Pittenger, Polam, & Kandel, 2005). These exciting findings suggest that
memories that are raised and reexperienced in a new way get laid down
differently back into brain, supporting the cognitive psychologists’ theories
about schema change.
An example for schemas relates to Katerina, who came to realize that she
was lacking in self-esteem because she felt neglected as a child. However, she
needed further interpretive work to understand the influences of the childhood
experiences on her current life and change her schemas. In addition, making
changes in her behaviors (e.g., getting a new job and leaving an abusive
relationship) helped her begin to think more highly of herself and led her to
292
understand why she had stayed in such a bad situation for so long. So
interpretive work helped Katerina change her schemas (ways of thinking), and
then action helped to reinforce or consolidate the schematic changes
(connections).
Yet another perspective comes from narrative therapy, which suggests that
we rewrite our stories in more productive ways in the helping process. In the
exploration stage, helpers work with clients to tell their narratives, and then they
use challenges to disrupt problematic narratives; finally, they use interpretations
to help clients rewrite their narratives and to think about their concerns in new
ways. For example, because in her family Joanna was cast in the role of the one
who had to take care of the younger siblings after her father died, she might
have come to tell herself that she could not expect much out of life. Because the
helper helped her understand the role of her father’s death, she was able to
rewrite the narrative into a new way of thinking about her family and how she
wanted to be in current relationships.
To conclude this section, I should note that there is not enough evidence to
support any one of these theories over the others. In fact, interpretations could
work for all the reasons: because the unconscious is made conscious and more
under ego control, because discrepancies between perspectives propel clients to
change in the direction of resolving the discrepancy, because interpretations
cause changes in schematic connections, because reprocessing memories helps
change brain structures, and because we rewrite the narratives in more adaptive
ways.
SOURCES OF DATA FOR DEVELOPING INTERPRETATIONS
There are several sources of data that helpers can use for developing
interpretations: verbal content of clients’ speech, past experiences, interpersonal
patterns, defenses, developmental stages, existential concerns and spiritual issues,
and unconscious activities.
Verbal Content of Clients’ Speech
A rich source of data for developing interpretations is in making connections in
the content of what clients talk about. Given that people often
compartmentalize things, listening carefully to what they say can reveal
connections between relevant things that they have not put together. For
example, if a client says she is having a hard time performing at her job and then
goes on to talk about the seemingly unrelated topic of anxiety over her parents’
health, the helper might connect the two if it seems probable that they are
related (e.g., “Perhaps you’re having a hard time concentrating at work because
of anxiety about your parents’ health”).
293
Past Experiences
Helpers can speculate about how a client’s behaviors is influenced by
interactions in the past with significant others. When the client’s responses to
the helper seem distorted because of experiences with others in the past or
present, helpers have material for making a transference interpretation. For
example, Keisha responded with silence and tears every time her helper provided
positive feedback. Silence and tears are not typical responses to positive
feedback, so the helper made some guesses about what might be going on with
Keisha. The helper knew about Keisha’s history with her father and suggested
that perhaps Keisha was afraid of what might follow positive feedback, given
that her father often told her something good and then yelled at her for her
mistakes. (More discussion of transference interpretations is available in several
texts: Basch, 1980; Freud, 1923/1961; Gelso & Carter, 1985, 1994; Greenson,
1967; Malan, 1976a, 1976b; Stadter, 1996; Strupp & Binder, 1984.)
Transferences occur to other people in clients’ lives. For example, Alan was
having extreme angry reactions to his female boss. As we talked about these
reactions, Alan described his boss in terms that were very similar to those he
used when talking about his mother. When I gently wondered if his boss
reminded him of his mother, he was able to see the connection and could then
understand why he was having trouble interacting with her. The research
suggests that transference interpretations work best with clients who are
functioning pretty well, especially in terms of interpersonal relationships (Crits-
Christoph & Gibbons, 2002). These findings suggest that helpers need to be
careful about using such interpretations with distressed clients.
Interpersonal Patterns
Another way of developing interpretations is to look at the client’s typical style
of interacting and conceptualize what the client is trying to accomplish in these
interactions. The core conflictual relationship theme method (Book, 1998;
Luborsky & Crits-Christoph, 1990) describes how people engage in typical
interpersonal patterns. Conflictual patterns have three components: (1) People
have wishes or needs (e.g., the client may wish to control others or to have the
approval of others), (2) they expect consistent responses from others (e.g.,
submission, approval), and (3) they consequently have a response from the self
(e.g., depressed, pleased). For example, Keisha might wish for affection and love
but also to be in control. She might expect others to hurt and control her as her
father did, and hence she might feel anxious and lack confidence. Interpretations
can thus be formulated about the client’s characteristic way of interacting with
others to help the client understand these patterns. Once the client understands
the pattern, it is easier to challenge beliefs and make changes in the pattern.
294
Defenses
Helpers can also provide interpretations based on observations of a client’s
defenses, for example, “I wonder if your difficulty at work stems from your
avoiding interactions with others, something you learned to do as a child to
protect yourself from fears of abandonment.” In the previous chapter on
challenges, helpers were encouraged to point out defenses to raise the client’s
awareness of them. Now the helper can work with the client to understand the
role that defenses play. People develop defenses early in life to help them cope
with situations but then may fail to give up the defenses that are no longer
needed. It is perhaps hardest to give up things that we believe protect us from
harm, given that we perceive that these defenses protected us in the past.
Through interpretive activity, helpers can help clients realize why they started
using defenses and then make choices about the need to continue using them.
For example, while Jon was talking about his inability to find a romantic
relationship, the helper found himself feeling sleepy. After fighting off the
sleepiness, the helper became curious and wondered to himself whether Jon was
using a defense by speaking in a monotone to keep away his anxiety. Thus, the
helper gently challenged Jon to bring this defense into awareness (e.g., “You
know, I can’t help but notice that when you start to talk about romantic
relationships, you start talking in a monotone, and it’s difficult to listen to you.
Have you noticed a change in your behavior when you feel anxious?”). Jon was
intrigued but could not think of what might be going on. After a pause to give
Jon a chance to reflect, the helper gently speculated, “I wonder if talking about
romantic relationships is hard for you because of your anger over your parents
and how they handled their divorce and made you feel like you had to take
sides?”
Developmental Stages
An additional source of material for interpretations is the client’s life stage,
within the context of his or her culture. Are clients on or off course for
mastering the developmental tasks that are important for them in their cultural
context (e.g., developing friendships, separating from parents, completing
schooling, making decisions about life partners and children, developing a
satisfying career, developing satisfying adult relationships, letting go of children
and careers, adjusting to illnesses and dying)? Interpretations can be developed
linking clients’ current emotions and functioning to what they might be
expected to be feeling or not feeling at this stage of life within their culture. For
example, Ken, a 50-year-old White man, might feel depressed because he
compares himself with other people his age who have accomplished more in
their lives. He dropped out of high school to rebel against his parents, who were
both physicians, and worked in construction his whole life; now he wonders if
295
he made the right choices. As another example, as Melania turns 35 and is not
involved in a serious romantic relationship, she is feeling anxious about whether
she will ever be able to have children.
In thinking about developmental stages, it is important to recognize that
these are somewhat culture-bound. For example, in Asian cultures, it is common
for children to live at home through college. And it is becoming more common
for young adults in the United States to return home to live with parents after
college because they cannot afford the rent on apartments. To impose one’s own
demand for independence might not be appropriate in such cases.
Existential and Spiritual Issues
Helpers can also help clients understand themselves in terms of existential
concerns. Yalom (1980), a well-known existential therapist, provided an
excellent description of what he considered to be four universal existential
concerns:
Death anxiety.
 The fact that everyone dies at some point means we all have
to come to terms with our mortality. Feelings of vulnerability about death are
particularly high at times of transition, when one is ill or has been in an accident
or attacked, when a significant other is ill or has recently been hurt or died, or
when there has been a recent major disaster. At such times, many people feel
especially attuned to loss and death and need to talk about it.
Freedom.
 Freedom refers to the lack of external structure and the need to
take responsibility for one’s destiny. When people either have many talents or
when they have no specific talents, it can be especially difficult to figure out
one’s calling and make choices.
Isolation.
 This includes isolation from both others and the world. Each of us
enters and exits the world alone; therefore, we must come to terms with our
isolation in contrast to our wish to be part of a larger whole, to be taken care of
and protected.
Meaning in life.
 We must all construct our own life meanings, given that
there is no predetermined path. We must all figure out what gives us a sense of
purpose, why we want to wake up in the morning, and what legacy we want to
leave.
Yalom (1980) noted the benefits of introducing a client with terminal
cancer into a therapy group. Having a group member dealing with issues of
death brings up the existential issues more saliently for the rest of the group
members. But Yalom also noted that clients in individual work frequently give
clues about existential concerns if helpers just pay attention. For example, clients
complain about physical aches and pains, of aging, of not being able to do what
they used to do, of not knowing what to do with their time, of wanting to leave
a legacy, about the death of a pet, or of wondering about spirituality. All of these
296
topics can be explored further to help people deal with existential crises.
Interestingly, Yalom suggested that clients often feel more rather than less
anxious after talking about existential issues because they realize they cannot
control many things in life. But we hope that through talking about existential
issues rather than defending against them, they gain in terms of living more
meaningful lives.
Note that culture clearly plays a role in existential concerns, particularly in
terms of religious beliefs. A person who believes in life after death will probably
experience less death anxiety than will someone who does not believe in life after
death. By listening carefully and nonjudgmentally to what clients say and asking
them about relevant cultural beliefs, helpers can often hear underlying existential
concerns and then assist clients, via interpretation, to understand these critical
issues.
Unconscious Sources
Interpretations can be developed through indications of unconscious activities,
most typically observable through dreams, fantasies, and slips of the tongue.
Psychoanalytic theorists have long postulated that important unconscious
material can be detected by looking at these manifestations. For example, if a
client accidentally uses a former boyfriend’s name when talking about her
current boyfriend, one could wonder aloud with her whether there was some
significance to the slip. Or if a client has a dream about the helper, this presents
the helper with an ideal opportunity to look at what the client might be
thinking about the helper. Similarly, if the helper has a dream about a client,
this presents a valuable learning opportunity for the helper to speculate about
the client, although helpers rarely reveal such dreams to clients, especially if they
involve the helper’s own unresolved personal issues (see Hill et al., 2013;
Spangler, Hill, Mettus, Guo, & Heymsfield, 2009). For more detail on how
helpers can work with dreams, I refer readers to a companion text that also uses
the three-stage model (Hill, 2004) and a DVD demonstration of the dream
model (American Psychological Association, with Hill, C. E., 2013).
ACCURACY OF INTERPRETATIONS
For psychoanalytic theorists, the accuracy of the helper’s interpretation is
important. The client and helper are on an “archeological dig” to uncover what
actually happened in the client’s past and understand how these events affect the
client’s current behavior. Of course, psychoanalytic therapists emphasize that
what they hear in therapy is the client’s perceptions about the events rather than
actual events.
The problem is that accuracy can never be determined. We cannot go back
and see what actually happened in the client’s life, and even if we could, we
297
would not know how the client absorbed the experiences. We know that people
perceive events idiosyncratically and then distort memories of events over time
(Glass & Holyoak, 1986; Loftus, 1988). Research shows that people can
“remember” events that never happened (Brainerd & Reyna, 1998), so helpers
need to be careful not to try to persuade clients that they have certain memories
(e.g., repressed memories about childhood sexual abuse).
Many psychoanalysts have struggled with this dilemma about accuracy.
Reid and Finesinger (1952) suggested that insight must merely be believed or
make sense to have a therapeutic effect. They thought that the psychological
relevance of the interpretation to the client’s problems is more important than
the truth per se (i.e., does the interpretation help the client understand more
about his or her problems?). Similarly, Frank and Frank (1991) noted that
interpretations do not have to be correct, only plausible. As an example, they
cited a study by Mendel (1964) in which four clients responded with a drop in
anxiety when they were offered the same series of six “all-purpose”
interpretations (e.g., “You seem to live your life as though you are apologizing
all the time”).
I do not suggest that helpers ignore the “truth” and just have a set of
standard interpretations to give clients. Quite the opposite: I believe that helpers
should try as much as possible to develop interpretations that fit all of the
information that clients present. Helpers should remain humble, however, about
how difficult it is to know all the data and to determine whether an
interpretation is accurate.
Basch (1980), a psychoanalytic therapist, indicated that whether clients
agree or disagree with an interpretation is not a good indication of accuracy.
Rather, he suggested, the criterion for accuracy should be whether clients
subsequently bring up material that indicates they have gained insight into the
problem. For example, if a helper interprets fear of intimacy as being based on
feeling rejected by his father, the helper could conclude that the interpretation
was facilitative (a better criterion than accuracy) if Lao brings in additional
memories of his father being distant and rejecting. I would caution, however,
that clients sometimes bring in (and even make up) memories to please their
helpers.
Frank and Frank (1991) further noted that the client is the ultimate judge
of the truth of the interpretation. They suggested that the helper’s power to
present an interpretation that is accepted by the client as valid depends on
several factors:
whether the interpretation makes sense out of all the material the client
has offered;
the manner in which the interpretation is offered—interpretations
must be presented in ways that catch and hold the client’s attention,
298
such as with vivid imagery and metaphor, because clients need to be in
a state of emotional arousal to be able to make use of interpretations;
the client’s confidence in the helper; and
the beneficial consequences for the client’s ability to function and for
the client’s sense of well-being.
In sum, as helpers we can never really determine the accuracy of
interpretations. Thus, I suggest that perceived helpfulness is the important
criterion for evaluating interpretations. The following criteria may be used for
determining whether interpretations are helpful for clients:
When an interpretation is helpful, the client typically feels a sense of
“aha,” of learning something that “clicks,” and has a feeling that things
make sense in a new way.
Clients typically have a feeling of energy and excitement about their
new discoveries, particularly when they feel they have discovered the
insight themselves.
Clients present additional important information that confirms the
insight.
Clients start thinking about what to do differently based on the
insight.
In short, when interpretations are helpful, clients arrive at personally
relevant insights and can use these insights to talk more deeply about problems
(emotional insight) and move to action. In contrast, when interpretations are
not helpful, the client might become silent, change the topic, feel
misunderstood, feel angry or upset, or dismiss the therapist.
HOW TO INTERPRET
The major task is to engage in an interpretive process in such a way that the
client and helper are working together to construct interpretations. As with
challenges, interpretations should be done carefully, gently, respectfully,
thoughtfully, empathically, and infrequently.
If you decide that a client is ready for interpretive work, you might begin by
asking the client for her or his interpretation (e.g., “What do you make of your
flunking out of school even though you are obviously very bright?”; “How do
you make sense of your reluctance to retire even though your wife keeps
pressuring you to do so?”). Asking clients for their interpretations before
providing them with your thinking encourages clients to think about
themselves, gets helpers out of the position of being the ones who provide all the
interpretations, gives helpers more information from which to formulate
interpretations, and allows helpers to assess clients’ current level of insight.
If the client seems interested and engaged in the insight process, the helper
299
might give a gentle, tentative interpretation to augment or extend the client’s
initial understanding. Helpers can develop these gentle, tentative interpretations
by paying attention to what the client is half saying, saying in a confused way, or
saying implicitly. The client may have almost put it all together and may only
need a little help to begin to integrate the pieces.
Helpers should view this initial interpretation as a working hypothesis,
which will be revised as the interpretive process ensues and more information is
gathered. The purpose of the initial tentative interpretation is to help the client
take the next step in the interpretive process and think about the reasons for his
or her behavior.
The helper and client work together to construct insights that the client can
hear and assimilate. The process is a creative attempt to understand a puzzling
phenomenon. Natterson (1993) stressed that when a helper who wants to exert
power over a client offers a shocking interpretation of a dream, it usually has an
antitherapeutic effect because it discourages the client from sharing dreams.
Similarly, Reik (1935) emphasized the deep, collaborative nature of the
therapeutic encounter. He suggested that insights that clients construct as a
result of interpretations should come as a surprise to both the helper and client,
rather than because the helper has forced a predetermined interpretation on the
client. Basch (1980) likewise noted that interpretations that are too obvious,
easy, simplistic, or superficial are usually trivial or wrong, whereas the important
insights are those that come as a surprise to both client and helper.
After effective interpretations, a client typically adds new information or
suggests alternative interpretations. This new exploration is wonderful and gives
a clear indication that the client is responding well to the interpretative process.
Helpers can respond by reflecting feelings or asking open questions and probes
to draw out the client’s thoughts.
On the other hand, if a client does not respond or rejects an interpretation
(says “Yes, but . . . ”), the helper needs to reevaluate the situation. If the helper
thinks the interpretation was right but the client was not yet ready to hear it, the
helper can return to the interpretation at a later stage when she or he thinks the
client is more able to tolerate insight (interpretations sometimes are painful to
hear). If the helper is wrong (which is possible because helpers never have all the
relevant information), the helper can use exploration skills to obtain more
understanding of the client before attempting again to interpret. Alternatively,
helpers can ask clients to provide an interpretation that fits for them. The key
here is to be nondefensive and eager to work with the client collaboratively.
If the client accepts the interpretation and adds new information, the helper
can extend the interpretation to a variety of situations to help the client reach
greater understanding. For example, if the interpretation involves the client
being unorganized and sloppy as a reaction to an overly neat and compulsive
mother, the helper can extend this insight to how the client is messy in her
300
apartment, unorganized in terms of her studying behavior, and late for
appointments. By talking about all these areas, the client is more likely to begin
to understand herself. Extending the interpretation to a number of situations
also generalizes the learning, making it more likely that the client will begin to
incorporate changes in thinking.
After hearing more from the client in reaction to the initial interpretation,
the helper can summarize or offer a reformulated interpretation. The new
interpretation might lead the client to new material that confirms or denies the
validity of the reformulated interpretation. Thus, rather than helpers having and
delivering the “correct” interpretations to clients, the helper and client work
together to create or construct interpretations. This collaborative process
requires that helpers be invested in the interpretive process rather than in
specific interpretations, so they can revise interpretations when clients offer new
information, explanations, or ideas.
Interpretations can be phrased as a direct statement (e.g., “You are worried
about whether you should get married, so you are diverting your anxiety about
getting married into trying to make the wedding perfect”); phrased more
tentatively (e.g., “I wonder if your fear of failure could possibly be related to
feeling that you are not sure you can please your mother”); or phrased as a
question (e.g., “Could it be that you distrust men because of your bad
relationship with your father?”). Although the last intervention is phrased as a
question, it is clearly an interpretation because the content of the question
assumes a relationship that the client had not articulated and provides an
explanation for the behavior.
The phrasing of interpretations is crucial to their acceptance by clients.
Phrasing the interpretation tentatively and without jargon makes it easier for
clients to understand. For example, “I wonder if you might be afraid of what I
say because I remind you of your mother, who was sometimes mean to you” is
easier for a client to hear than “Your transference of your Oedipal rage onto me
has caused you to distort my meaning.” The latter interpretation is difficult for
most clients to hear because it is stated too definitely and with too much jargon.
Psychoanalytic theorists suggest that it is important to provide
interpretations that are not too far beyond what clients already have recognized
(e.g., Speisman, 1959). If interpretations are too deep, clients cannot understand
what the helper is talking about; interpretations that are slightly beyond the
client’s awareness make more sense to the client and give the client a manageable
stimulus for thinking. In the first session with a client who procrastinates, for
example, the helper might not want to interpret the cause of the procrastination
back to early childhood events because the client may not be ready to hear such
an interpretation. Instead, the helper might interpret just beyond the client
awareness to gently encourage the client to go to slightly new levels of
understanding (e.g., “Perhaps it’s hard for you to study because you’re afraid of
301
succeeding”). Later, when the client is comfortable with this thought, the helper
might push for deeper interpretations, such as the client’s reluctance to
supersede his or her parents.
EXAMPLES OF INTERPRETATION
A wonderful example of the whole working-through process comes from Hill,
Thompson, and Mahalik (1989) in their examination of a single case of
successful brief psychotherapy. The middle-aged client was the middle of 16
children. Her mother had married at a very young age; when her husband (the
client’s father) died, the mother abandoned the children. The client was
divorced with three children and was depressed, blaming herself for being
“spoiled.” At the end of the therapy, the therapist and client both indicated that
the most important interpretation was that the client’s current difficulties
resulted from a difficult childhood and inadequate parenting. Interpretations
occurred only in the last half of the 12-session therapy, were of moderate depth,
seemed to be accurate, and were interspersed with approval-reassurance,
questions, restatements, and reflections aimed at catharsis. The therapist
repeated the interpretation many times and applied it to many situations, which
she referred to in postsession interviews as “chipping away” at the client’s
defenses. The client not only accepted the interpretation but also slowly began
to incorporate it into her thinking (i.e., she changed from seeing herself as
spoiled to seeing herself as neglected). The interpretation enabled her to disclose
painful secrets (e.g., her father’s attempted suicide and subsequent
hospitalization in a mental institution). Finally, the therapist began to pair the
interpretation with a suggestion that the client was a good parent to her children
and thus could parent herself. The interpretation helped the client come to a
greater self-understanding and, together with the direct guidance about
parenting herself, enabled her to change in some fundamental ways (e.g.,
become a better parent, obtain a job, and begin an intimate relationship).
Here is another example with dialogue (interpretations are in italics). Note
that the helper explores the problem before interpreting.
Client:
 
Lately, when I’m in church, I have been getting very anxious.
I have been starting to panic when we have to hold hands to say
a prayer. My palms get very sweaty, and I feel very embarrassed.
I start worrying about it so much ahead of time that I cannot
concentrate on the church service. I just don’t understand why
I should get so nervous. I wish I could understand it, though,
because it is making my experience of going to church very
unpleasant.
Helper:
 
It sounds like you feel upset about it.
Client:
 
I do. I feel foolish. I mean, who cares about my sweaty
302
palms? I’m sure the other people are just interested in going to
church and don’t really care about me. I don’t know the people
very well though, because I just started going to this church
when I moved here this fall.
Helper:
 
Tell me a little bit about the role of the church in your life.
Client:
 
I was hoping to have a community like we had in my
hometown. I need something apart from the people I know at
work. But it hasn’t worked out. I haven’t really met anyone
there yet.
Helper:
 
So you just moved here and have been hoping to make
friends in church.
Client:
 
Church was always important in my family. I don’t know
how much I believe in the religion, but I do feel a need for the
connection that you get in church.
Helper:
 
So you want to make friends and find a community, but
you also feel some ambivalence and you’re not sure what you
believe.
Client:
 
Wow, that is really true. I do feel like I’m supposed to go to
church, but I’m not sure I really want to. I feel like my parents
expect me to go. But I don’t quite know what I believe. I
haven’t taken the time to figure out what I believe separate
from what my parents told me to believe.
Helper:
 
I wonder if worrying about your sweaty palms takes your mind
off thinking about what you believe.
Client:
 
Yeah, that’s a good point. I sure cannot listen to much of the
sermon if I’m worried about the person next to me and what
they will think of me.
Helper:
 
Perhaps going to this new church is difficult because it reminds
you so much of your family and what you were supposed to do as a
child.
Client:
 
You’re right. I feel like I’ve been trying to establish myself as
an independent person. I moved across country to be on my
own and make my own decisions, but I miss my family and my
community. I don’t know how much I want to be here. I feel
like I’m struggling with trying to figure out who I am and what
I want out of life. (Client continues to explore.)
DIFFICULTIES IN USING INTERPRETATION
Some helpers are hesitant to interpret because it feels intrusive to “poke around
in clients’ heads.” They fear that their interpretations will be wrong or
premature, will upset or anger clients, or will harm the therapeutic relationship.
303
They err on the side of passivity and do not offer any of their own thoughts to
the interpretive exchange. In addition, some helpers feel unable to put all the
pieces together to formulate interpretations. If you feel this way, you might
practice trying to understand your own behavior, focus more on asking the
clients to come up with their own interpretations, and have patience that more
interpretive ability will come with practice. I also suggest further readings in
psychoanalytic theory (e.g., Basch, 1980; McWilliams, 2004; Summers &
Barber, 2010).
Other helpers are too eager to give interpretations and err on the side of
aggressiveness. The interpretation process brings out the worst in some helpers.
They become invested in the intellectual challenge of figuring out clients and are
eager to use their powers of insight. They lose sight of the need for empathy and
a strong therapeutic relationship and charge into putting all the pieces of the
puzzle together. I agree that people are infinitely intriguing, interesting, and fun
to figure out, but helpers must temper such sentiments with a strong
compassion for clients and a desire to help clients understand themselves.
I caution helpers in the use and potential abuse of interpretations because
they can be powerful interventions. Helpers have the responsibility to use such
power appropriately. I also caution helpers that clients may agree with
interpretations because they want to please, but they may actually disagree with
the interpretations and can feel wounded by them. Helpers thus need to observe
client reactions and ask clients about their reactions.
Helpers also need to be careful to encourage clients to become actively
involved in collaborating on constructing interpretations. In addition, timing is
important, because clients need to be able to hear the interpretations and can
build on them in constructing their own understandings.
Another problem helpers have is giving too many interpretations in one
session. Clients often need time to absorb and think about each interpretation,
so helpers should gauge their pace on the basis of clients’ reactions.
Disclosures of Insight
Olga was emotional and upset when she revealed that her husband had left her
for a younger woman. She felt abandoned and humiliated and did not want any
of her friends to know that her husband had left. She talked in her helping
session about feeling depressed, isolated, alone, and hopeless, and she said that
she was too old to start over. The helper said, “You know, I got divorced several
years ago, and I never thought I would recover. I came to realize that I had
believed my worth was dependent on whether I had a man, rather than who I
was. I wonder if that’s true for you?” Olga was momentarily taken aback, and
304
then said, “I never thought of it that way. I think you may be right. I was always
taught that I needed to be married, and so I never prepared for anything else.”
The helper’s disclosure thus enabled Olga to have an “aha” experience and think
about why she was so upset about her husband’s leaving her. She did not really
miss him; they had not been getting along well for many years. Instead, she
missed the sense of security that being married gave her. Once she understood
that about herself, she could begin to adjust to the divorce.
In another example, Angela was a new mother who was having trouble
getting back to a sexual relationship with her husband after the baby’s birth. The
helper disclosed that when she had been a new mother, it was gratifying to have
the baby’s affection and wondered if perhaps Angela was shifting all her
attention from the husband to the baby. Because they had a good relationship
and the helper was a mother, Angela was able to think about the possibility
without feeling pathologized.
A disclosure of insight reveals an understanding the helper has learned
about himself or herself and is used to facilitate the client’s understanding of his
or her thoughts, feelings, behaviors, and issues (see 
Exhibit 13.3
). Instead of
using challenges or interpretations, helpers share insights that they have learned
about themselves in the hope of encouraging clients to think about themselves at
a deeper level. Remember, though, that the intention is to facilitate client insight
rather than to further the helper’s understanding of himself or herself (refer back
to discussion of disclosures in 
Chapters 8
 and 
9
).
305
EXHIBIT 13.3
Overview of Disclosure of Insight
306
EXHIBIT 13.3 
(
Continued
)
Overview of Disclosure of Insight
Some students confuse disclosures of insight with other types of disclosures.
The key feature here is that the helper has a hint about an insight that might
help the client and uses his or her experience to present this in a more tentative
way than an interpretation.
WHY USE DISCLOSURE OF INSIGHT?
Helpers disclose their experiences to help clients attain realizations of which they
had not been aware. This type of disclosure is useful when clients are stuck or
are having a hard time achieving deep levels of self-understanding on their own.
For example, if a client is talking about everything being just fine after leaving
her abusive husband, but the helper suspects that the client has a lot of
underlying turmoil, the helper might say, “I remember feeling like I wasn’t sure
if I made the right decision after I left my partner. It was real scary for me
because my parents never allowed me to make my own decisions so I didn’t trust
myself. I wonder if something like that is true for you?” The helper hopes the
client will understand more about herself by hearing about the helper’s
experience.
A reason for using disclosures of insight is to enable clients to hear things in
307
a less threatening way than might happen with therapist challenges or
interpretations. Hearing a disclosure such as “I also feel like a child when I go to
visit my parents because I lose my identity and don’t know who I am” or “I also
have a hard time going to movies by myself because I feel like nobody loves me”
provides an opportunity for clients to think about whether they have similar
reasons for their behaviors. Rather than asserting an interpretation that may
offend the client, helpers disclose personal insights and ask whether these
insights might fit for the client, thus possibly facilitating new and deeper insight.
By using disclosure, the helper admits that the insight may be a projection and
allows the client to see if it fits. As with tentative interpretations, helpers are
hoping that clients will feel freer to look for underlying reasons after they have
heard helpers disclosing their insights. Thus, disclosures can have a modeling
effect.
In addition, disclosures can alter the power balance of the helping
relationship and lead to greater client participation. Rather than helpers being
the experts with the answers and clients relying on helpers to solve their
problems, disclosures make clear that helpers are also human and grapple with
difficult concerns. In addition, in dyads in which cultures differ, disclosures can
bridge the gap and make clients feel that their helpers understand them.
HOW TO DISCLOSE ABOUT INSIGHT
Helpers need to think honestly about their intentions before disclosing. If they
had an experience that could help clients understand more about themselves, it
might be useful to disclose it for all the reasons noted above. Disclosures should
not be used, however, to discuss or solve the helper’s problems (e.g., “You think
you’ve got it bad, let me tell you how bad it was for me”). Harm can result if
helpers disclose because they have unresolved problems or have a desire to get
attention for themselves. In this case, the focus shifts from the client to the
helper, perhaps resulting in the client taking care of the helper.
To develop appropriate disclosures, helpers can think about what
contributed to their behaviors when they were in situations similar to those of
their clients. By focusing on insights they gained about themselves, helpers use
their experiences to help clients attain insight. If helpers decide that disclosures
are appropriate for the client at a particular moment, they should keep the focus
of the disclosure on the insight rather than on recounting details of the
experience. For example, rather than talking about the details of how his father
died, the helper might say, “When my father died, I didn’t know what I was
feeling so I relied on everyone to tell me what I should be feeling. In the process,
I lost myself. I wonder if that’s happening to you?”
When helpers disclose, it is best to choose something that occurred in the
past and that has been resolved, resulted in a new perspective, can be helpful to
308
the client, and does not make the helper feel vulnerable. Helpers should be
honest about their experiences and should not make up things just to have a
disclosure. If they have not had a similar experience that led to a new
understanding, they should use a different skill rather than making up
something or using a hypothetical example. A fabricated disclosure of insight
would be inauthentic and cause great distance with the client. In addition,
disclosures that are short and immediately turn the focus back to the client tend
to be most effective. Helpers can follow disclosures with open questions and
probes about whether the insight fits for the client (e.g., “I wonder how that fits
for you?” or “I wonder if anything like that happens for you?”).
If a disclosure does not work (e.g., the client denies or disavows having
similar experiences or feels uncomfortable knowing information about the
helper), it is probably best to refrain from making further disclosures. Several
things could have happened. The helper could be right, but the client might not
be ready to gain insight. Or the helper could be projecting insight onto the
client. In addition, the client could become upset about learning anything
personal about the helper because it alters the distance between them. In such
instances, the helper can collect more evidence to determine whether the helper’s
projection, the client’s lack of readiness, or the client’s need for distance is at
issue. If lack of readiness is the problem, the helper can try other skills (e.g.,
reflection of feelings or challenge). If projection is the problem, the helper can
seek supervision or therapy. If the client prefers not to know anything about the
helper, the helper can change strategies and limit disclosures. Of course, any
extreme reaction should be investigated to assist in understanding and gaining
insight into the client’s underlying issues.
EXAMPLE OF DISCLOSURE OF INSIGHT
The following example shows a helper using disclosure of insight (in italics) in a
session.
Client:
 
I’ve been thinking a lot about death lately. I’m not thinking
of suicide but more about the inevitability of death. There are
so many senseless murders lately—the news is full of them. But
I cannot quite grasp the idea of death—it doesn’t make sense to
me. It doesn’t seem fair to be killed in the prime of life.
Helper:
 
You sound scared about the idea of dying.
Client:
 
Oh yeah, I really am. I really don’t know what happens after
death. Of course, my parents’ religion talks about heaven and
hell, but I can’t quite buy all that. But if I don’t believe what
their religion says, I don’t quite know what happens at death.
And what is the meaning of life? I mean why are we here, and
why does everyone rush around? What difference does it all
309
make? I’m sure this all sounds very confusing, but I’ve been
thinking about it a lot lately.
Helper:
 
No, it makes a lot of sense. I think all of us need to grapple
with the meaning of life and the fact that we are going to die.
You know, though, let me make a guess about something.
When I have been most concerned about death and meaning in life
is when I have been in moments of transition and trying to figure
out what 1 want out of life.
 I wonder if that’s true for you now?
Client:
 
Hmmm. That’s interesting. I am about to turn 30, and it
feels like a big turning point for me. I’m in a job I don’t really
like, and I haven’t found the relationship that I always hoped I
would find at this point. (Client continues talking about his
personal concerns.)
DIFFICULTIES IN USING DISCLOSURES OF INSIGHT
One potential danger in using disclosure is that helpers might inappropriately
project their feelings and reactions onto clients. For example, if a client has been
talking about getting bad grades and a helper states, “I feel panicked when I get
bad grades because I am still afraid of my parents’ anger,” the helper might have
inappropriately projected his or her own insight onto the client. The client
might confirm that this projection is not accurate by responding, “No, I feel
more like I deserved the bad grade because I didn’t study.” Helpers need to
remember that they are separate from their clients, have different experiences,
and their personal insights might not apply to their clients.
Another problem is that some helpers use disclosure to satisfy their urge to
reveal themselves, rather than using it intentionally to help clients gain insight.
Similarly, some helpers mistake the notion of being open as an opportunity to
say whatever is on their minds. Greenberg, Rice, and Elliott (1993) called such
impulsive helper openness “promiscuous” disclosure. With these types of
disclosures, clients may feel uncomfortable and lose respect for the helper. For
example, Mary sought help to address her concerns about divorce.
Unfortunately, her helper talked more about her own experiences with divorce
than Mary did. Mary terminated and found a different helper who used
disclosures more judiciously. Similarly, Greenberg et al. (1993) suggested that
disclosures need to be done with disciplined spontaneity on the basis of the
helpers’ accurate self-awareness of inner experience shared in a facilitative
manner at a therapeutically appropriate moment. In other words, helpers need
to be aware of themselves and of their intentions and deliver disclosures that are
likely to help clients.
Beginning helpers tend to use too many disclosures. As with medical
students seeing themselves in all the syndromes described in their medical texts,
310
beginning helpers connect with many of their clients’ struggles. They have a
hard time setting aside personal issues to focus on their clients’ problems. It is
indeed difficult to shift from the mutual sharing that ideally occurs in
friendships to the reduced amount of sharing that occurs in helping
relationships. Paying attention to how a client’s problems differ from the
helper’s can facilitate the helper to differentiate himself or herself from the client
and use disclosures judiciously.
Finally, some beginning helpers worry about making their disclosures
perfect. They believe that disclosures could have negative effects if not done
exactly right. They also worry about sounding patronizing, as if they have
figured out everything for themselves whereas clients are still learning. They
worry that they would feel too vulnerable and would lose any credibility they
have as helpers if they disclose issues they are currently involved in and do not
understand completely. Other helpers are concerned that they might not have
an appropriate disclosure because they have not faced a similar situation or have
not gained any insight into the situation—perhaps they really are in the same
boat as the client. I recommend that helpers use other interventions if they feel
uncomfortable or vulnerable using disclosures. I would also note that practice
under close supervision helps greatly in terms of teaching beginning helpers the
bounds of appropriate disclosures.
What Do You Think?
What role do you think culture plays in the interpretative process?
When do you think it would be appropriate or inappropriate to offer
interpretations, disclosures of insight, and open questions and probes
for insight?
Do you agree about the necessity for developing a collaborative process
of constructing interpretations with clients? Why or why not?
Debate both sides of the idea that interpretations are a necessary
prerequisite for change to occur.
Argue for and against the idea that interpretations are the “pure gold”
of helping.
Discuss whether clients can be taught to be more introspective.
Debate whether interpretations should only be given after challenges.
Debate how to determine the accuracy of interpretations.
What theoretical approach do you prefer as a basis for developing
interpretations?
Discuss the notion that disclosure reduces the power imbalance
between helpers and clients. What are the advantages and
disadvantages of having a power imbalance in a helping relationship?
311
What types of helpers might feel most comfortable disclosing?
Debate the importance of helper neutrality in the insight stage.
312
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Accuracy of Interpretations
Citation:
 Crits-Christoph, P., Cooper, A., & Luborsky, L. (1988). The accuracy of
therapists’ interpretations and the outcome of dynamic psychotherapy. 
Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 
490–495. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.56.4.490
Rationale:
 Given that psychodynamic therapists think of interpretations as the supreme
agent of therapeutic change, we need to know more about the effects of interpretations.
Crits-Christoph et al. argued that it is not just that any interpretations are helpful but
rather that interpretations must be accurate. Interpretations were defined as providing
reasons for thoughts, feelings, or behaviors and making connections between present
circumstances and other life experiences. Accuracy was defined as the congruence between
the interpretation and the client’s core conflictual relationship themes (CCRT) as identified
in narratives about events with others. The CCRT involves the client’s wishes or needs
toward the other, the response of the other, and the corresponding response of self (e.g., a
wish to be close to others, being rejected by others, and consequently feeling lonely,
depressed, and anxious).
Method:
 Clients completed outcome measures before and after therapy (averaging 53
weeks). The core conflictual relationship theme was identified by one set of judges in about
10 relationship narrative episodes in therapy sessions. Interpretations were identified by a
separate set of judges in two early sessions of moderate-length psychodynamic therapy.
Accuracy of interpretations (congruence between the content of the clients’ CCRT and the
content of the interpretation) was judged by a third set of judges.
Interesting Findings:
Treatment outcome was better when interpretations were accurate than when interpretations were not accurate.
Of the three components of accuracy, wishes and responses of other were more related to outcome than were
responses of self.
Conclusions:
Interpretations about the client’s persistent interpersonal problems can be helpful.
It is important to know what the client wishes from another person and how he or she thinks the other person
tends to respond.
Implications for Therapy:
One way to formulate interpretations is by listening carefully when clients talk about what goes on in their
relationships, particularly in terms of what they want or need from others and what they typically get back from
others. The goal would be to make clients more aware of their typical patterns in relationships.
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
313
There are, in fact, no more important communications between one human being and
another than those expressed emotionally, and no information more vital for
constructing and reconstructing working models of the self and other than information
about how each feels towards the other . . . it is the emotional communications between
a patient and his therapist that play the crucial part.
—John Bowlby
 (1988, pp. 156–157)
Evita constantly got angry at her helper, Angela, and criticized her for everything she
said. Angela began to feel inadequate and angry at Evita and did not look forward to
sessions. Angela consulted with her supervisor, who helped her gain compassion for
Evita by coming to understand that Evita’s personal issues caused her to denigrate
Angela. The supervisor suggested that Angela use immediacy in the next session to let
Evita know how she was feeling. So in the next session, when Evita criticized her for not
saying the right feeling word, Angela said, “You know, right now I’m feeling badly
because it feels like I cannot do anything right. I feel frustrated because I don’t know
how to help you. I wonder how you feel about our relationship?” Evita broke into tears
and said that she seemed to push everyone away. Angela was able to listen and reflect
that Evita felt criticized. Eventually they came to realize that Evita pushed people away
because she feared rejection. Using immediacy allowed Angela to help Evita understand
more about how she acted with others, and its use strengthened the therapeutic
relationship.
I
mmediacy
 occurs when the helper inquires about the client’s feelings about the
therapeutic relationship or discloses how she or he is feeling about the client,
about self in relation to the client, or about the therapeutic relationship. Kiesler’s
(1988, 1996) term for immediacy was 
metacommunication,
 which he said occurs
when helpers disclose to clients their perceptions of and reactions to a client’s
actions. He distinguished metacommunication from other helper disclosures of
personal factual or historical information about life experiences because
metacommunication relates specifically to the helper’s immediate experience of
the relationship with the client. Kiesler indicated that metacommunication is
one of the most powerful interventions in the helper’s repertoire because the
helper responds to the client in a different manner from that to which the client
314
is accustomed. Rather than ignoring inappropriate behavior, as is often the case
in social interactions, for example, the helper tells the client directly but gently
about the impact of the client’s behavior on him or her. Similarly, Ivey (1994)
called immediacy being “in the moment” with the client. He pointed out that
most clients talk in the past tense about events but might profit from talking in
the present tense about what is going on in the helping relationship.
Egan (1994) suggested that immediacy can focus on the overall relationship
(e.g., “It feels to me that we are getting along well now that we have worked
through our initial discomfort”), a specific event in the session (e.g., “I was
surprised when you said that you appreciated the sessions because I wasn’t sure
how you felt about our work”), or present-tense personal reactions to the client
(e.g., “I am feeling hurt right now because you reject everything I say”). See the
overview of immediacy in 
Exhibit 14.1
. For the insight stage, immediacy
statements help clients gain greater understanding of how they come across in
the therapeutic relationship, in the hopes that clients can use this information to
change how they act in relationships outside of helping.
315
EXHIBIT 14.1
Overview of Immediacy
Immediacy overlaps somewhat with other skills. It can be thought of as a
type of disclosure because helpers disclose personal feelings, reactions, or
experiences about the client or relationship to help the client gain insight.
Immediacy can also sometimes be a type of challenge because it can be used to
confront clients about issues in the relationship (e.g., “I feel annoyed that you
avoid my questions”). In addition, immediacy can sometimes be a type of
information if it is used to point out patterns in a client’s behavior in relation to
the therapist (e.g., “Whenever I go on vacation, you cancel the first two sessions
after I return. I wonder if we could talk about this pattern?”). However,
immediacy differs from feedback about the client (a type of information covered
in the action stage, see 
Chapter 16
) because both people in the relationship are
involved in immediacy interventions, whereas in feedback about the client, the
focus is only on the client (e.g., “You did a really good job when you spoke up
to your mother”).
Types of Immediacy
316
In this chapter, I focus on four specific subtypes of immediacy. In the first
subtype, 
open questions and probes about the relationship,
 the helper invites the
client to share feelings about the therapeutic relationship. These inquiries are
thus probes into the client’s reactions to the relationship and have also been
called 
process statements
 because they address what is going on in the immediate
moment. These inquiries often involve the helper checking in with the client
about feelings. For example, the helper might ask,
“I wonder what reactions you had to the session today?”
“How did you feel just now when I praised you?”
“What would you like from me right now?”
The second subtype of immediacy is the helper’s 
statement of his or her
reactions to the clie
nt.
 Thus, the helper shares his or her own feelings and
reactions in the moment and generally follows these up with an inquiry about
how the client feels. For example, the helper might say,
“I’ve been feeling a little disconnected from you today. I wonder how
you’re feeling?”
“I feel so much closer to you today when you share your feelings so
deeply. I feel so moved by what you have said. How has it been for
you?”
“I feel uncomfortable when you follow me around outside of sessions. I
wonder if we could talk about that?”
Making the covert overt
 is the third subtype of immediacy. Often the client is
saying something to the helper indirectly, and through this intervention the
helper attempts to make the client’s intention more open. In this subtype,
anything that happens in the helping relationship is open for processing to see
whether something is going on in the relationship. For example, the helper
might say,
“You are late again today. I wonder if anything is going on in terms of
your feelings about being here?”
“You keep looking at your watch. I wonder if you’re eager to leave?”
“You seemed angry when I said that. I wonder what’s going on inside?”
A fourth subtype, which also might involve covert communications, is
drawing parallels with outside relationships.
 Clients may talk about things that
bother them about other people; they may or may not be covertly referring to
things the helper, but it can be useful to check out. Again, the helper wonders
aloud whether the client has reactions to him or her that are similar to those the
client has to others. For example,
“You mentioned that no one seems to understand you. I wonder if you
317
might be saying that I don’t understand you?”
“You are talking about withdrawing from your friends lately. I wonder if
that’s happening in here with me?”
“You’ve said that you get upset if anyone criticizes you, and just now you
pulled back when I talked about your procrastination. I wonder if you’re
worried that I will criticize you?”
Rationale for Using Immediacy
The helping relationship provides a microcosm of how clients relate in the real
world. If a client is compliant with the helper, for example, he or she is probably
compliant with others in the outside world. If a client is arrogant and shows off
to impress the helper, chances are that she or he does similar things with other
people. Often clients talk about how they get along with others but helpers
cannot see both sides of the interaction; in the helping session, helpers can
actually see how the client interacts. Therefore, the client’s general interpersonal
style can be examined, at least in part, by an investigation of his or her
relationship with the helper. Of course, clients do not act toward all other
people as they act toward the helper—it may be that they act a certain way to
people in a position of authority and a different way to peers. But observing the
behavior provides firsthand evidence of how the client comes across in
interpersonal interactions, at least occasionally.
Helpers experience personally the impact of a client’s behavior, which
Kiesler (1988) and Cashdan (1988) called becoming “hooked” given that
helpers are pushed into a constricted, narrow range of responses by the client’s
maladaptive behaviors. For example, dominant clients tend to “pull for”
submissive behavior from helpers, whereas hostile clients “pull for” hostile
behavior from helpers. If helpers become aware of feeling hooked (i.e., feeling a
need to behave in a certain way) without critical judgment of the client, they can
begin to understand how other people react to clients in interpersonal
relationships and can feel freer to behave in a different and more therapeutic
manner.
In addition to addressing problems in relationships in general, immediacy
can also be used to discuss issues that arise in the helping relationship. For
example, a helper could discuss with a client what has and has not been working
in the helping process so that adjustments can be made, a helper might want to
ask about a client’s chronic lateness, or a helper might want to process feelings
with a client about running into each other at a party. Many issues present
themselves in a helping relationship, so immediacy is a critical tool for working
through the inevitable interpersonal problems.
318
Immediacy can also be used to make covert communication more direct. In
some cases, clients talk covertly about the helping relationship because they are
not sure how helpers will react if they say something directly. For example, a
client might say that no one can help him. Because the helper is trying to help
him, it is not a huge leap to guess that at least part of the communication is
directed toward the helper. In any communication, helpers can ask themselves
what clients are trying to communicate to them about the therapy relationship,
although they will decide whether to use immediacy based on the client’s needs
at the time.
Another reason for using immediacy is to challenge clients to change
maladaptive behaviors. When helpers are honest about their reactions, clients
learn how they come across to another person and thus might change their
problematic behaviors. Some examples of interpersonal behaviors that can cause
problems for clients in helping relationships (and other relationships) include
being so talkative that the helper cannot speak, acting overbearing and arrogant
and assuming that they are better than the helper, being passive and not saying
anything without being asked, droning on and on in a monotone voice without
maintaining eye contact, disagreeing with everything the helper says, constantly
bringing gifts to the helper, or trying too hard to be helpful.
Resolving problems between the helper and client can also provide clients
with a model of how to resolve interpersonal problems in relationships. If done
well, clients learn that it is possible to talk about feelings, resolve problems, and
develop closer relationships as a result of the discussion. Greenberg, Rice, and
Elliott (1993) suggested that encountering another real human being who both
cares and is authentic helps clients grow. Being able to resolve interpersonal
problems can be a powerful experience, teaching clients that it is possible,
although not always easy, to deal openly with issues.
In the world outside of helping, friends and acquaintances might not be
honest with each other about how they feel about what is going on in their
relationship because it is difficult, may hurt feelings, and takes time and effort.
Because they do not receive feedback, however, clients often are not aware of
how they come across to others. If oblivious to their own behaviors (which they
often are because they are so used to them), clients cannot change, and there
may be negative consequences (e.g., if a client is not aware that she speaks with a
hostile tone, it could negatively affect her evaluations in the workplace). The
helping relationship thus provides an opportunity for clients to become aware of
how their behaviors affect another person and to make changes in a safe setting.
Of course the ultimate goal is to help clients use immediacy in their
relationships outside of therapy so that they can have more open
communication.
Helpers who gently provide immediacy may be giving their clients a special
gift. In effect, immediacy communicates that helpers are willing to take the time
319
to let clients know about the effect of their behaviors so they can have an
opportunity to increase awareness and change inappropriate behaviors. But it is
important to emphasize that helpers must use immediacy in a caring way with
deep compassion and empathy. Immediacy can be a powerful, risky intervention
that raises the temperature in the room; helpers need to know that immediacy
has great power to heal but can also be damaging if done poorly.
Guidelines for Using Immediacy
Immediacy is a difficult and demanding skill. Helpers need to be aware of what
is happening in themselves and in the therapeutic relationship and have enough
self-confidence and self-understanding not to react defensively to a client’s open
expression of feelings. Because they do not always openly deal with immediate
feelings in nonhelping situations, helpers often feel frightened about doing so in
helping situations. It takes courage, as well as skill, to be immediate with clients.
But most important, it takes compassion; rather than taking the client’s behavior
personally, helpers try to understand what is going on with clients that keeps
them from relating effectively and then gently try to help client become aware of
these behaviors so that they can change and have more satisfying relationships.
When using immediacy, helpers talk directly to clients about their
interactions. In other words, helpers and clients metacommunicate about their
communication. Kiesler (1988) stressed that the success of the
metacommunication depends on the extent to which the helper balances the
challenge of the metacommunication with being supportive and protective of
the client’s self-esteem. Helpers need to present the immediacy as a gentle
examination of the process. Helpers communicate that they are committed to
working with clients to understand their actions and the effects of their
behaviors on relationships with other people.
Helpers might want to first educate clients about why they are using
immediacy. Given that talking directly about the relationship is very different
from what many people are used to, and it is often not sanctioned in families to
have direct communication, clients may need a rationale for why it is important
to use immediacy and what the effects might be. Often, when clients understand
why an intervention is being used, they are more receptive to it.
It can also be important to comment about cultural differences in terms of
dealing immediately with relationship difficulties. In cultures in which typical
communication is indirect, it can be considered rude to directly communicate
about the relationship. In shame-based and private cultures, it is often difficult
to talk immediately about feelings. Helpers may still be able to use immediacy,
but they may need to be gentle and tentative in their manner of delivery and
320
carefully observe and ask about client reactions.
It is also often helpful for helpers take appropriate responsibility for their
feelings when using immediacy by using “I” statements (e.g., “I feel
uncomfortable with praise”; “I feel bad that I interrupted you”) rather than
“you” statements (e.g., “You shouldn’t praise me”; “You talk too much”).
Clients often have an easier time owning their responsibility (e.g., “I was
probably talking too much”) when helpers candidly admit their contribution to
the interaction. Furthermore, it is only fair for helpers to admit responsibility (if
justified) if they want clients to acknowledge their part. When helpers
acknowledge their role in relationship problems, an open exchange can occur
about how both people feel. Problems can be resolved, the therapeutic
relationship can be enhanced, and clients can be encouraged to become actively
involved in problem solving. For example, one client came into the session and,
before he was even seated, asked if he could pray with the helper and then
immediately proceeded to invoke God’s help in guiding the helper in the
session. The helper was taken aback, felt very uncomfortable, and needed to
gently but honestly talk to the client about her reactions to his behavior before
they could continue (“I feel a little uncomfortable praying in the session because
it’s not part of the way I operate. I wonder if we could talk about this”).
It is crucial that helpers not prescribe how clients should change, because
“should” statements imply that the helper knows more about the client than the
client does. Instead, helpers simply point out how they react when clients act in
a particular way. It is also important that helpers are aware that their feedback
about clients is based on their perceptions and reactions and that others might
react differently to the clients. Helpers might even suggest that clients gather
feedback about how others react to the behaviors. An awareness of how they are
perceived by others can enable clients to decide whether they want to make
changes.
When the helper has a strong reaction to the client (e.g., hostility,
attraction, envy, boredom), compassion can mediate the strong feeling. Thus,
the helper first becomes aware of the strong feeling, allows it into awareness,
ponders the feeling, and accepts it. Then, the helper steps back and tries to get
some compassion for the client, trying to understand what might be going on
that causes the client to behave toward the helper to elicit such strong reactions.
The helper also tried to understand his or her own part in the interaction and
takes appropriate responsibility and initiative to work on his or her part in his or
her own therapy. Finally, the helper uses immediacy to approach the situation
with the client when the helper thinks the client can tolerate it. The helper
works hard to stay present in the moment in the interaction with the client and
continue the discussion.
After being immediate with clients, helpers can ask clients about their
reactions to the immediacy, so that the communication is two-sided. Hence,
321
after the helper says something like, “I felt uncomfortable when I saw you on the
bus yesterday. I wasn’t quite sure what to say, and I’m worried that you might
have felt offended that I didn’t speak to you,” the helper can ask the client,
“How did you feel about seeing me?” or “How do you feel talking about this
right now?” Thus, the helper tries to engage the client in a discussion of the
interaction. Research shows that it is important for helpers to be open about
exploring the interaction (Rhodes, Hill, Thompson, & Elliott, 1994; Safran,
Muran, Samstag, & Stevens, 2002).
Of course some clients will be happy to lay all the blame on the helper and
turn the tables to talk about the helper’s problems. If this happens, the helper
can use that as an immediacy intervention (e.g., “You know, I’m feeling a little
attacked. I wonder if we both can look at our parts in this interaction?”).
Because helpers have indicated that it is permissible to process the
relationship, they need to be aware that clients may give them feedback about
what they do not like about the helper’s behaviors. After all, helping is a two-
way interaction, and helpers may be doing things that are not optimal for
clients. Some of this information may be accurate and valuable—clients are
wonderful sources of feedback because they are the recipients of what helpers do
and know how the interventions feel. However, helpers also must be aware that
feedback is sometimes distorted (i.e., transference). For example, Yutta may say
that the helper is mean, not because of what the helper has done but because of
unresolved feelings she has about her critical mother that she projects onto the
helper. Helpers have to determine what feedback is genuinely related to their
behavior and what is related to transference issues. There is usually at least a
grain of truth in most client feedback, however, so helpers can investigate both
their own behaviors and the client’s contribution.
Example of Immediacy
The following shows a helper using immediacy (in italics) in a session:
Helper:
 
I have something to bring up with you that is a bit
uncomfortable to talk about. At the beginning and end of each
session, you want a hug, and I don’t feel comfortable doing that on
a routine basis.
Client:
 
(pause) I don’t understand. I thought we were close, and it
just feels natural to hug. What’s the matter with hugging?
Helper:
 
I do feel clo
se to you, and I don’t want to hurt our relationship,
but I thought that talking about this could help us clarify
expectations. It makes me uncomfortable feeling like I have to hug
you. It doesn’t feel professional.
322
Client:
 
Hmmm, that’s part of my culture. I always hug people when
I meet them and when we leave. I feel a little anxious when you
don’t want to, like you don’t care about me.
Helper:
 
I do care about you as a client, but we’re in a professional
relationship, and it feels awkward to blur the boundaries.
Client:
 
I didn’t realize that you felt that way. Is there anything I’m
doing that is wrong?
Helper:
 
You sound a little hurt.
Client:
 
I guess I am. I didn’t know that what I was doing is wrong.
Helper:
 
It’s not wrong to hug, it just feels awkward in a professional
relationship. I value our relationship, and I don’t want to be in a
position where I feel uncomfortable. It feels very important for us
both to feel comfortable here.
Client:
 
Okay, I think I understand. Are you angry at me?
Helper:
 
No, not at all. I’m very grateful that you’ve been so
understanding and that we could work through this difficult and
touchy situation. How are you feeling?
Client:
 
I’m relieved that you’re not angry. I think I can change. I’m
glad you told me.
Helper:
 
Thanks. And please let me know if you have any more feelings
about
 this.
Difficulties Helpers Have in Using
Immediacy
Beginning helpers often have fears about intruding and making clients angry if
they use immediacy, even if they do it empathically. Indeed, clients do
sometimes become angry. For example, a helper gently suggested that Olivia was
acting helpless when she expected the helper to take responsibility for her
behavior and failures. Olivia became angry and adamantly denied that her
behaviors were similar to those of victims. Several sessions later, however, Olivia
acknowledged that the immediacy intervention was accurate and helped her
become aware that she was acting like her mother who typically played the
martyr role. If the helper had withheld the immediacy intervention for fear of
hurting Olivia’s feelings, Olivia would not have learned a valuable lesson about
herself. Although it is sometimes painful to hear, such feedback can be
motivational and subsequently life-changing.
Another problem is that helpers often do not trust their feelings (e.g.,
“Maybe it is all my fault that I’m bored—if I were a better helper, I wouldn’t
feel bored”). They might feel unsure about their reactions and hesitant about
323
communicating their feelings to clients appropriately and empathically.
Some helpers simply avoid immediacy because it is frightening to talk
directly and honestly about the immediate relationship. They are not used to
such open communication in their relationships, and they feel vulnerable when
sharing immediate feelings. They might feel anxious about dealing openly with
interpersonal conflicts because their families had strong rules against addressing
conflicts openly. In fact, most helpers have an easier time being empathic with
clients who are sad or depressed but are less skilled when it comes to talking
directly with clients about negative reactions and working through interpersonal
problems. Once again, personal therapy can provide an opportunity for helpers
to come to understand their own issues. Supervision can also provide a reality
check for helpers because they can learn how someone else reacts to the client.
Some trainees have trouble being immediate with clients who are very
similar to them (e.g., from the same cultural or economic background or
gender) because some situations trigger complex emotions such as anger,
jealousy, disappointment, pride, and competitiveness. On the other hand, some
trainees have difficulty when clients are dissimilar from them. One both sides,
issues of diversity come up, and it is often hard to deal openly with diversity
issues. Trainees often want to be completely accepting and inclusive and feel
ashamed when they have politically incorrect feelings.
In addition, helpers sometimes inappropriately use immediacy to deal with
their own needs. For example, a helper who had recently been divorced was
feeling particularly vulnerable and needed affirmation that he was attractive, so
he encouraged Ingrid to talk about her attraction to him. Usually, helpers are
not aware that they are using immediacy to deal with their own needs. They
might become aware that they are doing so, however, if their behaviors have
negative consequences for their clients (e.g., a client quits after the helper gets
angry at her for being too quiet). Hence, it is crucial that helpers try to be
mindful of their needs so that they can get their needs met elsewhere instead of
their needs intruding on the helping process.
It is often hard for beginning helpers to imagine using immediacy if they
have only brief (e.g., 20-minute) interactions with clients as is typical in helping
skills classes. Indeed, immediacy is often not appropriate in brief interactions.
However, it is still valuable for beginning helpers to practice this skill in role-
plays and be aware of how it could be used in actual sessions with clients with
whom they work for longer periods of time.
What Do You Think?
Discuss whether you think helpers can balance being direct with
feedback and accepting clients as they are.
324
How might helpers respond when clients are angry at them?
Discuss the idea that immediacy can be an enactment of a deep level of
empathy.
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of using immediacy
compared with interpretations or challenges.
325
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Immediacy
Citation: 
Hill, C. E., Gelso, C. J., Chui, H., Spangler, P., Hummel, A., Huang, T., . . .
Miles, J. R. (2013, July 12). To be or not to be immediate with clients: The use and effects
of immediacy in psychodynamic/interpersonal psychotherapy. 
Psychotherapy Research.
Advance online publication.
Rationale: 
People often seek psychotherapy because of problems in relationships. They
may not be able to make or sustain relationships, or they may act in ways that make others
angry at them or dismiss them. Because of these problems in relationships, people often feel
isolated and alone but do not know how to change. Psychotherapy can help by analyzing
patterns in relationships, exploring reasons for relationship problems, and suggesting
alternative ways of behaving. But therapy is a relationship, so many of the problems that
emerge in a client’s relationships outside of therapy will also emerge in the relationship with
the therapist. If the client is chronically hostile, deferent, seductive, or saintly, for example,
she or he will probably also act that way with the therapist. Therapists can then use their
reactions to help clients understand how others react and then figure out how to change.
Given the theoretical importance of immediacy, we need to examine more closely when
and how it occurs within psychotherapy.
Method: 
Sixteen cases of therapy lasting between eight and 59 sessions with community
clients and doctoral student therapists were examined for immediacy events. Clients and
therapists completed evaluations after each session. Each immediacy event was coded by a
team of judges for type of immediacy, who initiated the event, duration, depth,
appropriateness, resolution, quality, and consequences. Clients and therapists were
interviewed after therapy about their experiences of immediacy.
Interesting Findings:
Most immediacy events were initiated by therapists.
Most involved exploration of unexpressed or covert feelings (e.g., “I wonder how you’re feeling right now about
our relationship?” “You seem a little angry at me right now.”). Thus, most immediacy events focused on trying to
help clients talk about what they might be feeling but not saying about the relationship so that they could learn to
express themselves more freely in the relationship.
Immediacy occurred during about 5% of time in therapy.
Typical consequences
Clients expressed feelings about the therapist or therapy.
Clients opened up and talked in greater depth about themselves.
Clients gained insight.
Therapists focused more on feelings and less on ruptures and initiated immediacy more often with fearfully
attached (i.e., generally anxious and avoidant and insecure in their interactions with others) than with securely
attached clients (i.e., generally nonanxious and nonavoidant and trusting in interactions with others).
Conclusions:
Immediacy is often beneficial in psychotherapy. Although it is not used often and needs to be used well, it can
facilitate the therapy process, and it can help the client gain insight.
Implications for Therapy:
It is okay for clients to bring up feelings about their therapists. Even though it is often scary, it can help repair
problems in the relationship and serve as a model for how clients can be more open in relationships outside of
326
therapy.
Therapists will need to tailor the immediacy interventions based on the client attachment style. Therapists may
need to be a little more cautious with clients who have fearful attachment styles.
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
327
He who has a 
why
 to live can bear with almost any 
how.
—Nietzsche
Monroe is able to experience and accept the depths of the anger and loss he feels
because his sister will not speak to him. Benjamin, who has been unable to choose a
career, comes to realize that he is afraid to compete with his father, a businessman who
is extremely successful but distant from his family. Yvonne comes to understand that
her feelings of inadequacy are based on other children making fun of her for having a
slight speech impediment. Nigel gains the insight that he avoids all risks because of his
fear of dying at a young age as his father did. Miji became aware that her hostility
pushed people away from her. Neo becomes aware that his hostile humor pushes away
other people. These are examples of new understandings that clients come to with the
aid of helpers in the insight stage.
I
n the insight stage, helpers assist clients in developing new perspectives about
themselves, their feelings, and their behaviors. Helpers choose which skills to use
depending on their intentions, what the client is presenting at the moment,
what the client can tolerate, and their overall goals for the session. They
maintain an empathic connection with clients and primarily use exploration
skills, but they also work to deepen client experiencing, challenge clients to raise
awareness, use open questions and probes to encourage clients to think about
the reasons for their behaviors, use interpretations and disclosures of insight to
facilitate new understandings of the underlying reasons or motivations for
thoughts and behaviors, and use immediacy to help clients become aware of how
they come across to others and to deal with tensions or misunderstandings in the
therapeutic relationship. These interventions help clients achieve greater depths
of self-understanding and insight about who they are, how they got to be the
way they are, and how they are perceived by others.
We hope that clients gain some new understandings of themselves at a deep,
emotional level by the end of the insight stage. We hope they see things in new
ways or from different perspectives, are able to identify patterns or make
328
connections, have ideas about why they do what they do, and have a deeper
understanding of themselves. These insights sometimes have an “aha” quality to
them, and clients feel relieved that they have explanations for their behaviors and
thoughts. Clients “own” their new understandings because they have been
instrumental in helping to construct them. Clients work to integrate these new
understandings into their self-perceptions and may even start to think
spontaneously about action.
Steps for Integrating Insight Skills
In trying to integrate the insight skills, helpers can follow several steps to help
guide clients. Helpers need not follow these steps exactly but, rather, can use
them as a general guideline for what can be accomplished in this stage.
STEP 1: SET THE STAGE
Helpers pave the way for the insight stage through empathy, reflections of
feelings, and helping the client explore. There needs to be a good bond between
the helper and the client, and the client needs to feel safe to explore the reasons
behind feelings and thoughts, without fear of judgment. In addition, the need
for empathy remains a key element of the insight stage. When dealing with
difficult clinical situations, if helpers can put themselves in the client’s shoes and
try to understand what is going on with the client, they will often be able to
avoid being judgmental and will be able to forge an alliance with their client.
Relatedly, Vivino, Thompson, Hill, and Ladany (2009) found that experienced
therapists who were able to step back and understand what was going on for
clients were able to rekindle their compassion for difficult clients.
Another reason for taking adequate time is so the helper can observe the
client. Helpers formulate challenges and interpretations from their observations
of clients, so they must be alert and trust their observations. Before going into
insight interventions, helpers need to collect an adequate amount of evidence to
clarify what is going on rather than jumping to conclusions.
STEP 2: LOOK FOR MARKERS OF CLIENT READINESS FOR
INSIGHT
The markers for readiness for challenges, insight work, and immediacy differ
somewhat. Note that clients often do not present markers as clearly as indicated
here, so helpers need to use their clinical intuition when necessary.
Markers for Challenging
329
Some markers for challenges are:
ambivalence,
contradictions,
discrepancies,
confusion,
feeling stuck, and
being unable to make a decision.
Helpers can also observe and listen to clients carefully for “sour notes”—
things that do not sound right, make sense, fit, or go together or things that are
done out of “shoulds,” cause ambivalences, or result in struggles. These sour
notes can point the way to issues about which clients feel contradictions and
uncertainties. These markers suggest that clients are ready to allow the problem
to “come into awareness.”
Helpers try to think about why the client might feel confused or stuck.
Rather than blaming or condemning the client, the helper tries to understand
the client’s dynamics. The empathy generated through this process can help the
helper become curious about checking out the hypotheses rather than becoming
invested in pointing out a discrepancy or trying to make the client change.
Markers for Insight Work
Possible markers of client readiness or eagerness are:
a clear statement of awareness of a problem,
a statement of a lack of understanding,
a stated eagerness or willingness to understand, and
a high level of affective distress experienced as a pressure to resolve the
problem.
The client might say something like, “I just don’t understand why I get so
angry at my boyfriend. He usually does nothing wrong. I just suddenly get
furious and I can’t control my rage. I really wish I understood it because it is
making me miserable and is about to destroy the best relationship I have ever
had.”
Possible markers indicating a lack of readiness are clients
telling a story in a nonreflective manner,
asking for advice, and
blaming others for problems.
Skills for facilitating exploration or awareness are probably more suitable
than insight skills when clients are not ready.
Some clients are psychologically minded and value probing into their
330
dynamics and motives. Other clients, however, are not so interested in probing
into the underlying dynamics and are more concerned with exploration or fixing
problems. It is important, however, to stress that helpers should not assume
from stereotypes that certain groups of clients (e.g., clients from a low
socioeconomic class) are not suited for interpretations. Furthermore, some
clients can be taught to be more introspective, particularly through open
questions and probes for insight.
It is also important to be aware that some cultures may not value
interpretive activity as much as the European American culture does. Some
cultures (e.g., Asian, Hispanic) value action more than understanding, although
sometimes education about why insight is valuable can be persuasive. Because it
is important to respect others’ values, helpers should not force clients to work on
insight if they are not amenable after being educated about it.
Markers for Immediacy
Client Markers
One set of markers comes from observing the client:
Does the client seem distraught, particularly quiet, unusually talkative,
more vague than usual, acting hostile or too friendly toward you?
Does the client mention references to other people that might be a
reference to you (e.g., “No one understands me,” “Everyone makes me
feel bad”)?
The client might directly confront the helper (e.g., “I’m angry that you’re late,”
“I don’t think I’m getting anything out of this relationship”). If so, these
behaviors may be signs that something is going on inside the client about the
helping relationship.
Helper Markers
Another set of markers is feelings that helpers have about clients. Typical
markers are the following:
feeling bored, angry, stuck, incompetent, prideful, or brilliant,
especially if these feelings are extreme;
feeling sexual attraction;
feeling afraid and wanting to avoid certain topics with the client; and
not using specific helping skills that would be appropriate (e.g., not
exploring; not using insight skills).
Becoming aware of these feelings is often difficult for helpers, who like to
think of themselves as being accepting and nurturing rather than as having
331
negative feelings. To get into these potential feelings, helpers ask themselves the
following questions:
“What am I feeling when I am with this client?”
“What do I want to do or not do when I am with this client?”
“What keeps me from using skills that I know would be helpful with
this client?”
“How does this client affect me compared with the effect of other
clients?”
“Do I find myself blaming the client (e.g., saying that the client is not
trying, is resistant, is bipolar)?”
Helpers need to allow themselves to have their feelings without judging
themselves as “bad” or incompetent. Rather, helpers can view themselves as
instruments and use their feelings to determine how they resonate with or react
to clients. Supervision can be useful in facilitating helpers in their struggle with
experiencing negative feelings toward clients because supervisors can normalize
such feelings. For example, the supervisor might say, “If I were in this situation,
I would feel sexually attracted to this client. She is so seductive that I would feel
distracted in sessions.” When supervisors are able to admit to having “politically
incorrect” feelings, helpers often are then able to acknowledge their own
feelings. Thus, supervision is invaluable for enabling helpers to become aware of
their feelings and also for ensuring that helpers do not act out impulsively on
their feelings.
Once the helper becomes aware of the automatic reactions, he or she can
stop the reactions and try to understand them. Rather than taking it personally
and feeling badly that they had these strong emotions or blaming the client for
the reactions, helpers can try to cultivate a sense of curiosity about what
contributes to clients acting as they do. Often, clients have developed these
behaviors as defenses. For example, if a client is very talkative and does not let
anyone else contribute to the discussion, he or she could be defending against
letting anyone get close for fear of becoming engulfed. Thus, the constant
talking may serve a defensive function of keeping others at a safe distance.
By coming to an understanding of what they are feeling with clients, helpers
can regain some objectivity, which permits them to distance themselves from
their reactions and begin to help their clients. For example, by becoming aware
that a client’s whining pulls for the helper to want to silence the client, the
helper can begin to get curious about what causes the client to whine. The
helper can then think about how to compassionately provide the client with
feedback about the effects of her or his whining. By acting differently than
expected or typical, the helper may be able to break the typical pattern so that a
new type of interaction can occur.
Of course, helpers need to evaluate whether any of their own issues could be
332
implicated in the feelings they have when they are with clients. For example, a
helper might be sensitive to a client’s talkativeness and aggressiveness because the
helper’s mother is dominant and talks incessantly. Furthermore, if helpers find
they have similar feelings with several clients (e.g., being sexually attracted to
several clients), this could be a clue that it is the helper’s rather than (or in
addition to) the client’s problem.
STEP 3: DETERMINE INTENTIONS
Helpers need to think about their intentions at a particular moment in the
helping process. The most appropriate intention here is to promote insight.
Inappropriate intentions would be to make oneself look good at the expense of
the client, to show off, or to punish clients for being frustrating. If helpers realize
that they want to give a challenge or an interpretation to meet their own needs,
they can pause, think about themselves and the client, and try to figure out what
is going on in the relationship. Seeking supervision or consultation is often a
good idea here.
STEP 4: ENGAGE IN AN INTERACTIVE, COLLABORATIVE
INSIGHT PROCESS
Of overall importance is for the helper to be gentle, tentative, and empathic
when using insight skills. The posture should be one of curiosity rather than one
of showing off or being judgmental. Furthermore, it is important for the helper
to collaborate with the client to discover meaning. Thus, there is a lot of back
and forth with both people generating ideas about what might be going on: The
helper might ask the client an open question and listen intently to the response,
and then perhaps the helper offers a tentative interpretation, which the client
adds to or modifies, and then the helper might challenge. Perhaps at this point
the client has a glimmer of insight, which the helper restates and asks for more
elaboration, and so on. The idea here is to help the client get unblocked so that
he or she can go out and continue thinking on his or her own.
It is also important for the helper to carefully observe client reactions to
insight interventions and make modifications if needed. And, because clients
often conceal negative reactions, helpers might need to go beyond observing to
asking explicitly about clients’ reactions. Helpers should also remember to use
exploration skills frequently during this stage because clients need the
opportunity to process new information in a safe and supportive setting.
STEP 5: FOLLOW UP
Single challenges, interpretations, or immediacy statements rarely trigger new
and lasting insight immediately. Clients typically require many reiterations
333
before they begin to understand, incorporate and change cognitive schemas, and
use insight to makes changes in their lives. At first, an insight intervention may
seem strange and foreign, but as clients hears it numerous times in different
ways, they begin to understand and integrate the ideas into their schemas (ways
of thinking). Helpers thus need to plan enough time in sessions to work through
the new insights. They also need to follow up on insight interventions in
subsequent sessions. Clients typically continue the interpretative process outside
of sessions (which of course is the goal of helping), so following up on what the
client has been thinking in between sessions can be fruitful.
STEP 6: ASK THE CLIENT FOR HIS OR HER CURRENT
UNDERSTANDING
Often what the helper thinks at the end of this stage can be quite different from
what the client thinks. It is thus useful for the helper to check out what the
client absorbed from the process. I recall one session in which I was sure that the
client had gained a lot of insight but was surprised when she said that nothing
much had changed. Knowing where the client is at can help you plan future
interventions.
Caveats About Using Insight Skills
Several caveats apply to the use of insight interventions. First, the therapeutic
relationship must be solid before insight skills are used. Clients must trust their
helpers, and helpers must have a base of knowledge about clients from which to
formulate insight interventions. A relationship can sometimes be established
quickly, but it takes a long time with other cases before the relationship can
withstand insight interventions. One way of determining whether the client is
ready for insight is by trying a mild insight intervention to see how the client
reacts. If the client rejects it adamantly, it is likely that she or he is not ready. If
the client, however, responds positively, then the helper can proceed cautiously,
always attending to how the client is responding. Helpers should always be
attentive to client reactions to insight interventions. The most superb insight
interventions are worthless if clients are not ready for them, and relationships
can be damaged by premature insight interventions.
It is usually best to encourage clients to come to their own insights, if
possible, through open questions and probes and interpretations that add just a
bit beyond the client’s current understanding. If clients are productively working
on insight, helpers can stay in the background and encourage and coach clients.
The process in the insight stage is thus just as collaborative as it was in the
exploration stage. Helpers and clients work together to construct understanding
334
rather than helpers being the experts who deliver insights to the clients.
When used, interpretive interventions need to be delivered gently and
tentatively, with caring and empathy rather than with judgment or blame. They
should be preceded by and interspersed with exploration skills (reflection of
feelings, restatement, and open questions and probes). As clients contemplate
what they learn from insight interventions, they are at a new level and need time
and support to explore what they have discovered about themselves.
Furthermore, helpers continually revise their insight interventions based on
emerging information, treating them as working hypotheses rather than as
fundamental truths.
In addition, insight interventions may need to be repeated many times, in
diverse ways, over long periods of time, so that clients can begin to incorporate
them, use them to change their thinking, and apply them to different parts of
their lives. Altering ingrained ways of thinking is difficult, and repetition often
assists clients in being able to hear and use the new insights. The first time often
plants the seed, which starts the client thinking, and then the helper follows up
on the idea and elaborates more at a different time.
Cultural Considerations
Given that helpers are relying more on their own reactions and thoughts in the
insight stage than they did in the exploration stage, they have to be
extraordinarily careful about imposing their values on clients from other
cultures. For example, a Western helper might challenge a 22-year-old Asian
student to be more independent and separate from her parents, but this
suggestion might contradict the client’s cultural value to be dependent on her
parents until marriage. As another example, a helper might interpret a client’s
caring for an aging parent as self-defeating in terms of career advancement,
whereas the client may feel a cultural obligation to sacrifice self for others,
especially family. Western values promote individualism and self-actualization,
whereas Eastern and Latino cultures value collectivism and familial obligations
(Kim, Atkinson, & Umemoto, 2001; Kim, Atkinson, & Yang, 1999); these
differences in values can lead to cultural clashes in terms of understanding
dynamics and psychological problems.
Another cultural consideration related to the insight stage is that some
cultures teach people to think that authority figures have the ultimate answers.
Hence, interpretations may take on greater meaning to such clients as the
“right” answer. In such instances, helpers have to be especially careful about
what they say. In addition, clients from non-Western cultures might benefit
from judicious disclosures of insight as a way of building trust (D. W. Sue &
335
Sue, 1999). Disclosures of insight might provide a model for clients to ponder
new ideas without dictating what the client should think.
An additional cultural consideration is that immediacy may seem quite rude
and intrusive to people from cultures in which open, here-and-now
communication is not valued. Again, helpers should be attentive to clients’
reactions and ask about any discomfort and adjust their therapeutic
interventions accordingly.
Although it is important to be sensitive to cultural considerations, this does
not mean that helpers should not approach culturally laden topics. For example,
even though culturally it may be appropriate for a woman to be meek and
submissive, such behavior may get in the way of her moving ahead in her chosen
career, and she may thus need help to think through this behavior and think
about changing. Even though it may result in messy ruptures and temporary loss
of trust, it may be necessary for the helper to challenge the client and then use
immediacy to work on the relationship.
A final cultural issue is that it may be particularly difficult for a majority
group client (e.g., a middle-aged White male) to receive a challenge or an
interpretation from a minority individual (e.g., a younger biracial female). There
may be resistance because such interpretation upsets the normative power
differential in society. This same client may have no problem receiving a
challenge or interpretation from an older female helper because he is used to
getting maternal care and emotional support from older women but is not used
to being in a one-down position with younger women.
Difficulties Helpers Might Experience in the
Insight Stage
Becoming competent in the skills used during the insight stage is difficult, and
these skills take many years to master. In addition, the skills cannot be applied in
a rote, technical fashion to every client, which makes it challenging for
instructors to teach and for students to learn these skills. Helpers have to use
their intuition and rely on their reactions to clients, so there is danger of
countertransference interfering with the insight process. Helpers need to proceed
slowly and observe clients’ reactions to their insight interventions, but I would
encourage helpers not to avoid insight interventions because they would then
miss opportunities to help clients understand themselves at deeper levels. Several
difficulties can be identified.
MOVING PREMATURELY INTO INSIGHT
336
Helpers sometimes move into the insight stage before the therapeutic
relationship has been firmly established, before the client has adequately
explored the problems, or before the helper has a deep enough understanding of
the problems. It is crucial that insight interventions be used within the context
of a strong therapeutic relationship and be based on a strong foundation of
understanding. Otherwise, these techniques have the potential for damaging
clients. For example, if a helper challenges before the client trusts him or her, the
client might doubt the helper’s motives and terminate the helping relationship.
TAKING TOO MUCH RESPONSIBILITY FOR DEVELOPING
INSIGHT
Beginning helpers often feel that they have to be the experts who “put it all
together” and connect all the client’s past experiences with the client’s present
behaviors in a new way. Or the helper may be impatient because the client
cannot see what is blatantly obvious to the helper. To this helper, figuring out
clients is more important than helping clients figure out themselves. From my
perspective, the more important task is for helpers to empathize with clients,
determine what contributes to clients having difficulty putting it all together, ask
clients about their thoughts about insight, and work collaboratively with them
to construct insights.
GETTING STUCK IN ONE THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVE
One of the dangers in the insight stage is that helpers may get stuck using only
one theoretical perspective too rigidly. For example, a helper may try to apply
psychoanalytic theory, even though the theory might not fit for an individual
client. Thus, a helper could be convinced that every client is suffering from an
Oedipal/Electra complex because Freud said so, rather than attending to the
data that the client presents. Or as another example, a helper could
conceptualize and treat the client from a cognitive viewpoint, assuming that
maladaptive thoughts need to be challenged, even though the client is not
receptive to cognitive work. It is helpful for helpers to be aware that theories are
guidelines rather than cookbooks and that helpers need to be judicious in
applying them.
FORGETTING TO BE EMPATHIC
Some helpers get so excited about figuring out the puzzle of the client’s
problems that they forget to be empathic. They do not remember the
importance of keeping clients involved in the therapeutic experience. It is crucial
to be constantly aware of how clients are feeling and reacting and to work at
maintaining the collaborative relationship.
337
TAKING CLIENTS AT FACE VALUE AND NOT DIGGING
DEEPER
Beginning helpers often have difficulty going beyond what clients present
because they are not used to the idea of thinking of people as complex and as
being motivated by conflicting unconscious forces. In addition, sometimes
helpers are afraid of upsetting clients and being intrusive, so they fail to search
deeper to help their clients. However, clients often value hearing another
perspective about their problems because they feel stuck, so helpers need to be
willing to help clients construct new understandings, always of course building
on the basis of a good relationship and solid exploration.
FORGETTING THAT NOT ALL CLIENTS NEED OR WANT
INSIGHT
No matter how much we as helpers personally value insight, not all of our
clients are equally enamored. Some clients (and even some helpers) do not want
or need insight. They prefer support without challenge and insight, or they want
immediate behavior change without insight. They may want to feel better
without understanding why they felt badly. Because the three-stage approach
presented in this book is essentially client-centered and values empathy above
all, it is important not to impose insight on such clients but to respect their
choice not to understand themselves. For such clients, I recommend making an
assessment about whether they primarily need support, behavior change, or
something helpers cannot offer. If clients need support to make behavior
changes, helpers can provide that and reduce the emphasis on the insight stage.
If clients need other things (e.g., medication, support groups, welfare) that the
helper is not competent to provide, helpers can refer them to other sources.
It is easy to blame the client for being resistant or reluctant if they are not
“open” to what we want them to do. Rather than labeling clients, however, it is
perhaps more helpful to think about how we as helpers have just not yet figured
out how to reach this particular client.
COUNTERTRANSFERENCE
Finally, countertransference (defined and discussed in 
Chapters 2
 and 
11
) can
interfere with the helper’s ability to deliver insight interventions effectively. For
example, a client talking about abortion or divorce might stimulate unresolved
feelings about these issues on the part of a helper. Similarly, a helper who has
problems dealing with anger might withdraw when a client becomes angry at
her. Once again, therapy and supervision can help to ensure that personal issues
on the part of the helper do not unduly and negatively influence the helping
338
relationship.
Strategies for Overcoming Difficulties in
Implementing the Insight Stage
Helpers can overcome difficulties in the insight stage by focusing on empathy
and using exploration skills, dealing with their personal feelings, and dealing
with the helping relationship.
FOCUS ON EMPATHY AND USE EXPLORATION SKILLS
Often, when beginning helpers first learn insight skills, they get so anxious and
focused on the insight skills that they forget to be empathic and focus on the
client. Similarly, when helpers are in doubt or having problems coming up with
insight skills, they can try to get back in touch with basic empathy for the client
—how does the client feel? What would it be like to be the client? And, to
facilitate empathy, the helper can refocus on the client using the exploration
skills of attending and listening, open questions and probes about thoughts and
feelings, restatements, and reflections of feelings. In effect, helpers need to
backtrack, rebuild trust, and make sure they hear the client’s real problems.
Helpers can keep exploring until an idea for a challenge or interpretation
emerges naturally and the client is ready to hear it.
DEAL WITH PERSONAL FEELINGS
It is important for helpers to be as aware as possible of what they are feeling (see
Chapter 4
). They need to sort out how much is a reaction to the client and how
much is related to their own personal issues. Helpers can get personal therapy to
deal with strong emotional reactions that arise when they are helpers. In
addition, it is helpful to talk to supervisors about feelings that come up when
working with clients.
DEAL WITH THE RELATIONSHIP
In one study (Rhodes, Hill, Thompson, & Elliott, 1994), satisfied clients were
asked what their helpers had done to resolve major misunderstandings that arose
in relationships. The clients reported that their helpers asked them how they
were feeling about what was going on in the therapeutic relationship. In
addition, helpers listened nondefensively to the clients and were willing to hear
what they were doing wrong with clients. They apologized if they made a
mistake or hurt the client’s feelings.
If helpers acknowledge their part in problems in the helping relationship,
339
they serve as models for how to deal with mistakes and how to respond in a
compassionate way to another person. In addition, helpers can talk about their
feelings about the relationship to let clients know how their behaviors influence
others. Helpers can also ask clients to tell them if they feel offended or hurt.
Providing a place where clients can discuss both positive and negative feelings
toward the helper and the sessions is both challenging and critically important.
Finally, helpers can thank clients for revealing their feelings. It is often painful
and difficult to process the therapeutic relationship, so clients need to be assured
that they can bring up both positive and negative feelings.
Example of an Extended Interaction in the
Insight Stage
In this example, the helper has already established rapport, and the client has
explored her feelings about her relationship with her daughter. The example
starts at the beginning of the insight stage.
Helper:
 
So you said your daughter is not doing well in middle
school and you’re worried that she’s going to flunk out of
school. (The helper wants to tie together what the client has
been talking about and so offers a summary statement.)
Client:
 
Yeah, she just never does her homework. She watches
television all the time, talks on the phone to her friends
constantly, and eats. She’s not even doing any extracurricular
activities at school. I just can’t get her to do anything. She just
got her grades, which she wouldn’t even let me see at first. I
finally got them from her, and she’s flunking two classes.
Helper:
 
Have you considered getting her a tutor? (The helper jumps
prematurely to the action stage here to offer suggestions for
what to do about the problem.)
Client:
 
We keep trying to get her to a tutor, but she doesn’t want
one. Last year we made her see a tutor, but it didn’t help. She
still flunked the course, and we wasted a lot of money.
Helper:
 
You sound really frustrated. (The helper comes back to a
focus on the client instead of on the client’s daughter.)
Client:
 
Yeah, I really am frustrated. I just don’t know what to do. I
feel so helpless. School was so important to me, and I feel that
if she doesn’t get a good education, she won’t get anywhere in
life. (The client really takes in the reflection and talks in more
depth about her feelings about the problem with her daughter.)
340
Helper:
 
You know, in my experience with my kids, it was really hard
to separate myself from them. I wanted so much for them to be
perfect to show that I was a perfect parent. (Helper uses
disclosure to stimulate client insight.)
Client:
 
Yeah, I get into that. I feel like I’m not a very good parent.
Everyone else’s kids are doing so well. They’re all talking about
their kids going to these expensive colleges. I want my kids to
have all the things I didn’t have and not feel as bad about
themselves as adults as I do.
Helper:
 
You really want the best for your children. (Helper restates
to show support.)
Client:
 
Yeah. Education wasn’t a big thing in my family. My parents
pushed me on religion and health food. In fact, they were really
pushy; well, at least my mother was pushy about wanting me to
be a missionary. We had such incredible fights when I was a
teenager. They didn’t even notice that I did well in school, so it
was something I could do on my own.
Helper:
 
Interesting—you wanted to be independent from your
parents and make your own decisions in life, but you want your
daughter to do what you tell her to do. (Helper challenges
client with a contradiction of which the client seems to be
unaware.)
Client:
 
Wow, you’re right! I can’t believe that I would be doing the
same thing to her that my parents did to me. I guess it seemed
like such a different thing. I want her to do well in school, and
my parents wanted to control me about religion. But I don’t
know how to be any different. I really try hard to be a good
parent. It’s so important to me.
Helper:
 
I wonder if you think I’m judging you and maybe thinking
you’re bad for your parenting? (Helper picks up on the client’s
self-blaming and wants to see if she feels negatively toward her,
so helper uses an immediacy statement.)
Client:
 
Well, I don’t know if you blame me. I blame myself. I just
don’t know how to quit doing what I’m doing with my
daughter. I feel stuck. I don’t know any other way to be a
parent. I’ve tried as hard as I can.
Helper:
 
You’re feeling very discouraged. (Helper reflects feelings to
support the client.)
Client:
 
When I was younger, I didn’t want to be a parent because I
thought I would be rotten at it. I thought people should have
to pass tests before they could become parents. There are so
many rotten parents out there. But I was in therapy for a lot of
341
years, and I thought I had solved a lot of my problems. But I
guess I didn’t solve them all. You know it was so much easier
when the kids were younger.
Helper:
 
Perhaps you’re having problems now that your kids are
teenagers because that’s when you had your problems with your
parents. You didn’t get much of a model on how to be a parent
of teenagers. (Helper interprets the client’s current difficulties
as related to past experiences.)
Client:
 
That’s really true. I sure didn’t. You know, I still haven’t
forgiven my parents for some of the things they did. You
wouldn’t believe how controlling my mother was.
Helper:
 
You still have a lot of anger at her. I wonder if you can
identify with your daughter’s anger? (Helper reflects feelings
and interprets a parallel of the client’s feelings with her
daughter’s to help the client get some empathy with daughter.
Helper considers putting the client into an empty chair exercise
to help work on the unfinished business with the parents but
doesn’t have enough time left in this session to be about to do
it thoroughly.)
Client:
 
Yeah, I know she feels angry at me. And you know, I feel
good that she can express it. I used to just withdraw and get
depressed when I was a kid. She at least can express herself
pretty well sometimes. You know she does have a lot of spirit.
She’s different from me in some ways, yet in some ways she’s a
lot like me. School really is difficult for her. It’s not fun for her
to sit down and read a book like it is for me. She’s just not
academically oriented. But I guess she has to find her own way.
She’s not 5 years old anymore. Maybe I just have to trust that
she will find herself. I have to accept her as she is just as I have
to accept myself as I am. Maybe what I need to do is go back
and do some more work on myself to see why I’m so
controlling.
Helper:
 
You’ve done a really good job of focusing on yourself.
You’ve gone from blaming your daughter to looking at your
part in this whole situation. (Helper wants to reinforce client
for all the work she’s done.)
Client:
 
Yeah, it’s not easy though. It’s so much easier to blame her.
Helper:
 
How do you feel about the work we’ve done today in trying
to understand your conflicts with your daughter? (Helper asks
how the client is feeling about their interaction.)
Client:
 
I think I have a new understanding of my issues with my
daughter. I’m not sure yet that I’ll be able to stop having the
342
fights, because they happen so quickly, but I do have a better
idea what my part in the struggles is all about. I’ll need to do a
lot more thinking about what kind of relationship I want to
have with my daughter.
What Do You Think?
Several students have noted how difficult it is to learn and use the
insight interventions. They have said that the exploration skills seemed
easy, whereas now all of a sudden the insight skills seem hard. What is
your experience?
Many students forget to use the exploration skills when trying to use
challenge, interpretation, disclosure, and immediacy. They revert to
using lots of closed questions. What is your experience? What can you
do to remember to integrate the exploration skills into the insight
stage?
How do you think clients from different cultures react to the insight
skills as compared with the exploration skills?
Debate the advantages and disadvantages of the insight stage. Identify
the benefits and possible problems with moving clients to deeper
awareness.
Check which of the following obstacles you are most likely to face in
your development of insight skills:
_____ moving prematurely into the insight stage,
_____ taking too much responsibility for developing insight,
_____ applying psychoanalytic theory too rigidly,
_____ taking clients at face value and not digging deeper,
_____ forgetting to be empathic, and
_____ forgetting that not all clients need or want insight from the helper.
Which of the following strategies might help you cope with the
potential obstacles you could face in the insight stage?
_____ focus on empathy and use the exploration skills,
_____ deal with personal feelings,
_____ deal with the relationship.
343
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Training for Insight Skills
Citations:
 Chui, H., Hill, C. E., Hummel, A., Ericson, S., Ganginis, H., Ain, S., &
Merson, E. (2013). 
Training undergraduate helping skills students to use challenges.
Manuscript in preparation.
Jackson, J., Hill, C. E., Merson, E., Wydra, M., Liu, J., & Ericson, S. (2013). 
Teaching
undergraduates the skill of interpretation.
 Manuscript in preparation.
Spangler, P., Hill, C. E., Dunn, M. G., Hummel, A., Walden, T., Liu, J., Jackson, J.,
Ganginis, H., & Salahuddin, N. (2013). 
Helping in the here-and-now: Teaching
undergraduates the skill of immediacy.
 Manuscript in preparation.
Rationale:
 Given that students generally have much more difficulty learning insight skills
than exploration and action skills, we wondered whether there might be particular methods
that would help them learn these skills. The foundation for the studies was Bandura’s
(1977) theory that people learn by instruction, modeling, practice, and feedback. A
secondary purpose was to determine whether some students benefit more from training
than others do because this might have implications for selection of students for training
programs.
Method:
 All three studies were conducted within semester-long undergraduate helping
skills classes taught at one large public university in the United States. Each study involved
three or four classes of about 30 students each taught by different instructors, all of whom
had learned helping skills from me. The same basic design was used for each study, with
some minor variations. At the beginning of the semester, students completed several
measures. After the students had spent 6 to 8 weeks learning exploration skills, they were
asked to read the chapter in the Hill (2004) text on the relevant skill (immediacy,
challenge, or interpretation). They then participated in a 2-hour lecture and discussion class
in which they heard a lecture about the target skill, saw video clips of expert therapists using
the skill, and practiced the skill in the large class. A couple of days later, students
participated in a 2-hour lab class, where they practice the target skill.
Interesting Findings:
Some evidence was found across all three studies for the effectiveness of lecture, modeling, and practice. By far,
the most effective component of training was practice.
Students indicated some effects of culture on learning insight skills. Many felt that insight skills were not valued in
their cultures (e.g., East Asians), making it difficult to learn these skills.
Initial self-efficacy and previous helping experience predicted final immediacy self-efficacy. In addition, perceived
cohesion among lab group members increased after learning and practicing immediacy.
Students who initially reported low dominance had more gains in self-efficacy for using challenge than did
students who were initially high in dominance.
Conclusions:
Students really value practice in learning insight skills. We speculate that reading, lecture, and watching video
clips of expert therapists using the skills set the foundation for learning but that practice is essential.
Some components (e.g., reading, lecture, video clips, practice in large groups, practice in dyads) work well for
some but not for others. Students vary in which components they like (e.g., some love reading, others do not).
344
Implications for Training:
After reading, hearing a lecture, and watching video clips, students must have ample practice to learn how to
implement the insight skills.
Different types of practice seem to be beneficial (e.g., responding to written stimuli, responding to videotaped
stimuli, practicing in large groups and hearing skills used by others, practicing in dyads).
We suggest that a variety of components (instruction, modeling, practice, feedback) be used in training given that
students differ in their learning styles.
The quality of the video clips makes a big difference. Students need to feel that they can relate to the therapists in
the clips. We also suspect that they need to discuss their reactions in class to benefit from the experience.
We cannot select students for training based on these results. We suspect that performance-based measures (e.g.,
ability to respond facilitatively to a standard client) may predict better than self-report measures.
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
345
346
It is movement, not just insight, that produces change.
—Waters and Lawrence 
(1993, p. 40)
Not everything that is faced can be changed, but nothing can be changed unless it is
faced.
—James Baldwin
Consuela sought help because she was feeling vaguely uninterested in life. During
exploration with her helper, she described her situation as being devoid of close
friendships. She also indicated that she had not been doing well in her job since she was
promoted to a managerial position. She described her childhood as idyllic, with no
major problems. After further exploration, Consuela revealed that her parents had been
killed in a car accident a year ago. In the insight stage, the helper and Consuela began to
piece together that Consuela had not had a chance to grieve the loss of her parents
because she felt pressured to perform in her new job. She had moved to a new city to
take the job right before her parents’ deaths, and so she did not have friends to support
her in the aftermath. In addition, Consuela’s childhood was not as idyllic as she had
initially indicated, in that she had gone through a rough adolescence with many fights
with her parents. Through the helping process, she was able to understand that she felt
angry at her parents because they had been so strict and had not allowed her to develop
friendships outside the home. She was able to grieve her parents and the support they
provided. At this point, the helper decided to move into the action stage. Because
Consuela indicated that she wanted to make new friends and deal with the stress of her
job, they did assertiveness training to help her state more clearly what she wanted and
needed from friends, relaxation training for helping her deal with stress, and some
behavioral work to help to think about different ways of behaving in the work situation.
After several sessions, Consuela started to make some friends and was feeling calmer
about her work situation.
A
fter clients have explored and gained insight, they are ready for the action
stage, during which helpers collaborate with clients to explore the idea of
change, explore options for change, and help them figure out how to make
changes. These changes can be in thoughts (e.g., fewer self-defeating
statements), feelings (e.g., less hostility), or behaviors (e.g., less overeating). The
action stage also involves exploring feelings and examining values, priorities,
347
barriers, and support in relation to change. The emphasis in this stage is on
helping clients think about and make decisions about action rather than on
dictating action to clients. Helpers are coaches rather than experts dispensing
advice.
Rationale for the Action Stage
There are two important reasons for moving beyond insight to action. First,
because most clients seek help to feel better or to change specific behaviors,
thoughts, or feelings, it is important to help them attain these goals. Clients
usually feel better if they not only gain insight but also develop some ideas about
how to make needed changes in their lives. For example, Betty sought help
because of problems with her roommate. She came to understand that it was
hard for her to tell her roommate about her feelings because Betty’s family was
covert and indirect and never talked about feelings. This insight was important,
but Betty also needed to translate the insight into action and change her
behavior with her roommate.
Second, taking action is crucial for consolidating the new thinking patterns
learned in the insight stage. Action makes insight more understandable and
practical. New understandings can be fleeting unless something is done to help
the client consolidate the insights. Old thinking patterns and behaviors easily
resurface unless new ones are practiced and incorporated into existing schemas.
For example, Miguel’s old thinking pattern was that he was worthless unless he
was perfect. When the helper challenged his thoughts, Miguel came to realize
that he did not have to be perfect to accept himself. Miguel also came to
understand that he acted needy and dependent because his parents never
accepted him for who he was. His parents idealized his older, brilliant, and
successful brother because they had never achieved much in their own lives.
They had constantly put Miguel down for being only average in intelligence.
Through the insight stage, Miguel came to realize that even though his parents
did not accept him fully for who he was because of the comparison with his
brother, he was still a worthy and lovable person. This insight was fragile and
could have eroded, however, unless Miguel incorporated the learning into a new
pattern of behavior and thinking. Thus, the helper worked with Miguel to think
about possible changes. The two of them devised a list of things that Miguel
wanted to do (e.g., skydiving, rollerblading, going back to school) and developed
a plan for how he could pursue these activities. Beginning to do things he
wanted to do and at which he succeeded enabled Miguel to feel better about
himself. The helper also worked with Miguel to help him meet friends with
shared interests, so that he could receive social support. When he felt better
348
about himself, Miguel began to question the things he had told himself about
needing to be perfect. Hence, Miguel cycled back to insight after making
changes.
Deterrents to Action
Sometimes newly gained insights lead spontaneously to action. Clients begin to
say things such as,
I can see that I’ve been so angry at the world because it felt unfair that I am not as smart and
good-looking as my brother. I don’t need to feel so angry now, because I can accept who I
am and see that I have things to offer people. I am going to do the things that I want to do
with my life”
or
It makes sense that I had a hard time in my job if I kept treating my boss like my father. I
don’t need to do that anymore. I’m going to stand up to him and ask him for a raise.
Hence, moving to action comes naturally to some clients as they begin to talk
about how they might apply what they have learned about themselves in the
insight stage.
At other times, however, insight does not spontaneously lead to action,
perhaps because clients feel stuck, understand the situation incompletely or only
at an intellectual level, or do not take personal responsibility for their role in the
maintenance of the problem. For example, Stefan might realize intellectually
that he is upset about being fired, but he might not have allowed himself to feel
the humiliation of the loss or experience his anger at his boss. He also might not
have understood how he set himself up in self-defeating ways. Expressing,
understanding, and accepting his feelings and his role in creating the situation
are important tasks before moving to action, so Stefan and his helper might need
to spend more time in the insight stage.
Another reason that insight might not lead directly to action is that clients
might not have the necessary skills to take the next step. For example, even
though Margarita understood why she was not assertive and wanted to change
her behavior, she did not know how to stand up for herself. She could not
behave more assertively because she did not have the skills needed for being
assertive (e.g., maintaining eye contact, stating needs directly without blaming).
Hence, clients may need to be taught these skills and may need to practice and
get feedback about their performance to develop the skills adequately.
Even if they understand themselves thoroughly and have the skills to
change, clients may lack the motivation to change. They may feel blocked from
changing because old habits are hard to alter and they are afraid of trying
anything new (e.g., a client learning to be more assertive might be reluctant to
349
confront a friend for fear of losing the friendship). They may feel demoralized
and not believe they can change. They may need encouragement to even begin
thinking about change.
In addition, it is important to be aware that clients sometimes cannot make
all the changes they may want or need to make because of limited talents and
resources. For example, if Andrew has earned poor grades in college, getting into
a high-ranking graduate program is an unlikely proposition. Hence, the goal of
this stage is to enable clients to learn to make changes within the limits of the
possibilities and to expand these possibilities as much as possible. For example,
Andrew’s helper might encourage him to explore advanced training in a related
field so that he can pursue a career related to his goals. Although this view does
not fit with the idealistic notion that every person can do whatever he or she
wants, it fits with the more realistic idea of realizing one’s limits and maximizing
one’s potentials within those limits.
Philosophical Underpinnings
The major philosophical underpinning of the action stage is that clients are the
active agents of their own lives. They know when things are not going well and
seek input to help them fix problems, but ultimately they make the decisions
about how they want to be, and they are the ones who actually make whatever
changes get made. The role of the helper in this stage is to serve as a coach,
cheerleader, supporter, information giver, and consultant, but not to take over
and “fix” the client.
This stage, then, is still client-centered, with helpers facilitating clients in
thinking about change rather than imposing change on them. Helpers do not
have to know the best action plans for clients. In fact, helpers rarely need to
form an opinion about what clients “must” or “should” do. The goal for helpers
in this stage is to provide a supportive environment and facilitate clients in
resolving their problems and making their decisions. Hence, helpers need to be
just as empathic and supportive as they were in earlier stages. Mickelson and
Stevic (1971) found that behaviorally oriented counselors who were warm,
empathic, and genuine were more effective with their clients than were those
who were low in these facilitative conditions.
When clients decide for themselves what to do differently, they are more
likely to take responsibility and ownership for their actions than if helpers
dictate what they should do. Telling clients what to do, even if clients ask for
advice, is often not helpful because clients become dependent on the helpers,
especially if the client has a similar pattern in other relationships (see Teyber,
2006). Helpers cannot always be there for clients, so they need to teach clients
350
how to motivate themselves to change and how to implement changes in their
lives. Thus, rather than solving clients’ problems, helpers seek to enhance clients’
problem-solving capacities. With better coping skills, clients can address the
problems that led them to seek help and are better equipped to solve problems
in the future.
As you can see, helpers need to be supportive of clients and not be invested
in whether and how they change. Whether the client chooses to change is her or
his choice and responsibility rather than a reflection on the helper’s skills and
personal qualities. The helper’s skills are involved in helping the client explore
and make decisions about changes, not in which decision is made. Thus, the
helper’s goal is to encourage clients to explore whether they want to change, and
if so, to assist them in making the changes they have identified as desirable.
Otherwise, it is too easy for clients to replicate childhood patterns (e.g., acting or
not acting) to please or defy helpers as they did their parents. Instead, helpers
collaborate with clients in making choices, serving as facilitators of the process
and helping clients explore the positives and negatives of the various choices
rather than as experts who provide the answers and tell clients what to do.
Here is an example that illustrates the need for the action stage and shows
how it is implemented. Casey acted silly (e.g., giggled uncontrollably) when she
went out dancing because she was extremely nervous. Because Casey felt so
embarrassed and panicked when she acted silly, she would leave dances early and
then feel badly that she had missed all the fun. Through exploration and insight,
she came to realize that her anxiety at dances arose from her fear of being with
men. She was afraid no one would like her because her brothers had made fun of
her when she was a child. Her brothers had told her that she was ugly and had
taunted her about her face and hair. Insight was not enough, however. Casey
needed something to help her deal with the anxiety in the situation. The helper
taught her relaxation and then strategized with her about how to handle specific
situations at dances. When she felt a “silly” attack coming on, she and the helper
planned that she would take a time-out in the bathroom, practice deep
breathing, and watch what she was saying to herself. After practicing several
times in sessions, Casey was able to attend a dance and enjoy it. She was even
able to let a man touch her and allow herself to think that she was attractive.
Being able to master the situation made Casey feel better about herself. She then
began to reevaluate whether she was indeed ugly and wonder what had
motivated her brothers to be so mean to her. Hence, insight led to action, which
in turn led to more insight.
Markers for Knowing When to Move to
Action
351
It is generally best to wait to move to the action stage until the client is ready for
action. There are several indicators (markers) that a client might be ready to
move on to action. The first is when the client has gained insight and starts
spontaneously talking about action. This situation is the ideal because the helper
is following the client’s lead and providing what the client seems to need at the
time.
Another situation in which action would be called for (sometimes at the
beginning of the first session) is when the client presents with a specific problem
and simply wants relief from that problem (e.g., a simple phobia such as fear of
flying not complicated by other problems). In such cases, it makes sense for
helpers to approach the problem straightforwardly and offer what help they
know how to give (e.g., relaxation, exposure), after doing just enough
exploration to make sure that they are working on the right problem. By giving
clients what they ask for, helpers respect them and acknowledge their right to
the type of services they want. Instead of trying to clients’ their style and
preferences, helpers respect these wishes and move to action. It may be that after
making specific behavior changes, these clients will be curious about reasons for
their behavior, but it is equally likely that they will just want to feel better.
Relatedly, some clients are in crisis and need to make some changes
immediately. With these clients, helpers need to move quickly to action,
shortening the exploration and insight stages. Such clients need more direct
interventions because they are in crisis, are not psychologically minded, or
cannot articulate their concerns. Some clients just want something or someone
to make them feel better, and it is important for the helper to meet clients where
they are rather than imposing her or his values on them. For example, a person
who has been kicked out of his house, has no job or food, and has delusions may
need immediate relief in terms of housing, food, and medication before he can
focus on understanding. To rephrase Maslow’s (1970) statement, “people
cannot live on bread alone unless they have no bread.” These clients, after they
have received direct guidance about how to solve a pressing problem, might be
willing to go back and understand what contributed to the problem or work on
other problems.
Finally, another marker for moving to action is when the client is stuck in
insight and not making changes. The classic example is the client who wallows
in insight for years in therapy and knows exactly why she or he is dysfunctional
(and often blames someone else) but then does nothing to accept the situation,
take responsibility for the future, and change. Such clients can be gently
encouraged to move to action.
Theoretical Background: Behavioral and
352
Cognitive Theories
Behavioral theories lay the foundation for the action stage. In this section, I
discuss the underlying assumptions of these theories, the principles of learning,
and treatment strategies.
ASSUMPTIONS OF BEHAVIORAL THEORIES
Behavioral theories share several basic assumptions (Gelso & Fretz, 2001; Rimm
& Masters, 1979):
a focus on overt behaviors rather than unconscious motivations;
a focus on what maintains symptoms rather than on what caused them;
an assumption that behaviors are learned;
an emphasis on the present as opposed to the past;
an emphasis on the importance of specific, clearly defined goals;
a valuing of an active, directive, and prescriptive role for helpers;
a belief that the helper–client relationship is important to establish
rapport and gain client collaboration but is not enough to help clients
change;
a focus on determining adaptive behaviors for specific situations rather
than on seeking personality change; and
a reliance on empirical data and scientific methods.
One of the defining characteristics of behavioral approaches is that
behaviors, emotions, and cognitions (both adaptive and maladaptive) are learned
(Gelso & Fretz, 2001); therefore, it is important to talk about how learning
takes place. Rather than covering all behavioral theory, I cover those aspects that
are most relevant to helping skills training: operant conditioning, modeling (also
called observational learning), and cognitively mediated learning. Although the
three types of learning are not as distinct as once thought, it is still useful to be
aware of the different types.
OPERANT CONDITIONING
In operant conditioning, behaviors are thought to be controlled by their
consequences (Kazdin, 2013; Rimm & Masters, 1979; Skinner, 1953).
Reinforcement
 is anything that follows a behavior and increases the probability
that the behavior will occur again. An event, behavior, privilege, or material
object that increases the likelihood of a behavior occurring again is called a
positive reinforcer. Primary reinforcers
 (e.g., food, water, sex) are biological
necessities, whereas 
secondary reinforcers
 (e.g., praise, money) gain their
reinforcing properties through association with primary reinforcers. An example
353
of a positive reinforcer related to helping is an approval–reassurance given after a
client talks about feelings if it leads to the client talking more about feelings.
Note that things are not always reinforcing (e.g., food is typically
reinforcing only if a person is hungry) and that reinforcers are not the same for
all individuals (e.g., a long bath may be reinforcing for one person but not
another). Whether something is a reinforcer can only be determined by looking
at whether the target behavior increases when the reinforcer is administered.
Thus, a helper can determine whether something is reinforcing by observing the
client’s response.
To be effective, reinforcement must be contingent on, or linked directly to,
the behavior (Rimm & Masters, 1979). An office worker who receives a raise
every 3 months regardless of the quality of work is less likely to change his or her
behavior than is the office worker whose raise is contingent on good
performance.
For a behavior to be reinforced, it must first be performed. Hence, helpers
often have to engage in 
shaping,
 which refers to the gradual training of a
complex response by reinforcing closer and closer approximations to the desired
behavior. Goldfried and Davison (1994) gave the example of training a
developmentally disabled child to make his bed by first reinforcing him for
fluffing up his pillow, then for pulling the top sheet forward, and so on. Each of
these acts is a successive approximation of the final desired behavior. An example
of shaping is how we teach exploration skills. We might first ask the trainee to
practice listening empathically without saying anything, then ask him or her to
repeat exactly what the client said, next ask the trainee to say the main word the
client is communicating, and finally ask him or her to give restatements and
reflections of feelings. Thus, we try to shape the helper’s skills by starting with
easier skills and moving on to more difficult ones only after the trainee has
mastered the easier ones.
Punishment
 occurs after a behavior and reduces the probability that the
behavior will occur again. Goldfried and Davison (1994) identified three
punishment procedures: (a) presenting an aversive event (e.g., a frown when the
client reports something undesirable), (b) removing a person from a situation in
which she or he would otherwise be able to earn reinforcers (e.g., a time-out in a
room away from anyone who could provide positive reinforcement), and (c)
reducing a person’s collection of reinforcers (e.g., taking away candy). The
purpose of punishment in clinical situations is to decrease the frequency of
maladaptive behaviors (e.g., inappropriate interrupting, nonstop talking).
It is difficult to deliver punishment immediately after the behavior. As a
result, often a person is punished for being discovered rather than for the
behavior itself. Hence, when punishment is used as the primary mode of
behavior management, people often figure out how to avoid getting caught
rather than decreasing the problematic behavior. For example, a child who steals
354
cookies feels great (is reinforced) when he steals the cookies because they taste
good, but he feels bad several hours later when he gets caught. Because the
punishment is contingent on getting caught rather than on eating the cookies,
the clever child figures out a way to get the cookies without getting caught.
Another important behavioral concept is 
generalization,
 which involves the
transfer of learning from one situation to other, similar situations. For example,
if kicking and hitting are punished with time-outs and cooperative behavior is
positively reinforced at school, one would expect a decrease in kicking and
hitting and an increase in cooperative behavior in the home setting. However,
these behaviors are most likely to generalize if they are punished and reinforced
in the same manner in the home setting as in the school setting. Another
example of generalization is when a person acts frightened of a teacher or helper
because she or he was punished by authority figures in the past (a concept
similar to transference).
Extinction
 reduces the probability of a behavior occurring by withholding
reinforcers after the behavior is established (Goldfried & Davison, 1994). For
example, if a parent’s attention reinforces fighting among siblings (when no
other problems are apparent), a helper might instruct the parents to ignore the
fighting and let the kids work out their problems on their own (unless one child
is in danger of getting hurt) in the hopes that it will extinguish. Goldfried and
Davison (1994) noted that extinction is best facilitated by concurrently
reinforcing an incompatible and more adaptive behavior. Thus, in the previous
example, the parents might suggest that the siblings play separately and then
praise them if they play quietly.
Operant conditioning is often used when working with children because
they are not usually amenable to insight-oriented approaches. For example, I
used operant methods for several specific behavioral problems with my children
(e.g., to reduce fighting, to help them get off to school on time in the morning,
to help them sleep through the night in their own beds). It can also be useful for
adults changing bad habits (e.g., nail biting, procrastination, overeating,
underexercising, excessive drinking of alcohol or coffee). For more detail on self-
help methods for dealing with behavioral problems, see Watson and Tharp
(2006).
Although the concepts of operant conditioning sound relatively
straightforward, helpers often have difficulty applying them because of the
complexity of human nature and because helpers often have minimal control
over the reinforcers and punishments in the environment. In fact, Goldfried and
Davison (1994) aptly noted that helpers typically do not reinforce the actual
changes but rather reinforce the client’s talking about making specific changes.
Clients have to transfer the reinforcement from talking about changing to
implementing the changes outside the session. Thus, helpers act more as
consultants, whereas clients are the actual change agents.
355
MODELING
People often learn things even though they have never been reinforced for
performing them. One explanation for this learning is that they have learned
through modeling or observational learning, which occurs when a person
observes another person (a model) perform a behavior and receive consequences
(Bandura, 1977; Kazdin, 2013). For example, children learn how to be parents
by watching their parents and experiencing the effects of their child-rearing
practices. Students learn how to be teachers by observing effective and
ineffective educators. Helpers learn how to help by observing the behaviors of
effective and ineffective helpers.
To understand how modeling works, learning and performance must be
distinguished. A person can observe a model and thus learn a behavior. Whether
the person actually performs the learned behavior, however, depends on the
consequences at the time of performance. Bandura (1965) demonstrated this
distinction between learning and performance with his classic Bobo doll study.
Children observed a film in which an adult hit or kicked a Bobo doll (a life-size,
inflatable, plastic doll that is weighted so it pops upright after it is punched
down). The adult’s behavior was rewarded, punished, or met with no
consequences. When the children were put in the room with the Bobo doll,
those who had observed the aggression being punished were less aggressive than
were those who had observed the aggression being rewarded or ignored. When
all children were given an incentive for performing the aggressive behavior, there
were no differences among conditions, indicating that children in all conditions
learned aggressive behaviors equally well. Bandura concluded that learning
occurred through observation but performance depended on whether the child
perceived that the adult was rewarded or punished.
Kazdin (2013) noted that imitation of models by observers is greater when
models are similar to observers, more prestigious, higher in status and expertise
than observers, and when several models perform the same behavior. Thus,
helpers can learn about helping by watching videotapes of many experts. In
addition, clients are probably more willing to listen to and accept suggestions
from helpers whom they perceive to be credible and expert.
Modeling is an especially important component of helper training.
Watching experts conduct therapy is incredibly useful (see the review by Hill &
Lent, 2006). Students who have worked in my lab transcribing and coding
therapy sessions often say that this experience was incredibly valuable in terms of
learning what they liked and disliked about therapy.
COGNITIVE THEORY
Whereas early behaviorists such as Skinner believed in a stimulus–response
356
model (meaning that people respond directly to environmental cues [e.g., noise
leads to a startle response]), cognitive theorists (e.g., A. T. Beck, 1976; Ellis,
1962; Meichenbaum & Turk, 1987) introduced a stimulus–organism–response
(S-O-R) model. In the S-O-R model, the organism (i.e., person) processes the
stimulus before determining how to respond. Thus, people respond not to
stimuli but to their interpretation of stimuli. For example, how Esteban reacts to
a noise heard in the middle of the night is dependent on whether he thinks it is
a benign noise (the house “settling”) or whether he thinks the noise was made by
a burglar. Thus, it is important to look for and dispute irrational thoughts (e.g.,
“I must be perfect,” “Everyone must love me”). Theorists such as Beck, Ellis,
and Meichenbaum have suggested that it is not so much events that cause a
person to become upset but what the person thinks about the events.
Cognitive processes are of utmost importance to the helping situation. As
discussed in 
Chapter 2
, much of the helping process takes place at covert levels.
Helpers’ intentions for their interventions as well as their perceptions of clients’
reactions influence their subsequent interventions. In addition, clients have
reactions to helpers’ interventions as well as intentions for how to influence
helpers. Hence, a cognitively mediated model for understanding the helping
process makes a lot of sense.
HOW BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE THEORIES RELATE TO
THE ACTION STAGE
Behavioral and cognitive theories fit well into the action stage of the helping
model because they provide specific strategies for helping clients change. When
clients have explored thoughts and feelings thoroughly and obtained insight
about themselves, action allows them to determine how they would like to
change their lives. When used in an empathic and collaborative manner at the
appropriate time, behavioral and cognitive treatments can facilitate change. Core
components of behavioral (e.g., reinforcement, modeling) and cognitive theories
(e.g., intentions) are incorporated into the steps for working with the four types
of action (see 
Chapter 17
).
The major difference between behavioral and cognitive theorists on the one
hand and the three-stage model on the other hand is that the former do not
emphasize the importance of engaging in the exploration and insight stages.
Helpers working from these models may engage in exploration and insight, but
they do not view these as curative elements of the treatment.
Goals of the Action Stage
The goals of the action stage are for helpers to encourage clients to explore
357
possible new behaviors, assist clients in deciding on actions, facilitate the
development of skills for action, provide feedback about attempted changes,
assist clients in evaluating and modifying action plans, and encourage clients in
processing feelings about action (see 
Exhibit 16.1
). While in the action stage,
helpers need to remember to be empathic and pace themselves according to
clients’ needs. A stance of exploring, rather than prescribing, action is typically
most helpful.
358
EXHIBIT 16.1
List of Goals, Types, and Skills to Facilitate the Action Stage
Goals
Explore possible new behaviors.
Assist clients in deciding on actions.
Facilitate the development of skills for action.
Provide feedback about attempted changes.
Assist clients in evaluating and modifying action plans.
Encourage clients in processing feelings about action.
Types of action
Relaxation
Behavior change
Behavioral rehearsal and assertiveness
Decision making
Skills
Open questions and probes for action
Information
Feedback about client
Process advisement
Direct guidance
Disclosures of strategies
Skills of the Action Stage
The skills used uniquely in the action stage are open questions and probes for
action, information, feedback about the client, process advisement, direct
guidance, and disclosure of strategies. The purpose of the most frequently used
skill, open questions and probes for action, is to stimulate clients in their
thinking about action. Information is important to educate clients about options
for action. Feedback about the client allows helpers to let clients know how they
come across to the helpers. Process advisement is used to direct the process of
sessions, particularly in doing therapeutic exercises (e.g., behavioral rehearsal)
within sessions. Direct guidance is occasionally useful to give some advice to
clients about the best strategies. Disclosure of strategies is another, more
tentative, way to suggest action ideas.
Helpers also continue to use exploration skills throughout the action stage.
Restatements and reflections of feelings are particularly useful for uncovering
feelings related to change, demonstrating support, and ensuring that helpers
accurately hear what clients are saying. When clients are stuck, insight skills such
as challenge, interpretation, self-disclosure, and immediacy are used to uncover
359
obstacles to action.
Skills in the action stage are not used as discretely as they are used in the
exploration and insight stages. Rather, skills are used to accomplish the steps of
working on four different types of action (relaxation, behavior change,
behavioral rehearsal, decision making). Hence, in this section, I briefly present
the skills that are used in the action stage. In 
Chapter 18
, I discuss how the skills
are integrated to work with the four types of action.
These action skills require more input on the part of the helper, so helpers
have to be sure that clients are ready for these interventions (i.e., have explored
enough). Helpers also need to be attentive to observing client reactions to see
how they are responding and to make sure that clients are actively involved in
the process.
OPEN QUESTIONS AND PROBES FOR ACTION
Open questions and probes for action
 are questions aimed specifically at helping
clients explore action (see 
Exhibit 16.2
). For example,
What kinds of things have you tried?
How did it work when you tried that?
What ideas do you have about what to do in this situation?
What might happen if you tried that?
360
EXHIBIT 16.2
Overview of Open Questions and Probes for Action
Rationale for Using Open Questions and Probes for Action
Open questions and probes for action are particularly useful for gently guiding
clients through the action stage. They are the primary tool through which
helpers find out whether clients are ready to change, what they have tried before,
what ideas they have for action, what barriers they see to change, and how they
respond to action ideas. By using open questions and probes, the helper
implicitly communicates that she or he is guiding or coaching the client to
figure out about action rather than providing answers. Thus, helpers encourage
clients to solve problems with their support, communicate respect that clients
have self-healing capacity, and minimize the likelihood of imposing helpers’
values on clients. By using open questions and probes, helpers can also teach
clients a process of thinking through problems and possible solutions.
Guidelines for Using Open Questions and Probes for Action
As discussed with open questions and probes for exploration and insight, open
questions and probes for action should be done gently and with an air of
curiosity. The helper is collaboratively inquiring and helping the client figure
out about action. Helpers should be careful not to ask too many questions at
one time, make sure to give clients time to respond, vary questions with other
skills so that they do not sound repetitive, and make sure that questions are open
rather than closed.
Examples of Open Questions and Probes for Action
The following shows a helper using open questions and probes for action (in
italics) in a session:
Helper:
 
So you’ve talked quite a bit about these kids bullying you
and kicking in your locker. 
What are your thoughts about what
361
you might do?
Client:
 
I don’t know.
Helper:
 
You sound a little anxious as you say that. What’s going on
inside?
Client:
 
I’m scared. There’s four of them, and only one of me.
They’re a lot bigger.
Helper:
 
Yeah, I would be scared too. 
What have they told you at
school about this kind of bullying?
Client:
 
They said that we should report it to the principal.
Helper:
 
What would that be like for you?
Client:
 
I don’t know. I guess it feels like I would be grassing on
them. They might get back at me. But the principal always says
that bullying is not okay and that we should say something.
Helper:
 
Would you like to try that?
Client:
 
I think I would like to say something.
GIVING INFORMATION
Giving information
 can be defined as providing specific data, facts, resources,
answers to questions, or opinions to clients (see 
Exhibit 16.3
). There are several
types of information:
educating the client (e.g., “The rationale for asking you to develop
your own ideas is for you to take responsibility for coming up with
choices,” “Role-playing involves practicing how you might respond
differently when you talk to your mother,” “Having a specific place to
study allows students to concentrate better on their studies without
distractions”),
providing information about assessment or psychological tests (e.g.,
“The Strong Interest Inventory measures a person’s interests and
compares them with interests of people happily employed in a variety
of occupations”), and
educating the client about the world or psychological principles (e.g.,
“A moderate amount of stress is typically helpful to motivate a person,
but too much or too little stress can be counterproductive”; “Many
women become depressed after giving birth. There’s even a term for it
—it’s called 
postpartum depression
”).
362
EXHIBIT 16.3
Overview of Giving Information
Rationale for Giving Information
In the action stage, helpers sometimes shift into a teacher’s role to provide
information. They occasionally act as educators, which is appropriate if the
information is given in a caring manner when clients need information and are
ready to listen. For example, a helper might educate a client about his mental
condition or about what to expect in different situations. Or a helper might
explain what happens during panic attacks as a way of teaching a client that the
physical sensations she experiences (e.g., heart palpitations) are due to anxiety
rather than a heart attack. Such information can lead to change when clients are
open to learning.
Sometimes, however, helpers do not have information to give. Rather than
assume that one must know everything before becoming a helper (obviously an
impossible task), helpers can be aware of some basic information (e.g., referral
sources) but then focus on helping clients figure out how to get the needed
information themselves.
Information is not always the most appropriate intervention in a situation,
however, even when the client requests this type of assistance and the helper
knows the information. Sometimes clients need to explore how they feel about
situations without being told what is “normal” or expected. Other clients need
to seek out information themselves rather than having the investigative work
done for them. Some clients need to be challenged to think about why they do
not already have the desired information and to think about what motivates
them to rely on others to give them information.
Guidelines for Giving Information
Before giving information, helpers may find it useful to ask what information or
363
what misinformation clients possess (e.g., “What do you know about getting
into graduate school?”). Thus, rather than assuming clients need information,
helpers can assess clients’ knowledge base. They can also ask clients what
strategies they have used to gather information.
Examination of intentions is critical to ensure that information is delivered
appropriately. Helpers should think carefully about their intentions. Helpers can
ask themselves what is motivating them to want to give information at this
particular point, and for whom (the client or helper) this information will be
helpful. Helpers can ask themselves the following:
Do I want to educate the client?
Do I want to normalize the experience?
Do I want to explain what is happening in the session?
Does the client need this information?
If the answer to any of these questions is yes, if the issue is straightforward
and not motivated by inappropriate needs, and if the helper has the requisite
information, helpers can provide information. Sometimes helpers do have
valuable information and can serve as resources for clients. When giving
information, of course, helpers should be empathic, gentle, and sensitive to how
clients are reacting. The goal of delivering information is not to lecture clients or
act as an expert, but rather to educate clients when they are ready to learn and
when it does not undermine clients’ independence in searching out their own
information.
If helpers determine that giving information is appropriate, they should not
provide too much information at one time. In medical relationships,
Meichenbaum and Turk (1987) found that patients remember very little of the
information that doctors give them. Ironically, the more information given by
doctors, the less patients remember. Similarly, when clients are anxious in
helping situations, it is easy for them to forget information. Thus, helpers may
just give a small amount of information and put crucial information (e.g.,
referral numbers, homework assignments) in writing to assist clients in accessing
the information later.
As with disclosures, helpers turn the focus back to the client after providing
information to see the client’s reaction. For example, after describing his
position on the use of prescription drugs for psychiatric illnesses, a helper might
ask the client about her thoughts and reactions to using prescription drugs.
Sometimes when a client requests information, the helper is not sure that it
is best to give the client information at this point. Helpers can ask themselves
the following:
Is the client trying to make me feel needed or like an expert?
Is the client trying to avoid exploration or insight?
364
Is the client resorting to familiar defenses of being dependent on
others?
Does giving information foster further dependency in the client?
Does the client expect me to be like a medical doctor who asks
questions about the problem and then gives a diagnosis and course of
treatment?
Is the client testing me or my credibility?
Rather than giving the information right away, the helper might may ask
clients what is motivating them to ask for information, what they want to do
with the information, or what they hope the helper will do for them (e.g., “I’d
be happy to answer your question, but first let’s talk about why you ask”). If the
client is requesting information as a ploy in the interpersonal interaction (e.g.,
for dependency needs or to make the helper feel needed), the helper can use
immediacy skills to address this issue (see 
Chapter 15
). It is often better to find
out what is beneath the request than to ignore it or engage in a power struggle
over who controls the information.
Once the helper knows the motives behind the request for information, he
or she can address these motives directly. For example, if the client expects the
helper to make a diagnosis and dictate the course of treatment, the helper can
either educate the client that she or he uses a different treatment strategy or refer
the client to someone who is more likely to meet these expectations. Helpers
need to think carefully about how to handle these situations (and, as always,
talking the situation over with supervisors or trusted peers can aid helpers in
dealing with such situations in the future).
On the other hand, there are times when it is good to avoid giving
information. When helpers answer yes to any of the following questions, they
might want to use other skills:
Do I want to inappropriately minimize client anxiety?
Do I want to show the client how much I know?
Examples of Giving Information
The following shows a helper giving information (in italics) in a session:
Client:
 
So tell me all about your class. I think I want to take it next
year.
Helper:
 
It sounds like you would be interested in learning helping
skills.
Client:
 
Yeah, I’ve always had the idea that maybe I might want to be
a social worker. But on the other hand, I’m not sure I would be
very good at helping.
365
Helper:
 
What concerns do you have about learning helping skills?
Client:
 
I’m afraid of getting too involved with the clients. I feel so
responsible for my friends when they talk about their problems.
I feel like I have to solve all their problems and tell them exactly
what to do.
Helper:
 
So maybe you’re worried that you won’t be able to have any
distance from clients in a helping setting.
Client:
 
Yeah, do they talk about how to deal with that in the class?
Helper:
 
Sounds like you really need some help with that.
Client:
 
I do. I had a friend talk to me just yesterday, and I felt totally
depressed when we were done because I felt like I had done
nothing to help her. I’m afraid that she felt worse when we
were done. It reminded me of my mother and father, who both
want to talk to me ever since they divorced. Both want me to
be on their side. Sometimes I feel split in half.
Helper:
 
I can see why you’d be nervous about the helping situation
after having to be a helper with your parents.
Client:
 
Yeah. What was it like for you?
Helper:
 
I have had a good experience in the class. The professor has
talked a lot about how we have to get personal issues dealt with in
our own therapy or else it is difficult to help clients with their
issues.
 I wonder if you have ever explored the idea of getting
into therapy?
Client:
 
Not really. I don’t know much about it.
Helper:
 
There’s a counseling center right here on campus that offers 12
sessions of free therapy for students.
Client:
 
Really? I’ll have to think about that. Maybe I’ll check it out.
GIVING FEEDBACK ABOUT THE CLIENT
Giving feedback
 can be defined as the helper giving information to the client
about his or her behaviors or impact on others (see 
Exhibit 16.4
). It is a type of
information (see previous section), but it is confined to information about the
client specifically. Examples of feedback about the client include the following:
You expressed yourself very clearly and concisely in the role-play.
You are smiling a lot and seem more open to making changes.
I noticed that you were tapping your foot during the relaxation
exercise.
366
EXHIBIT 16.4
Overview of Feedback About the Client
Rationale for Giving Feedback About the Client
Brammer and MacDonald (1996) suggested that effective feedback can increase
clients’ self-awareness, which can in turn lead to behavior change. For example,
if the helper comments that Jennifer always ends her sentences with a question
and thus sounds tentative when she speaks, this might lead Jennifer to become
aware of how she talks and try to change her behavior. When she begins to make
definite statements, other people might begin to take Jennifer more seriously.
Research shows that clients prefer positive feedback and think it is more
accurate than negative feedback (Claiborn, Goodyear, & Horner, 2002).
Positive feedback is good to use early on to establish the relationship and
enhance credibility. In addition, if negative feedback must be given, it is best to
precede it with positive feedback or to sandwich it between two pieces of
positive feedback.
Feedback about the client (e.g., “You did a good job explaining your
reasons”) is similar to immediacy (e.g., “I feel good about our relationship”) in
that both involve something about the client. Feedback about the client is only
about the client, whereas immediacy is about the interaction between helper and
client in the therapeutic relationship. In addition, whereas immediacy is used in
the insight stage to promote insight and deal with problems in the therapeutic
relationship, feedback about the client is used in the action stage to assist clients
in generating, implementing, and maintaining changes in thoughts, feelings, and
behaviors.
It can be difficult for beginning helpers to provide feedback to clients
367
because it is a different behavior than one usually uses in social interactions and
can be met with resistance. Beginning helpers often become victims of the 
mum
effect,
 a tendency to withhold bad news even if it is in the best interest of others
to hear it (Egan, 1994). In ancient times, bearers of bad news were killed, which
not too surprisingly led to some reluctance to be the one to bear bad news or
give negative feedback.
Guidelines for Giving Feedback
Some guidelines to consider in giving feedback are the following:
Give feedback about the client cautiously, with the clear understanding
that the helper is offering his or her personal observations about the
client’s behavior.
Make the statements descriptive (e.g., “You spoke very softly”) rather
than evaluative (e.g., “You aren’t taking this role-play very seriously”).
Emphasize strengths (e.g., “You effectively articulated your feelings”)
before weaknesses (e.g., “but you didn’t sound like you really believed
it”) to make it easier for clients to hear the feedback.
Give feedback about things clients can change (e.g., nonverbal
behaviors, actions) rather than about physical characteristics or life
circumstances that cannot be changed (e.g., height, personality).
Give feedback in close proximity in terms of time to the occurrence of
the behavior (e.g., “You spoke with more assurance that time”) rather
than waiting for a long time and then trying to recreate the situation
(e.g., “Last session you looked away from me and didn’t say
anything”).
As with the other action skills, give feedback with a lot of empathy and
support. Negative feedback could damage the helping process if it is
perceived as threatening or inaccurate, so helpers need to do it gently
and tentatively after a good relationship is established.
Example of Feedback
The following shows a helper giving feedback (in italics) in a session:
Client:
 
I tried the homework you suggested about trying to make
more friends.
Helper:
 
Fantastic. How did it go?
Client:
 
Well, I smiled more often and tried to look at people when I
was crossing campus.
Helper:
 
That’s great. How did that feel?
Client:
 
It was a little strange at first, but then it was nice to see
people smiling back at me. No one came up to me, but it felt
368
like a start.
Helper:
 
You were also going to try to initiate a conversation with
someone in class. How did that go?
Client:
 
That didn’t go so well. I picked Sally because she usually
seems friendly. I sat near her as planned, but then I got scared
at the last minute and didn’t say anything to her.
Helper:
 
Let’s role-play that so I can see how you did it. Let’s pretend
that I’m Sally.
Client:
 
I sat next to her but I didn’t say anything, so there’s nothing
really to role-play.
Helper:
 
Okay, let’s try it where I play you and you play Sally and see
if we can come up with some ideas about how to do it. Would
that be okay?
Client:
 
Sure, that would be great.
Helper:
 
Hi Sally, how’s it going?
Client:
 
Oh hi, pretty good, except I’m stressed out about this test.
Helper:
 
Me too. Would you be interested in studying together?
Client:
 
Sure. Want to meet later for coffee and study?
Helper:
 
How did that feel? Do you think you’d be able to do that?
Client:
 
Yeah, I think I could. Let me try . . . Hi Sally. Umm, how’s
it going? Would you like to study for the exam together?
Helper:
 
Great, you did it, you got it out, and you looked directly at me
when you said it. That’s a big improvement.
 Maybe next time
you could slow down a bit when you are talking. Let’s practice
again, because it can really help to practice until you feel
comfortable here.
PROCESS ADVISEMENT
With 
process advisement,
 helpers direct clients to do things 
within
 helping
sessions (e.g., “Show me how you acted when your roommate asked to borrow
your new dress,” “Play the part of the man in your fantasy”). Process advisement
is a type of advice or direct guidance (see the next section), but it is confined to
directing what goes on in the session (see 
Exhibit 16.5
).
369
EXHIBIT 16.5
Overview of Process Advisement
Rationale for Giving Process Advisement
Helpers are experts on how to facilitate the helping process and, hence, often
have suggestions about what clients can do in sessions to facilitate the change
process. Clients, in contrast, are not experts in the helping process and
consequently rely (within limits) on helpers for judgments about how to proceed
in sessions. The primary use of process advisement in the action stage is through
behavioral exercises such as behavioral rehearsal or role-playing (see 
Chapter 17
).
Guidelines for Giving Process Advisement
Clients are generally agreeable to trying things in sessions that helpers deem
appropriate if they trust the helper and are presented with a credible rationale for
why the exercise might be helpful (e.g., “Let’s try this role-play to help you learn
how to be more assertive. It may feel silly at first, but it can be helpful”). So the
idea is to present the idea in a clear, calm manner that transmits confidence that
this exercise will help the client.
Helpers try to be attentive to signs that clients do not want to follow
process advisements. Signs may range from passive resistance (e.g., hesitance, not
responding, changing the topic) to more active resistance (saying “Yes, but . . . ”
or arguing). It may be that the helper has presented the process advisement
poorly, and so the client is reluctant to try it. Or it could be the helpers present
the process advisement in an apologetic manner (e.g., “I don’t suppose you’d
want to do this exercise that my supervisor suggested?”), which often defeats the
possibility of gaining client cooperation. Or sometimes helpers are not clear
about what they want the client to do. Furthermore, some helpers do not
provide a clear rationale for why the activity is important or how it might help
370
the client.
Some clients do not want to follow process advisement no matter how
skillfully it is presented by the helper. At all times, helpers need to respect the
client’s decision not to participate in an exercise. Perhaps the worst thing to do
with reluctant or resistant clients is to get into a control struggle with them
because control struggles tend to escalate, sometimes leading to disastrous
consequences, with both people feeling that they will lose “face” if they back
down. If a control struggle starts, helpers can step back and use exploration skills
to understand why clients are reluctant, or they can use immediacy to work with
the therapeutic relationship.
Example of Process Advisement
The following shows a helper giving process advisement (in italics) in a session:
Helper:
 
You’ve talked a lot about your indecision about whether to
put your mother in an assisted living home. 
I wonder if you
would be willing to try something here in the session?
Client:
 
What?
Helper:
 
What I’d like you to do is to pretend that your mother is over
there in that chair and tell her how you’re feeling.
Client:
 
Yikes, that sounds a little scary.
Helper:
 
Yeah, it might be at first. Would you be willing to try it?
Client:
 
Sure, why not. So she’s in that chair? (Helper nods.) Mom, I
know you don’t want to go, but I don’t know what to do.
Helper:
 
Take a deep breath.
 (Pause while the client takes a deep
breath) 
Now think about what you would like to say.
Client:
 
Okay, let me try again. Mom, I know you’re scared of going
to the assisted living place, and I am too, but I think it’s time. I
can’t take care of you when I live 1,000 miles away, and it’s not
safe for you to be alone.
Helper:
 
Good. How did that feel?
Client:
 
It felt a lot better. I felt like I knew what I wanted to say.
Helper:
 
Yeah, you sounded good. 
Now let’s see how she might respond
and how you could handle that
 . . .
DIRECT GUIDANCE
Direct guidance
 can be defined as making suggestions, giving directives, or
providing advice for what helpers think clients should do 
outside
 of helping
sessions (see 
Exhibit 16.6
). Examples include providing suggestions to parents
who are exploring ways of dealing with bedtime for a young child, to a client
about coping strategies after a hospitalization, or to a middle-aged person for
371
dealing with an elderly parent with Alzheimer’s disease.
372
EXHIBIT 16.6
Overview of Direct Guidance
One form of direct guidance is homework assignments (a term commonly
used in the behavioral literature, although I recognize that students often have
negative reactions to this term). Helpers suggest that clients do homework (e.g.,
monitor exercise and eating behaviors, read a self-help book, seek information,
practice being assertive, record dreams) so that clients can practice what they are
learning in helping sessions. Homework can be a particularly useful way to keep
clients involved in the change process in between sessions. In addition,
homework can speed up the helping process because clients are actively involved
in changing and bringing feedback about change efforts back to the session.
Homework can also encourage clients to act on their own without the helper’s
immediate monitoring.
Of course, the manner in which homework is assigned can make a big
difference in terms of client receptivity and willingness to implement the
homework. Research suggests that clients are more likely to implement
homework suggestions if therapists choose tasks that fit the problem, are not
difficult to implement, and are based on clients’ strengths (Conoley, Padula,
Payton, & Daniels, 1994; Scheel, Seaman, Roach, Mullin, & Mahoney, 1999;
Wonnell & Hill, 2002). In a study on homework, Conoley et al. (1994) gave an
example in which a client was depressed and angry. During the session, the
client said he wished he had written down instances in his journal when he felt
badly the previous week so that he could remember them to talk about in the
373
sessions. For homework, the helper followed up on what the client said and
asked the client to write down instances when he felt badly, recording what he
was thinking, doing, and feeling, and what the situation was so they could
discuss the problem more specifically in the next session. The client responded
favorably, saying he liked to write and that writing had helped him in the past.
Thus, the recommendation was judged as not being difficult because it required
only a small amount of time, was not anxiety producing, and was clear. In
addition, it was based on the client’s strengths, given that the client had
indicated that he liked to write. Furthermore, it matched his problem because it
facilitated the client in remembering situations in which he was depressed and
angry. During the next session, the client indicated that he had implemented the
recommendation. In contrast, the directive to write would not have been good
for other clients who do not like to write.
It is important to note that helpers in some job settings (e.g., rehabilitation
counseling, job placement) need to do more direct guidance than helpers do in
other settings (e.g., college counseling centers). For example, clients in
rehabilitation settings often need specific guidance for how they could handle
their major life obstacles, whereas clients in university counseling centers may be
able to solve their problems by talking with an interested helper. Similarly,
clients from some cultures want more direct guidance. For example, in Asian
cultures clients often want their helpers to give them specific advice, and they
might think less of helpers who do not provide suggestions. They might not
necessarily implement the advice, but advice is expected from experts in that
culture.
Direct guidance is different from 
information giving.
 When helpers give
information, they provide facts or data but do not suggest what clients should
do. In contrast, direct guidance indicates what helpers think clients should do.
For example, contrast the effects of “The counseling center is in the Shoemaker
Building” (information) versus “You should go to the counseling center” (direct
guidance). Information often has an implied directive about what the client
ought to do (e.g., “In my opinion, students earn better grades when they get a
full night of sleep before taking a test”), but it does not state directly that the
client should take a particular action (e.g., “You should make sure you get 8
hours of sleep before taking the test”).
Rationale for Giving Direct Guidance
Dear Abby, Ann Landers, Dr. Joyce Brothers, Dr. Phil, and others give advice to
millions of people. Many people (including me) read the newspaper columns
and listen to the radio shows, which have become immensely popular because
they are so entertaining. Providing advice is probably as old as human speech,
but what are the consequences? Do people follow the advice, and if so, is it
374
helpful or harmful? Unfortunately, no one has the answers to these concerns,
except perhaps anecdotally. My main concern about direct guidance given in
these entertainment formats is that the advice is not preceded by thorough
exploration; the wrong problem might be addressed, and the recipient might
think that it is not necessary to explore all the angles of the problem.
Furthermore, in such situations people might begin to rely on others to make
their decisions rather than coming to trust their own instincts. Moreover, some
people seek guidance from many people and then either become confused or
consider only the opinions they want to hear. It can be valuable to gain input
from many people, but it can then be difficult for people to determine what they
want to do. In addition, people may follow direct guidance out of fear of
hurting the feelings of the advice giver or out of fear of retribution rather than
because of choosing freely.
Direct guidance, however, can occasionally be useful in helping situations,
especially when given by a trusted helper whose opinions are based on solid
knowledge and experience and are given after extensive client exploration and
insight. Helpers can have good ideas about what might be helpful for clients to
do. For example, Dorothy asked her helper for advice on negotiating her salary
for her first job in an academic setting. This was an area her helper knew
something about because she worked in an academic setting. They talked about
the information Dorothy had gathered about the salary range of other recent
hires, what her values were, and what she wanted. They then discussed how
Dorothy could navigate the negotiation process. The helper suggested that
Dorothy not name a specific salary but say that she was dissatisfied with what
had been offered. They talked about that possibility, and Dorothy modified it to
fit her style. The process was collaborative because the helper respected
Dorothy’s right and ability to make her own decisions. The helper was not
invested in which strategy Dorothy chose but was interested in presenting
alternatives that Dorothy might be able to implement. Although the strategy did
not work exactly as planned when Dorothy tried it (which is typical in the real
world), Dorothy was able to modify it during the negotiation. She accepted the
job at a competitive salary and started her new job soon afterward.
Although most clients are able to make their own decisions, especially if
they have input from others, an individual in a crisis situation may need more
explicit guidance. When clients are suicidal, for example, they often have
“tunnel vision” that prevents them from seeing options other than death.
Helpers may need to intervene in such situations and try to ensure that clients
do not harm themselves (refer to 
Chapter 19
 for discussion about dealing with
suicidal clients). It is important to emphasize that other than in extreme cases
(e.g., child abuse, suicidal or homicidal risk), helpers typically do not take over
and manage what clients do. Offering suggestions is quite different from
demanding that clients do what you tell them to do.
375
Guidelines for Giving Direct Guidance
Before giving direct guidance, it is important for helpers to think about and
become aware of their intentions. As with information, helpers should not give
direct guidance until they have assessed clients’ motivation (as well as their
own). They should make sure they are using this skill for the client’s benefit.
When giving direct guidance, it is helpful to remember that it is easier for
clients to make small, specific changes than to change many big things all at
once. Helpers are more likely to be helpful if they can be specific about which
small steps could be done and when they could be done, and then they should
reinforce approximations toward the desired behaviors. For example, rather than
suggesting that an inactive client try to lose 5 pounds in the next week (which is
not under the client’s control), the helper might suggest that the client walk for
15 minutes three times in the next week, reinforce herself by taking a hot bath
after each walk, and allow herself to read a novel (assuming the helper has
discovered that the client enjoys doing these things).
I also suggest that helpers write down assignments to help clients remember
them given that it is often difficult to remember everything that happens in
sessions. Furthermore, clients are more likely to take written assignments
seriously. Following up on assignments in subsequent sessions (e.g., asking
clients about their experience in trying to implement the homework) is also
important; otherwise, clients might feel that such assignments are frivolous and
not to be taken seriously. And, as always, it is important to observe client
reactions to see how they respond to such interventions.
When clients ask (or sometimes even beg) for direct guidance, helpers have
to be particularly careful to distinguish between the honest and direct request for
direct guidance and the expression of dependent feelings. When in doubt, it is
probably best to deal first with the feelings involved (e.g., “You seem pretty
desperate to get some advice. I wonder what’s going on?”) After such
exploration, helpers have additional data to consider how to deal with the
request. Helpers also have to assess their own motivation and ensure that their
needs to take care of others do not interfere with allowing clients to make their
own decisions.
Clients often have negative reactions if helpers ignore their requests for
advice. Some clients want direct guidance and are angry when helpers refuse to
tell them what to do. An example is a case presented in Hill (1989) in which an
Asian woman wanted direct guidance about family issues in the early sessions,
and the African American therapist did not give it to her because she wanted the
client to work on insight. The client felt disregarded by the therapist and
became less invested in the therapy thereafter. In cases such as this, it may be
better to give advice if the helper genuinely feels he or she has useful advice, and
376
then process with the client later about the origin of the desire for advice. In
addition, openly addressing the client’s feelings using immediacy skills may help
repair breaches in relationships that occur when clients become angry at helpers
for not providing any, enough, or the “right” direct guidance.
Cautions When Giving Direct Guidance
Helpers need to be aware that they can offer help but cannot force clients to take
it. Helpers are not taking over for clients but are providing options for them to
consider. Clients have the right to decide for themselves what to do, even in the
most desperate of circumstances.
Furthermore, helpers have to know the limits of how much they can offer.
Friedman (1990) recounted a fable about a rescuer who holds a rope over the
rail of a bridge to save a drowning person. The drowning person grabs the rope
but refuses to climb up. After a while, the rescuer holding the rope cannot hang
on any longer because the drowning person is so heavy. The rescuer has to make
a decision about letting go or falling from the bridge himself, which clearly
would not help either the drowning person or the rescuer.
Another problem with direct guidance is that it can foster dependency by
shifting the responsibility for solutions from clients to helpers. Clients can
become passive and helpless if helpers insinuate that clients are not competent
enough to solve their own problems. In addition, when helpers rather than
clients are responsible for the guidance, clients often blame the helpers when
things do not go so well. Moreover, when helpers use too much direct guidance,
it can lead to tension, resistance, or rebellion if clients choose to ignore the
advice. Hence, direct guidance can cause problems in therapeutic relationships if
it is not done collaboratively, with helpers and clients together constructing the
direct guidance.
Example of Direct Guidance
The following shows a helper giving direct guidance (in italics) in a session:
Client:
 
Our 3-year-old daughter has gotten into the habit of coming
into our bedroom in the middle of the night and climbing in
bed with us and wanting to stay until morning. At first it
seemed okay because she seemed to need comforting, but it has
gotten out of hand. We only have a double bed, and my
husband takes up more than his half, so I end up being unable
to sleep because I can’t move. When I try to move her, she
doesn’t want to leave. So we’ve got to do something.
Helper:
 
You sound frustrated.
Client:
 
I am. We can’t figure out what to do. I don’t want to
377
traumatize her if she needs comforting. She seems to really like
sleeping with us.
Helper:
 
What have you tried so far?
Client:
 
Nothing really. It just started getting intolerable. So now I
know we have to do something. Plus I think she’s getting a
little too old to be doing this.
Helper:
 
What is your goal?
Client:
 
When she wakes up and is upset, I’d like to comfort her and
then have her go back to her bed. I don’t want her to get into
our bed. Once she gets in, it’s hard to get her out.
Helper:
 
What are your usual strategies for dealing with problems
with kids?
Client:
 
We talk things out ahead of time so the kids are prepared
and are in on it.
Helper:
 
Maybe that would work here if you talked with her ahead of
time about what you are planning to do.
 How would you do it?
Client:
 
Before bedtime, I could tell her that during the night when
she wakes up, she can’t come into our bed anymore. But I’m
afraid there’s nothing positive to replace it with.
Helper:
 
That’s a good point. 
What if you were to lie down next to her
on her bed until she went back to sleep? Then you could go back to
your own bed.
Client:
 
That sounds like a good idea. So when she comes into our
room, I would just take her back to her room, lay down with
her for a while until she’s asleep, and then go back to my bed. I
think that would work, especially if I tell her about it ahead of
time. I might miss some sleep but not as much as I am now.
Helper:
 
Sounds good. Do you see any problems?
Client:
 
Well, I might fall asleep on her bed, but probably not for
long because it would be uncomfortable there too. I might also
be groggy in the middle of the night and just let her in out of
habit.
Helper:
 
Well, it probably would only take three to five nights, so you
could tell yourself that if you can just do it for that long, the habit
will be broken.
Client:
 
Good point. I’m going to do it. It fits with the way I like to
do things, so I know it will work.
DISCLOSURE OF STRATEGIES
Helpers make suggestions through disclosing strategies that they personally have
tried in the past (another form of disclosure). In effect, rather than telling clients
378
what to do, helpers provide suggestions by disclosing what has worked for them
previously if they think their strategy might work for the client (see 
Exhibit
16.7
). Helpers then turn the focus back to the clients and ask for their reaction
(e.g., “When I feel angry, I take a deep breath and count to 10. I wonder if that
would work for you?”).
379
EXHIBIT 16.7
Overview of Disclosure of Strategies
Rationale for Disclosing Strategies
It is important to disclose only those strategies that seem like they might work
for the client. The object is not to show off strategies that work for you but to
help clients think about other possibilities.
Hearing what another person has done can provide specific ideas for new
behaviors (e.g., “I brush my teeth as soon as I have finished eating so I don’t
forget or am too tired to do it”) and can also encourage clients to think of novel
action plans (e.g., “I treat myself to a cruise each year as a reward for working
hard all year. I wonder what you could do?”). Disclosing what has worked for
the helper is also somewhat disarming—rather than telling clients what to do,
helpers communicate that they do not have the answers but are willing to share
what has worked for them. By disclosing strategies, helpers provide ideas for
clients without imposing the type of demands that may result from directives.
Disclosing strategies is a more tentative way of giving information or direct
guidance.
Guidelines for Using Disclosures Of Strategies
All of the suggestions related to other types of disclosures apply here (e.g.,
disclose about concerns that are resolved and do not make you feel too
vulnerable). It is especially important to turn the focus back to the client after
giving the disclosure. For example, the helper might say,
When I’m reading a textbook, I make myself read a chapter, and then I reward myself by
doing something I like—I might get a soda, make a phone call, or play a video game,
although I limit any of those activities to 10 minutes. Would that work for you?
380
Helpers should be aware that a client might be unduly influenced to do
exactly what the helper does. For this reason, the helpers might provide the
option tentatively, indicate that it might or might not work for the client, and
then turn the focus back to the client for her or his reaction. In addition, helpers
need to be careful not to disclose strategies in a way that would shift the focus
from the client to the helper (e.g., “Let me tell you all about what I did because
it’s so fascinating and interesting”).
Example of Disclosing Strategies
The following shows a helper disclosing strategies (in italics) in a session:
Client:
 
I know that I need to exercise, but I can never seem to find
anything I like to do.
Helper:
 
One thing that works for me is to go for a half-hour walk every
morning with my husband. I get exercise and get to spend some
time with my husband at the beginning of the day.
 I wonder if
something like that would work for you?
Client:
 
Well, that kind of appeals to me, but I’m really out of shape.
Helper:
 
I started out walking 10 minutes a day and worked my way up
over several years. Now I hate to miss my morning walk.
 Would
10 minutes be easier for you?
Client:
 
Yeah, but how would I get my husband involved?
Helper:
 
What thoughts do you have about that?
What Do You Think?
Clients often ask for information. How would you decide when to give
clients the requested information and when to probe them for their
ideas?
How can you determine whether clients really want or need direct
guidance?
Argue for or against the opinion that direct guidance should generally
be given tentatively and only after thorough exploration and insight.
What would it be like for you to tell clients that you do not know the
answer to their questions? How might not knowing an answer
influence the client’s perception of the helper?
How do you feel about receiving information from other people? What
feelings do you have when you seek information or when people ask
you for information?
Debate the pros and cons related to radio talk-show psychologists
giving direct guidance after having spoken only briefly with callers.
381
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Is the Action Stage Necessary?
Citation:
 Wonnell, T. L., & Hill, C. E. (2000). Effects of including the action stage in
dream interpretation. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 47,
 372–379. doi:10.1037/0022-
0167.47.3.372
Rationale:
 Hill (2004) postulated a three-stage model of dream work that is similar to the
helping skills model proposed in this book. Wonnell and Hill wondered whether the action
stage of the dream model is necessary to help clients gain insight and make changes in their
lives. They also wondered about therapists’ perspectives on what makes it easy or difficult
to do the action stage.
Method:
 Volunteer clients (undergraduate students) were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions for a single session with a trained doctoral student therapist: (1) dream sessions
conducted using the full model (exploration, insight, and action) and (2) dream sessions
conducted without the action stage (just exploration and insight). Therapists adhered
closely to the Hill (2004) dream model in all sessions, and sessions in the two conditions
were about the same length. After sessions, therapists rated how easy it was to conduct the
session, and then indicated what made the session easy or difficult.
Interesting Findings:
Conditions did not differ in terms of session quality or client insight.
Clients who went through the action stage gained more in terms of action (i.e., self-ratings of how much action
they gained, self-ratings of how much they gained in terms of problem definition and problem-solving, and judge-
rated quality of action plans devised as a result of the session) than did clients who did not go through the action
stage.
Therapists thought that it was easiest to conduct the action stage when they felt confident in their own action
stage skills, and when they were working with clients who were motivated to understand their dreams, involved in
the process, psychologically minded, had explored their dreams thoroughly and gained insight before the action
stage, and presented dreams that were relatively recent.
Conclusions:
The action stage is not needed if clients only wish to attain insight into their dreams.
The action stage is needed if clients are to make changes based on what they have learned about their dreams.
Focusing on exploration and insight does not lead to as much action as does focusing on action after exploration
and insight.
It is easier to work with clients who are motivated to understand their dreams and who get involved in the
therapeutic process.
Implications for Therapy:
Therapists need to focus on action if they want clients to make changes. Therapists also need to be skilled in using
the action stage.
Clients need to be motivated to work on their dreams.
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
382
Vision without action is a daydream. Action without vision is a nightmare.
—Japanese proverb
A helper at a homeless shelter listened to Debi talk about her rage, feelings of
powerlessness, and sense of humiliation at being evicted from her home. The helper
challenged Debi’s irrational thoughts that she was worthless and a social outcast. The
helper disclosed about her own experiences with poverty and losing her job and how she
had been forced to figure out what she wanted to do with her life. Debi felt better after
expressing her feelings and gaining insights about how she had gotten to this situation,
but she also wanted to learn skills so she would never be homeless again. The helper
asked for more details about how she had come to lose her job and home. Debi said that
she had been fired because of downsizing and had become discouraged about getting
another job after being turned down by 15 employers. The helper gave Debi some tests
to figure out her interests, helped her write a resume, and then did role-playing with her
about how to do a job interview. Debi applied for several jobs while living at the shelter
and was offered one that she liked. The helper then worked with Debi to help her
develop the skills she would need to do the job well (being on time, dressing
appropriately, not using the telephone for personal calls). Debi was still in her job at a
6-month follow-up.
R
ather than learning and practicing single skills as we did in the exploration
and insight stages, we combine the skills (open questions and probes for action,
information, feedback about the client, process advisement, direct guidance, and
disclosure of strategies) into a series of steps for four action tasks: (a) relaxation,
(b) behavior change, (c) behavior rehearsal, and (d) decision making. Thus, we
practice the steps for each of these tasks rather than focusing as specifically on
the individual skills.
These steps are not presented as rigid requirements for how to do these four
action tasks. Rather, I try to present them as clearly as possible so that trainees
can have an idea of how to implement them. Helpers will want to modify the
steps to fit their own styles and to meet the needs of individual clients.
Action work is creative and rarely follows a clear set of steps. For example,
some clients might be ready to start changing and will not need to spend as
383
much time exploring action; other clients might not have tried to change their
behavior in the past, so steps about assessing past change attempts can be
skipped. When clients have strong reactions to any of the steps, helpers can step
back, help clients process their reactions, and possibly alter their strategies. So I
encourage readers to try to follow what is presented here to familiarize
themselves with the concepts and then modify the steps as needed.
Relaxation
Relaxation is particularly important for clients who have problems with stress
and anxiety. An extensive amount of data shows that relaxing one’s muscles
reduces anxiety (Jacobson, 1929; Lang, Melamed, & Hart, 1970; Paul, 1969)
and that it is useful to teach clients to relax when they get anxious (Bernstein &
Borkovec, 1973; Goldfried & Trier, 1974). When people are relaxed, they are
more open and able to handle information, so relaxation is a good thing for
helpers to teach before trying to implement other behavioral interventions.
Examples of markers for helpers to do relaxation are when clients have a fear
of flying, are extremely anxious about taking tests or speaking in public, have
anxiety in social situations, or seem especially tense during the session. In
contrast, helpers should be cautious about offering to do relaxation with clients
who are paranoid, fear losing control, or have delusions. See 
Exhibit 17.1
 for the
steps for relaxation. Essentially, the helper is first going to teach relaxation and
then help the client figure out how to implement it outside of the session.
384
EXHIBIT 17.1
Steps for Relaxation
STEP 1: IDENTIFY AND DESCRIBE SPECIFIC SITUATIONS OF
STRESS AND ANXIETY
Through exploration, clients often identify stress and anxiety as a major
problem. Helpers can also observe when clients seem particularly tense (e.g.,
they might speak rapidly, act fidgety, or panic). Helpers may then ask whether
the client would like to learn relaxation techniques to calm down in the
immediate moment and to be able to calm themselves down outside of sessions
in times of stress. The explanation is that if a person is physiologically relaxed,
this state is incompatible with anxiety, and relaxation is a good coping strategy.
If the client agrees to learn relaxation, the helper can ask for description of a
specific example of a time when the client experienced stress and anxiety. It is
important to ask for a lot of details, involving all the different senses (e.g., touch,
smell, sight, taste) involved in the experience of the situation.
STEP 2: TEACH RELAXATION
Benson’s (1975) extensive research has found two main components of effective
relaxation: (a) the repetition of any word, sound, prayer, thought, phrase, or
muscular activity and (b) the passive return to repeating when other thoughts
intrude. Following Benson’s suggestions (modified somewhat here), helpers can
teach clients to relax by going through the following steps, using a calm voice
and speaking slowly:
1.
 
“Get as comfortable as possible in your seat. Remove everything from your lap and
put your feet firmly on the floor. Close your eyes. Imagine sand being poured
385
into your head and filling your body so that your whole body begins to feel
heavy.”
2.
 
“Relax your body starting from your toes up through your head. Shrug your
shoulders and release the tension. Now focus on your breath. Breathe in 
. . .
breathe out. As you breathe in, imagine taking in fresh, clean, restoring air. As
you breathe out, imagine getting rid of bad air.”
3.
 
“Pick a word (e.g., 
one,
 
peace
), sound (e.g., 
om
), prayer (e.g., the Lord’s Prayer),
thought, or phrase (e.g., 
the river runs through it
). Pick something that fits with
your beliefs and feels comfortable to you. Repeat that phrase each time you
breathe out.”
4.
 
“Let all your other thoughts go. When you find yourself thinking about
something else, don’t worry, just passively let it go and return to repeating.”
5.
 
“Do this for 3 to 5 minutes and then sit quietly for a minute.”
Another method is deep muscle relaxation (Jacobson, 1929), wherein the
helper teaches the client to systematically concentrate on one muscle at a time
and tense it for 30 seconds and then relax. The helper goes systematically
through the major muscle groups of the body, perhaps starting at the feet and
tensing and then relaxing opposing muscles (e.g., bend feet toward self, bend
feet away from self). Going through the whole body takes 20 to 30 minutes.
After practicing relaxation systematically several times, many people can begin to
induce it when needed.
Another relaxation method is 
mindfulness,
 which Kabat-Zinn (2003)
defined as the awareness that comes from attending nonjudgmentally to one’s
experience in the moment. The idea behind mindfulness is to become aware of
(i.e., mindful) about emotions and reactions, take them out and observe them,
and then let them go (Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002). A good example of
mindfulness involves eating. When eating mindfully, one pays full attention to
eating, savoring every bite, tasting each flavor, and smelling each aroma rather
than gobbling down the food while doing something else. To practice
mindfulness, the helper can ask the client to take a raisin and first examine it
carefully, looking at it, smelling it, and feeling it. After carefully studying the
raisin, the client can put the raisin in his or her mouth and let it sit there and
feel it, and then slowly bite it and let the flavor ooze out. One thus becomes
mindful in the present moment of experience and then tries to generalize this
experience outside the session.
Because doing a relaxation exercise during a session could be difficult or
scary for some clients (e.g., they might feel worried about whether they are
doing it “right,” they might feel vulnerable sitting with their eyes closed), helpers
can ask clients about thoughts and feelings before, during, and after the exercise.
Helpers can thus help clients talk about the experience.
386
STEP 3: IMAGINE APPLYING RELAXATION IN A SPECIFIC
SITUATION
If the relaxation was used because the client was anxious talking about
something outside of the session, the helper can now help the client imagine the
situation while staying relaxed (using a method similar to guided imagery or
systematic desensitization). The helper can ask the client to close her or his eyes
and then gently lead her or him through the steps of the situation described in
Step 1. For example, the helper might say to Ralf,
Now imagine that you are getting into your car to go to work. Focus on your breathing as
you start the car and feel the sense of relaxation come over you. (pause) Now picture yourself
getting onto the ramp to go onto the highway. Focus on your breathing. Breathe in. Breathe
out. (pause) You are on the ramp and you start to worry about whether the cars will let you
in. Keep focusing on your breathing. (pause) You keep up a steady speed and look each way
as you get up to the highway. Breathe in. Breathe out. (pause) You maintain your speed and
notice that you can move over into the lane easily. You wave to the driver and breathe
deeply. Cars are zooming by but you find that you can focus on just being where you are.
You feel comfortable. Focus again on your breathing.
If the relaxation was used because the client was anxious in the session, the
helper can gently introduce what the client was talking about and ask the client
to talk about the topic while keeping track of breathing. If the helper observes
the client starting to get anxious again, he or she can gently remind the client to
focus on his or her breathing and relax. By teaching the client to manage anxiety
in the moment, the helper can teach a valuable skill that the client can then
employ outside the session.
STEP 4: ASSIGN RELAXATION PRACTICE
If it seems useful, helpers can suggest that clients practice deep breathing,
relaxation, or mindfulness 5 to 10 minutes, once or twice a day (e.g., in morning
before breakfast and in the late afternoon) in a quiet place with no distraction. A
good explanation for practicing is that the client will then be able to induce
relaxation in new situations more quickly.
STEP 5: FOLLOW-UP
In subsequent sessions, helpers can ask about the client’s experience practicing
the relaxation. If the client was able to easily do the exercise, the helper could
encourage the client to continue practicing. They could also talk about and
rehearse trying to implement relaxation during difficult situations (e.g., flying,
examinations).
If the client was not able to or chose not to do the relaxation exercises, the
helper can nonjudgmentally ask about what was going on. The helper and client
can then work to modify the exercise or might choose to drop the idea of this
exercise.
387
Behavior Change
Sam wants to have more meaningful relationships. How might you help him?
After reading this section, check the example at the end of the section to see if
your ideas fit with this model.
During the exploration and insight stages, many clients identify specific
behaviors that need to be changed. They might report doing too much of some
behaviors (e.g., eating too much, drinking too much alcohol or coffee, nail
biting, playing too many computer games), not enough of other behaviors (e.g.,
exercise, teeth brushing, keeping the apartment clean), and inappropriate or
unconstructive behaviors (e.g., poor social skills, poor study skills,
procrastination). The foci in earlier stages were on exploring the context more
generally with brief mention of the specific problem, whereas in the action stage
our attention turns to a clearer, fuller description of the problem in and of itself.
This model of behavior change is ideal for problems that are intrapersonal and
under the person’s control (e.g., procrastination, exercise); interpersonal
problems (e.g., assertiveness) are more appropriate for behavioral rehearsal.
Our goals are to clearly identify the problem, assess the environment,
determine specific changes, search for reinforcers, and monitor the changes. See
Exhibit 17.2
 for the steps for behavior change. Essentially, the helper works with
the client to explore the problem, the idea of changing, and previous change
attempts, all leading to clarifying the problem and goals. Then the helper works
with the client to generate options and figure out how to implement the chosen
options.
388
EXHIBIT 17.2
Steps for Behavior Change
389
EXHIBIT 17.2 
(
Continued
)
Steps for Behavior Change
STEP 1: CLARIFY THE SPECIFIC PROBLEM
In this step, we need to make sure that we understand the problem and that it is
specific enough to work with behaviorally. It is important to choose a specific,
observable problem (e.g., studying more) rather than something nonbehavioral,
vague, or amorphous (e.g., feeling better). In addition, it is best to focus on one
problem at a time because dealing with several problems simultaneously can be
confusing and diffuse change efforts. If the client has multiple problems, the
helper could work with the client to list all the problems, order them, and then
choose the most important one, making sure that it is one that can probably be
dealt with using a behavioral approach.
Because it is much easier to deal with a specific episode rather than talking
generally about the problem, the helper might ask for a specific example (along
with details) of the time the behavior occurred: “Tell me about the last time you
got angry. Describe the situation as fully as possible.” The helper can then probe
for the ABCs of the event: first asking about the antecedents, then inquiring
about the behaviors during the event, and finally asking about the consequences
of the event:
Antecedents: “What was going on before you got angry?”
Behaviors: “Describe exactly what happened when you got angry.”
390
Consequences: “What happened as a consequence of your anger?”
If the client is vague or unsure about the details or is not a good observer,
the helper might ask the client to monitor his or her behavior over the course of
1 to 2 weeks to gather specific information about the ABCs. For example, if
Joetta wants to reduce her overeating, her helper might ask her to write down all
the food she eats, where she eats, who she is with when she eats, and how she
feels before and after eating. Clients often learn that their behavior differs
dramatically from what they reported earlier to helpers. For example, an
overweight man who claims that he never snacks might learn that he
consistently nibbles on snacks while working or watching television. A person
who feels lonely might discover that she never looks people in the eye or says
hello.
By the end of this step, the helper should know the details about a specific
behavior in a specific situation that the client wants to address (e.g., wanting to
drink less coffee, wanting to brush teeth more often, wanting to exercise more).
The helper should also know what happened before, during, and after the
specific instance (e.g., details of the last time the client procrastinated).
STEP 2: EXPLORE THE IDEA OF ACTION FOR THIS PROBLEM
Rather than assume clients are eager to change, it is important to allow them to
explore the idea of changing. Although clients might be unhappy with the way
things are, they are often scared by what things might be like if they change
(e.g., it is better to live with the misery you know than to risk the unknown).
Furthermore, not every client is ready to change. As described in 
Chapter 2
,
there are five stages of clients’ readiness for change: precontemplation,
contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance (Prochaska, DiClemente,
& Norcross, 1992). Assessing the client’s current stage is important before
proceeding to the action stage. In the precontemplation and contemplation
stages, clients typically require much time to explore their feelings and develop
insights before making a commitment to change; homework might involve
listing the benefits of change and obstacles to change. Clients in the preparation
and action stages are often more ready to move directly to action. Clients in the
maintenance stage probably are more interested in stabilizing the changes they
already have made.
If helpers plunge too quickly into action with clients who are not ready,
they typically hear “Yes, but 
. . . .” Clients who are not ready will have many
reasons why action is not possible. Alternatively, some clients may simply listen
politely but have no intention of following through on the action.
Furthermore, helpers should not be invested in whether clients choose to
change. Rather than perceiving that their success as a helper is based on clients
making changes, helpers need to view their success as based on helping clients
391
decide what is best for them. After all, how can helpers possibly know what is
ultimately best for clients?
The key is to provide a good-enough climate so that clients feel comfortable
talking about and then making decisions about changing. Helpers can encourage
clients to express their thoughts and feelings about action and examine the
benefits and drawbacks of changing or not changing by using open questions
and probes about action:
“What are the benefits of changing?”
“What are the benefits of not changing?”
“How would changing make you feel?”
“What keeps you from changing?”
“What feelings are you having when you contemplate making changes
in your life?”
The helper also can support clients and facilitate exploration of change
through restatements and reflection of feelings, such as:
“It’s exciting for you to think about doing something new.”
“You sound like you want to change.”
The primary skills used in this step are open questions and probes about
action, restatements, and reflections of feelings. Open questions and probes are
often used to begin the discussion, which helpers can then facilitate by restating
and reflecting feelings, thereby drawing clients into a discussion of values, needs,
and problems related to change.
If the client is clearly conflicted about changing, it might be helpful to
challenge the client about the discrepancies (see 
Chapter 12
). Alternatively, the
helper might use a two-chair technique (see 
Chapter 12
) to allow the client to
experience and express both sides of the conflict. Resolution of the conflict is
typically easier after both sides of the conflict are brought into awareness. For
this technique, the helper uses process advisement. For example,
Helper:
 
Be the side of you that says you should quit biting your
fingernails. Pretend that you’re talking to that part of you
sitting in the chair over there.
Client
 (to empty chair):
 
It’s disgusting when you do that. You look
awful. Just stop it.
Helper:
 
Can you say it a little louder, like your father might have
said it to you when you were 12 years old?
Client
 (to empty chair):
 
Yeah, (louder) just stop it. You look ugly
when you chew your fingernails. What’s wrong with you,
anyway? Stop it right now.
Helper:
 
Now go over to the other chair and be the 12-year-old side
392
of you who wants to chew her fingernails. What would you
have wanted to say back to your father?
Client
 (from other chair to empty chair):
 
I’ll chew my fingernails if I
want. You can’t stop me. I don’t care what you think. All you
want is for me to be perfect, so I’ll look good for you. (Role-
play continues for a while.)
Helper:
 
How did that feel to you going through that? Did you learn
something new about why you might chew your fingernails?
Client:
 
I sure did. I can see that I wanted to get back at my father. It
was a small way that I could have some control over my life.
Helper:
 
When you think about it that way, what do you think about
being ready to change your fingernail biting now?
Client:
 
I think I’m ready to quit biting my fingernails. I’m pretty
disgusted by it too at this point. But I do want to come back
after that to try to understand more about my relationship with
my father.
Helper:
 
Okay, then. Let’s spend some time working on the
fingernails first and then go back to the issue with your father.
After weighing the benefits and drawbacks to change, some clients might
choose not to change because the costs of changing are not worth the benefits.
Sometimes change is too painful, and sometimes clients discover that their
current life is not so bad. Choosing not to change can be just as valid a choice as
deciding to change. For example, Sandra told her helper that she wanted to quit
playing computer games. After they explored for a while and discussed the
benefits and barriers to quitting, Sandra realized that she did not actually want
to quit. Although she felt guilty and embarrassed admitting she played games,
playing the games helped her relax and center herself after a day of work. The
helper, who was able to listen nonjudgmentally and not have an opinion about
whether Sandra should or should not play video games, suggested that they go
back and try to explore more about the guilt and “shoulds.”
By the end of this step, the client should have made a decision about
whether to go forward with the change process. Clients are rarely 100% in favor
of change, but the advantages should clearly outweigh the disadvantages. If the
client is reluctant, the helper can return to exploration and insight to process the
feelings.
STEP 3: ASSESS PREVIOUS CHANGE ATTEMPTS AND
RESOURCES
When the helper has established that the client wants to change, she or he can
work with the client to assess what attempts, if any, the client has already made.
Finding out about previous attempts can avoid encouraging actions that have
393
not worked in the past, indicate that the helper respects the client’s change
efforts, and lets the client know the helper is aware that the client has been
attempting to solve problems. After all, clients have usually had lengthy
experiences with their problems and have undoubtedly tried, and have many
feelings about, various alternatives. Instead of being the experts, helpers thus act
as consultants, collaboratively working with clients to determine what they have
tried and how these strategies have worked.
In this step, then, helpers assess what worked and what did not work in the
previous attempts. In effect, the helper is assessing the forces facilitating change
as well as the forces inhibiting change. Helpers can focus on both internal (e.g.,
motivation, anxiety, insecurity, self-confidence) and external factors (resources
that clients have available in their environment to support them when they make
changes, social support, obstacles such as discrimination and social injustice)
that facilitate and hinder change.
One particular external factor that is typically important to assess is the
client’s support system. Breier and Strauss (1984) noted that the benefits of a
social support system include a forum for ventilation, reality testing, support and
approval, integration into the community, problem solving, and constancy.
Positive support can provide encouragement and reinforcement (e.g., having a
supportive, nonjudgmental partner can enable one to stick to a diet). In
contrast, negative support can undermine the person’s resolve (e.g., if a woman
decides to go on a diet and her partner says that she was more attractive before
or can’t stay on a diet, it will be difficult for that woman to continue the diet).
In addition, helpers can discuss with clients how change will influence their
social network.
It is good to know as much as possible about the factors influencing the
change process from the outset so that the same problems are not repeated. It is
important to realize that clients may not be aware of all the influencing factors,
but it is good to get as many as possible out in the open. Helpers use open
questions and probes to assess the facilitating and restraining influences:
“What worked that you have tried before?”
“What didn’t work?”
“What problems did you encounter that made it difficult the last
time?”
“When you tried the last time, what things made it easier for you?”
“How do others respond to you about this problem?”
“How would others react if you changed?”
It is important for helpers to remember to support client exploration of
change attempts because it is often quite threatening to discuss. Using
restatements and reflections of feelings can also demonstrate to clients that
helpers are listening. For example:
394
“Sounds like you’ve tried lots of things to help you overcome your
depression.”
“You sound frustrated that, after all your efforts, nothing happened.”
Using approval-reassurance can let clients know that helpers are aware of
their hard work in exploring and that helpers value what clients are saying. For
example,
“You’ve done a great job working so hard to get information about
services available in the community. You’ve been very resourceful.”
By the end of this step, the helper should have a fairly good idea about what
the client has tried before, effective and ineffective strategies, and facilitating and
restraining forces. The helper integrates this new information with data gathered
during the exploration and insight stage to begin to conceptualize the strengths
and obstacles the client will have in terms of making changes (e.g., having
positive values vs. resistance to authority figures telling client to change).
STEP 4: CLARIFY OR RECONCEPTUALIZE THE PROBLEM
Now that the client has explored the problem thoroughly, the helper might ask
the client how she or he now feels about the original problem or goal. The client
may well change the problem description. For example, rather than wanting to
slow down her eating all the time, Chris decided she wanted to eat more slowly
during Saturday night dinners with her husband.
STEP 5: GENERATE OPTIONS TOGETHER
One of the biggest benefits for clients of working with helpers is that they can
come up with options together for working on change. Through collaboration,
two people (or even better, a group) can usually generate more ideas than can
one person alone. The goal in this step is to generate as many ideas as possible to
enable clients to see that there are many alternatives. Reality can come later
when deciding among the possibilities, but the ideas must first be generated.
One strategy is to set a specific time limit, such as 2 minutes, for this process. It
is also important for clients to lift restrictions on themselves while generating
ideas and to suspend judgment about what is possible so they do not censor any
possibilities. Although I usually recommend that helpers not take notes, it often
helps during this step to write down the ideas so helpers can refer back to them
in the next step.
To aid in the process of generating ideas and options, helpers can use open
questions and probes to ask clients to think of all the actions that come to mind,
no matter how unlikely or silly these might initially sound:
“If money or time were not an issue, how would you try to change this
395
problem?”
“What would you suggest to someone else in this situation?”
Helpers can also make suggestions because it can open clients up to new
ideas they might not have considered. Of course, it is important for helpers not
to get invested in their ideas but just to offer possibilities to give clients more
options. Helpers can also think about Grandma’s rule (“Eat vegetables before
dessert”) in thinking of strategies, so they might suggest doing the new behavior
(e.g., studying) before something fun (e.g., watching television). Alternatively,
helpers could use Premack’s principle, which involves pairing a low-frequency
behavior (e.g., teeth brushing) with a high-frequency behavior (e.g., surfing the
Internet).
“What about talking to your boss?”
“Maybe you could 
. . . ”
Helpers can also disclose about strategies they have tried in similar
situations. By disclosing, helpers admit that they too have had problems and
thus might help the client feel less disturbed. But it is always important to
remember that what works for one person may not work for another, and that
the disclosure is being used just to generate more options:
“When I have trouble remembering all the things I have to do, I make
a list.”
“I try to keep a routine and brush my teeth right after my shower.”
By the end of this step, a list of possibilities for the client to try has been
developed. No order of preference is expected at this point, but hopefully many
ideas have been generated.
STEP 6: CHOOSE AN OPTION OR OPTIONS
Once a number of options have been generated, the task for the helper is to help
the client think through the options systematically. Clients need to select ideas
that are specific, realistic, within the realm of possibility, and consistent with
their values. It might be easiest to start by asking the client to cross off any
options that are totally bad (from the list that the helper wrote). Alternatively,
helpers can ask the client to choose the three or four most likely options and
then work with the client to evaluate the good and bad aspects of each of these
options. Helpers can also ask about clients’ values to determine whether any of
the options violate these values. For example, even though a quick way to obtain
money might be to rob a bank, one hopes that clients have values against theft.
It is also important to note that clients should choose options that involve
changing themselves rather than trying to change other people (except for
behavior change with children). It is not only difficult to change others, but it
396
presents ethical problems. For example, rather than trying to get a partner to
exercise more, the helper may want to help the client change something about
his or her own behavior (e.g., reduce nagging, get a hobby). The following are
examples of open questions and probes that helpers might use to help a client
choose the options:
“What do you like about the first option?”
“What do you dislike about the first option?”
“What are your values related to the first option?”
“Using a 5-point scale (5 
=
 high), rate the likely effectiveness of this
option.”
“What would be the obstacles related to the first option?”
After going through the top options, clients will hopefully have a few
possibilities that might work for them and can choose which ones she or he
wants to implement. This step may be quite short if the client immediately
jumps into the problem solving that takes place in Step 6. The client may be
quite reluctant, however, which can alert the helper to problems that must be
addressed by cycling back to the exploration and insight stages. Finally, some
clients may have gotten enough out of action at this stage and not need to go
further (e.g., the client may have a clear idea about what to change and not need
further help).
The helper needs to make sure that the client goals are realistic. For
example, if an overweight person wants to lose 50 pounds in 1 month, the
helper can work with the client to choose a more realistic goal. Instead of
encouraging the overweight client to begin a severely restricted diet of 800
calories per day, the helper might encourage the client to walk 20 minutes a day
in addition to eating more moderately (e.g., 1,500 calories per day) to facilitate
gradual weight loss, which is more likely to be maintained.
STEP 7: DETERMINE REINFORCERS
In this step, if reinforcers have not come up naturally, helpers work with clients
to identify realistic reinforcers, things that they can use to reward themselves for
changing, given that change is more likely to happen with reinforcers.
Importantly, reinforcers are individual, such that what works for one person
(e.g., the helper) might not work for another (e.g., the client). For example, one
client might find it reinforcing to look forward to going on a vacation to a
Caribbean island if she exercises 30 minutes 5 days a week for 3 months.
Another client might need the more immediate reinforcement of being able to
call a friend after he studies for 1 hour. To determine reinforcers, helpers can
ask:
“If you were able to do the things you mentioned what might be
397
rewarding for you?”
“What things are generally reinforcing for you?”
The client may need some help identifying reinforcers. The helper (and the
group) might generate options as they did earlier in Step 5.
STEP 8: PROBLEM SOLVE ABOUT IMPLEMENTING ACTIONS
Once the target behavior is identified, baseline information has been gathered,
realistic goals set, options generated and chosen, and reinforcers identified, the
helper works with the client to figure out how to implement the changes: how
and when the client will try the new behavior, what they expect will happen, and
how they will cope with adversities that inevitably arise. Essentially, they work
together to do problem solving. For example, if the client wants to increase the
amount of exercising by the client going to the gym more often, the helper and
client might work together to identify when the client could go to the gym.
They might also identify potential barriers and figure out how to solve them.
This process is creative because each client is different. Some principles are
the following:
It is generally preferable to look for ways to increase positive behavior
(e.g., increase smiling) than to decrease negative behaviors (e.g., reduce
amount of time spent alone) because it is easier to change in the
positive direction.
The chosen behaviors must be observable, behavioral, culturally
appropriate, and specific (e.g., smiling at strangers) rather than broad
and vague (e.g., becoming more friendly) because specific behaviors are
easier to work on and monitor for changes.
Helpers target specific behaviors to change (e.g., a certain amount of
homework) rather than trying to change the outcome (e.g., the final
grade) because specific behaviors are within one’s control, whereas the
outcome is not (e.g., one never knows how instructors will grade).
The principle of “baby steps” is also important here. Rather than
expecting the client to make huge changes immediately, small changes
are more likely to be attainable. It can also be useful to inform clients
that actually incorporating behavior change into one’s repertoire takes
a long time. It generally takes 21 days of daily implementation before
the new behavior begins to feel like a habit. By being aware of this,
clients can pace themselves a bit better and not expect to make changes
overnight.
By the end of this step, the helper and client should have a good idea of
how the client can change. If the client is eager and cooperative and seems to
enjoy doing the behavioral work, the helper can proceed to Step 9. If the client
398
has not gotten involved in this step, the helper could work with the client to
understand the resistance, whether it relates to issues in the therapeutic
relationship (e.g., not liking the helper telling the client what to do) or whether
it relates to dynamic issues within the client (e.g., not being ready to give up
anger at a parent).
STEP 9: ASSIGN HOMEWORK
Helpers often assign homework so that the client can implement tasks that they
have collaboratively developed in the session. For example, after discussing study
skills, a helper might make a contract with a client to study at least 30 minutes a
night at his desk (where he does nothing else but study), after which he can
reinforce himself by getting a soda and calling his girlfriend.
Helpers might also warn clients to “go slow” to prevent too much
enthusiastic initial behavior that often results in not being able to sustain the
change. Many people enthusiastically say they will make an extreme change
(e.g., exercise 3 hours a day) but then get discouraged when they discover how
difficult it is to carry out this change. It is better to take too small a step than to
overestimate what one can do.
To assign tasks, helpers use direct guidance. For example, the helper might
say,
Based on what we’ve talked about in the session, I’d like to suggest a couple of things. First,
keep a journal for the next week. When you catch yourself chewing your nails, write down
what you are feeling so we can try to figure out what’s going on there. Also, put a quarter in a
jar for each time you’re able to stop biting your fingernails and save up for something special
that you’d like. What do you think of those two suggestions?
In addition, it is not good for helpers to be too “bossy” when assigning
homework. Several studies have shown that clients become resistant and
uncooperative if helpers become too directive (Bischoff & Tracey, 1995;
Gillespie, 1951; Mahalik, 1994; Patterson & Forgatch, 1985), so helpers need
to remember to be collaborative in developing homework assignments with
clients. One way to do this is to follow up direct guidance with open questions
and probes to see how the client reacts to the direct guidance.
“What I’d like you to try over the next week is to say hello to one new
person each day when you’re walking on campus. How would that be
for you?”
“How about writing in a journal at least 5 minutes a night. Would that
work for you?”
Helpers also need to work with clients to identify potential facilitating and
restraining forces in implementing the tasks to avoid failure to complete the
assignment. For example, a man thinking about beginning an exercise program
in which he walks for 15 minutes each day might identify the restraining forces
399
as the time commitment and weather and the facilitating forces as eventual
weight loss and increased self-efficacy. Furthermore, if the client does not discuss
social support as a facilitating or restraining force, it is a good idea to ask
specifically about this because other people can be powerful helping and
hindering forces. The idea here is to play out the behavior change and see what
the roadblocks are to successful implementation. To assess the facilitating and
restraining forces, the helper can use open questions and probes:
“What things would help you in doing the homework?”
“What things would prevent you from doing the homework?”
“What kind of social support do you have to help you do the
homework?”
Then, helpers can work with the client to figure out ways to manage the
restraining forces. For example, the helper can work with the client to help him
or her figure out how to arrange his schedule to allow for 15 minutes of exercise
and what to do when the weather is bad.
An example of how this step might be implemented involves Charlene, a
30-year-old homemaker, who was depressed, overweight, and out of shape.
Through the exploration and insight stages, the helper discovered that Charlene
was frustrated about staying home but felt that it was her duty to take care of the
children full time. She came to the insight that she thought she should be a stay-
at-home mom because she believed that was the only way her husband would
love her. She recounted memories of her parents having an awful relationship
and her dad resenting her mom for having a successful career. Through helping,
she came to understand that she could achieve in a career without destroying her
husband. At this point, however, she realized that she had been unemployed
outside the home for so long that she did not know how to cope with the world
of work. The helper worked with Charlene to devise a plan to get her back in
shape physically to gain some confidence. Her homework for the first week was
to take a 30-minute walk at least three times with her husband (to lose weight
and have some private time with her husband) and to monitor her caloric
intake.
By the end of this step, the client has chosen some task that he or she can
practice outside the session. Of course, some clients might not need outside
tasks because it is not appropriate for their problems or because they are not
ready to take this step.
STEP 10: CHECK ON PROGRESS AND MODIFY
ASSIGNMENTS
Problems almost always arise when clients try to implement actions outside
sessions. Changing is often more difficult than anticipated and includes
400
unanticipated obstacles. On the basis of experiences clients have had trying out
homework in the real world, helpers can work with clients in subsequent
sessions to modify homework assignments.
Helpers need to determine what did and did not work for the client in
trying to implement the tasks, without judging clients for their efforts, so that
modifications can be made to the tasks. If helpers think of themselves as
uninvested observers or scientists, they can help clients modify the plans to make
them more effective. Rather than becoming angry with clients for not
implementing the homework perfectly, helpers might try to view modifications
as a natural part of the process. Often clients are not aware of all the barriers in
their environment until they try to change, so modifications are often needed.
Helpers can use open questions and probes, such as “How did it go last week
when you tried to talk to your mother?”
Developing effective homework is a process of trial and error. The helper
uses open questions and probes and direct guidance to figure out how to help
the client modify the task:
“Last week we discussed whether you could study 30 minutes before
you took a break, but that seemed like it was too long. What would
you think about trying to study for 15 minutes and stopping as soon as
you have a hard time concentrating?”
“So it seems that it did not work so well when you tried to confront
your roommate when you were really angry about their leaving the
dishes unwashed. I wonder if it would be a little easier to talk with her
at a time that you’re not angry and maybe just say that you want to
talk about how to keep the apartment clean?”
Clients can become discouraged with relapses. Brownell, Marlatt,
Lichenstein, and Wilson (1986) advocated that a slip or lapse need not lead to a
relapse. Helpers can suggest that clients forgive themselves for lapses and learn
from them. For example, when Frank drinks too much at a party after having
been sober for 6 months, he might learn that he cannot drink even in
moderation. This learning might lead him to take steps to determine how to
handle parties in the future. In contrast, if Frank beats himself up too much for
the relapse, he will probably feel worse about himself and will not be able to
cope productively with the problem, which might lead him right back to the
problematic drinking.
Throughout this step, helpers can also give clients feedback about their
progress. Reinforcement for what they are doing well provides support and
encouragement for clients. Given how hard it is to make changes, it helps to get
support. All feedback should be given in a caring manner, be brief and to the
point, focus on client behavior rather than personality characteristics, be given in
moderate doses so as not to overwhelm the client, and have a balance between
401
positive and negative feedback (Egan, 1994).
“You did a really good job recording how many times you yell at your
daughter and what provokes you to yell. Now let’s try to figure out
other ways to behave when you get angry.”
“Congratulations on being able to keep organized this week.”
“It seems that you had some trouble keeping up your end of the
bargain about getting home before curfew several times this week.”
By the end of this step, the client should have had some success
implementing the change process for one particular problem. The helper and
client will then have to decide if helping is over or if they want to go back and
tackle another problem. In either event, it is a good time for the helper and
client to evaluate how they feel about what has gone on so far.
EXAMPLE OF STEPS FOR BEHAVIOR CHANGE
In this example, the helper has already explored with Sam his feelings about his
recent diagnosis of terminal cancer. They have come to the insight that his
depression over the diagnosis is due to feelings that he has not yet lived fully.
They have traced his passivity back to his having controlling parents who told
him how to live his life. Sam now recognizes that no matter what his childhood
was like, he is the one responsible for the rest of his life and he cannot blame
anyone else.
Readers should note that this example is meant to illustrate how the steps
can work. Of course, each situation is different, and it will not always go so
smoothly for each helper who tries this out. In addition, sometimes there is not
enough time to go through all the steps in one session, so this process gets
divided into several sessions.
Helper:
 
So what specifically would you like to work on changing?
(Step 1)
Client:
 
I want to change my lifestyle, but I am not certain how to do
that.
Helper:
 
What do you mean by that?
Client:
 
I want to change my priorities in terms of how I spend my
time.
Helper
:
 
You’ve been talking about how you would like the
remainder of your life to be different. What would it mean for
you to make changes at this time? (Step 2)
Client:
 
It would be scary because I’ve been resistant and angry and
blaming my parents for so long, but I want to try.
Helper
:
 
You sound sure about wanting to change.
Client:
 
Yeah, I am, even though it’s going to be tough. Maybe if I
402
take it slowly, it will be easier. But I don’t have much time left,
so I want to get started.
Helper
:
 
Okay, well, let’s take the issues one at a time. First, you
indicated that you want to have more meaningful relationships.
What have you tried in the past? (Step 3)
Client:
 
Well, I’m shy, and it’s not easy for me to make friends. I
never joined groups or clubs. I guess I hoped that people would
come to me. My parents always pushed people on me, so I
never took an active role in making friends. I don’t need a lot
of friends. I would be more interested in having two or three
close friends—people I could really count on. (Step 4)
Helper
:
 
You sound like you know yourself pretty well.
Client:
 
Yeah, I’ve thought a lot about myself and these issues.
Helper
:
 
Okay, let’s brainstorm how you might go about making
some new friends. What ideas do you have? (Step 5)
Client
:
 
I thought about joining a cancer support group. There
would be people there who are going through the same thing I
am and would understand me. Also, my neighbor suggested
that there’s a poker game starting with a bunch of guys in the
building. It’s only once a month, but I like playing poker. I
always wanted to do something like that, but I thought I
should be working. Oh, I just remembered that a person who I
used to be friends with in college moved back to town. Maybe I
could get together with him.
Helper
:
 
Those sound like terrific ideas. Which ones are most
appealing? (Step 6)
Client
:
 
Actually, I think I could easily do them all. The cancer
support group is once a week, and it’s not far away. The poker
game is only once a month. And I’ve been meaning to call my
friend, so that doesn’t seem like too much at all. I definitely
want to do all those things.
Helper
:
 
I like your enthusiasm. Let’s just pick one right now to talk
about in depth.
Client
:
 
Okay, we can focus on the cancer support group first.
Helper
:
 
So tell me about it.
Client
:
 
The group is at a local hospital. I think there are eight to 10
people in it, and all of them have terminal cancer.
Helper
:
 
What would be the most difficult part about going?
Client
:
 
I won’t know anyone.
Helper
:
 
What might you say to yourself to help you with that?
Client
:
 
I might say that they don’t have to become my best friends. I
just need to talk to some people who are experiencing the same
403
things as I am.
Helper
:
 
Would that help?
Client
:
 
A little bit, but I think I might still have some trouble
making myself go to it.
Helper
:
 
Can you think of what you might do to reinforce yourself
for going? (Step 7)
Client
:
 
Maybe if I go to the group, I could stop afterward and get a
coffee.
Helper
:
 
Would that be a good motivator?
Client
:
 
Yeah, I think it would.
Helper
:
 
Could we set it up where you go to the support group next
week? (Step 9)
Client
:
 
I think this would be reasonable. I’m kind of looking
forward to it.
(Next session)
Helper
:
 
How did it go when you went to the cancer support group?
(Step 10)
Client
:
 
I went, and it was okay, but I didn’t really feel comfortable.
Everyone was a lot younger than me.
Helper
:
 
That’s too bad because you were looking forward to it.
Client
:
 
Yeah, I’m a little disappointed. But I heard about a different
group that’s supposed to have more older people. I think I
might try that.
Helper
:
 
How was it telling yourself that these people don’t have to
be your best friends?
Client
:
 
That worked pretty well. I also told myself that I didn’t have
to go back if I didn’t like it, and that helped. But what really
helped was getting myself the coffee afterward. In fact, I went
into the coffee shop and met up with a person I had gone to
college with and we had a good talk. So that turned out really
well.
Helper
:
 
Okay, so what can you take out of this with you?
Client
:
 
I think I’ve just got to get out there and try different things.
I’m definitely going to try this other support group. And maybe
I’ll hang out at the coffee shop too—they have an Internet
connection so maybe I could just spend some time there and
see what happens.
Behavioral Rehearsal
404
Behavioral rehearsal
 is used to teach clients skills for responding in more adaptive
ways to specific life situations (Goldfried & Davison, 1994). Helpers teach
clients new behaviors through role-playing how they could behave differently in
specific situations. Although behavioral rehearsal can be used for many concerns
(e.g., rehearsing for a job interview, practicing for a public speech), I focus here
on problems with 
assertiveness
 (i.e., standing up for oneself) because these are so
prevalent.
According to Alberti and Emmons (2001), the goal of assertiveness training
is to teach clients to stand up for their rights without infringing on the rights of
others. The assumption here is that open and direct communication is most
likely to lead to good relationships (admittedly a Western value). Unassertive
people let others walk all over them, whereas aggressive people walk all over
other people. Both unassertive and aggressive people can be taught to express
positive and negative feelings more appropriately, although one cannot
guarantee that clients will get their way when they assert themselves. In fact,
aggressive people who are used to getting their way are not likely to respond
favorably to a previously unassertive person acting assertively. Hence, helpers
also assist clients in thinking not only of how to present an initial, empathic,
assertive statement but also then of how to respond assertively to escalated
aggressiveness or to change goals.
I assume here that assertiveness problems (or the need to practice how to
respond in an interpersonal situation) have been revealed in the exploration and
insight stages. At this point, then, helpers ask whether clients would like to learn
some skills for how to respond differently. If the client agrees, the helper
proceeds slowly through the following steps for behavioral rehearsal
(summarized in 
Exhibit 17.3
). I encourage helpers not to rush through the steps
because it is usually helpful for clients to explore thoroughly in each step.
405
EXHIBIT 17.3
Steps for Behavioral Rehearsal
406
EXHIBIT 17.3 
(
Continued
)
Steps for Behavioral Rehearsal
STEP 1: ASSESS THE BEHAVIOR IN A SPECIFIC SITUATION
The helper asks the client to describe a specific example of when the lack of
assertiveness occurred (e.g., a client did not tell a roommate that she did not like
her borrowing her clothes without asking, a client got angry and blew up at a
colleague for not doing his share of the work). It is best to ask the client to
choose a specific example (e.g., the last time it happened) because behavioral
rehearsal works best with specific situations. For example, if the client presents a
problem of extreme awkwardness and unassertiveness in interactions with
interesting men, the helper might ask for detailed information about the last
time this happened, covering the ABCs (antecedents, behaviors and feelings in
the specific situation, and consequences).
Once the client has provided enough information so that the helper has an
idea how the other person in the situation behaved, the helper can ask the client
to role-play the situation with the helper playing the part of the other person.
The helper should try to make the role-play as realistic as possible, modifying it
as the client provides additional details.
During the role-play, the helper carefully observes the client’s behavior (e.g.,
eye contact, voice volume, statement of needs, attitude) to get an idea of how
the client actually behaves, although the helper does not comment on the
behaviors at this point. After the initial role-play, helpers can ask clients for self-
evaluations to help clients focus on their behavior and their experience of the
situation.
407
STEP 2: DETERMINE BEHAVIORAL GOALS
Helpers work with clients to determine specific, realistic goals for how they
would like to behave differently (e.g., make one comment during class
discussion, calmly tell son to take out the garbage, ask neighbor to turn down
the music) given that clients are more likely to make changes when they have
clear, doable goals. To construct goals, helpers and clients can generate different
possible behaviors and determine which behaviors would feel comfortable to
clients.
There is no “right” way to be assertive, so this step is crucial in devising
goals that clients can embrace. For example, one female client might want to
learn how to ask an interesting man to go out for a date, whereas another would
not find this action desirable.
During this step, it is helpful to talk about values that might influence goals
(e.g., a woman may not feel comfortable approaching a man for a date because
she holds a strong value that men should initiate contact, a man might not want
to ask his parents for money because he has a value that he should be
independent, a student may not want to ask the professor for help because of
not wanting to appear stupid). It also can be helpful to talk about rights (e.g., to
privacy, to self-determination), which are of course influenced by values and
culture. In addition, it is important to help clients explore their feelings about
the different goals and the possible consequences of their goals (e.g., they might
get their way but lose a friend).
STEP 3: GENERATE AND EVALUATE POSSIBILITIES
Similar to the step in behavior change, the goal here is to generate various
possible ways of dealing with the situation, trying to help the client think
creatively about options (e.g., what have others tried in the past, what might
work?). This step involves problem solving given the specific situation. Once
several options have been generated, the helper can work with the client to
explore the feasibility and desirability of the different options, hopefully leading
the client to choose the best options.
STEP 4: PROVIDE A MODEL
Once the target behavior is determined, helpers can provide a model of how
clients could implement the new behaviors by playing the part of the client. For
example, the helper could ask the client to be the instructor, and then the helper
would show how she would ask an instructor for an extension of a deadline
because of a documented illness. Several principles may prove helpful when
thinking about assertiveness:
Helpers should start with relatively easy behaviors first (e.g.,
408
questioning a clerk in a store) rather than major behaviors (e.g., asking
for a raise) to maximize the possibility of success. The client might first
work on initiating a conversation with a man in class and work up to
asking him out on a date.
Helpers can encourage clients to be empathic with the other person. By
thinking about the other person’s feelings, clients are more likely to
present themselves more compellingly (e.g., “I know you would really
like to talk with me right now, but I can’t do it now. Can we set up a
time to talk tomorrow?”).
It is often better not to provide a lengthy explanation following an
apology because this can invite the other person to find solutions.
Hence, rather than saying, “I’m so sorry that I can’t go to lunch right
now because I’ve got to run errands and do a million things but maybe
another time,” the person might say, “I’m sorry that I won’t be able to
go to lunch right now.”
A helpful technique is to be a “broken record” and keep repeating
yourself when the other person does not listen. For example, if you are
saving a seat for someone in a theater and another person tries to take
the seat, you might say, “I’m sorry, but this seat is saved.” When they
try to debate with you, you continue saying, “I’m sorry, this seat is
saved.”
Once the role-play is done, the helper can ask the client what parts the
client liked and did not like and how it would be for the client to do what the
helper did. If it seems as if it would be useful, the helper can try role-playing
again to provide a better model.
STEP 5: ROLE-PLAY AND PROVIDE FEEDBACK AND
COACHING
Helpers then can ask clients to be themselves again, with the helper being the
other person, and try the chosen behavior in a role-play of the problematic
situation. During the role-play, the helper again observes the client’s behavior
carefully and provides honest positive feedback after the role-play (“You did a
really good job of using eye contact and of stating your needs”). Even if the
positive feedback is about something minor, clients need to feel that they are
doing something well and making some progress. Helpers then can give
corrective feedback about one or two specific things (it is important not to
overwhelm the client with too much feedback at one point).
Helpers ask clients to do additional role-plays until the client feels confident
that she or he can perform the desired behaviors. Before each role-play, the
helper provides coaching about what clients could try differently in the next
role-play (e.g., “Okay, say it louder and with more conviction this time”).
409
During the role-plays, helpers may also discover that they need to do relaxation
training or cognitive restructuring with clients to overcome obstacles to change.
STEPS 6 AND 7: ASSIGN HOMEWORK AND MODIFY ON THE
BASIS OF EXPERIENCES
These steps are the same as in the previous section in this chapter on behavior
change.
EXAMPLE OF STEPS FOR BEHAVIORAL REHEARSAL
This example is a continuation of the helping session with Sam, the client we
met in the last section on behavior change. The following dialogue occurred
after the helper and Sam talked about his progress with joining the cancer
support group:
Client:
 
One other thing, though. I would like to have a good
relationship with a woman before I die. I wonder, you know,
I’ve been thinking a lot about my ex-wife lately. I think that a
lot of the problems in our marriage were due to my passivity
and never having resolved things with my parents. Now that I
have some understanding of my relationship with my parents, I
think I could be different with my ex-wife. I realize now that
she is not my mother. She does have some quirks, but I do still
care for her.
Helper:
 
How would you feel about checking whether she’s still
interested? (Step 1)
Client:
 
I know that she’s not with anybody because of what my
daughter says. If I got back together with my ex-wife, I could
also spend more time with my daughter, which is something I
really want to do.
Helper
:
 
It sounds like that might work. But I need to caution you
that things might not be so smooth given all the past history
that you and she had. You were very passive and might still
have a tendency to fall into those behaviors. Perhaps we could
work on some assertiveness training to help you stand up to her
better and say what’s on your mind.
Client
:
 
That would be helpful. Could we begin today?
Helper
:
 
Sure, give me an example of a recent situation with your ex-
wife in which you were passive and you wished that you had
behaved differently.
Client
:
 
She might say something like she thinks I ought to be
spending more time with our daughter. She gets mad that I
410
don’t take more responsibility. She has her ideas of exactly what
I should be doing and doesn’t mince words. Yesterday she
called and wanted to know exactly what I planned to do about
the babysitting situation. I just said I didn’t know, I hadn’t
really thought about it, and I was really busy right then. I felt
irritated that she was bringing it up and was so bossy that I shut
down and wouldn’t give her any satisfaction.
Helper
:
 
Okay, let’s role-play to get a clear idea of what happened. I’ll
be your ex-wife, and you be you. I want you first to role-play
exactly what you did in the situation. So, I’m your ex-wife. (as
ex-wife) Sam, I want you to take more responsibility for our
daughter. I just can’t handle it all. I’m working full time, and I
can’t be the one to take off for everything. I’m going to lose my
job if I keep taking off every time she gets sick or needs to go to
the doctor. You know that the day-care center won’t let her
come if she has even the slightest sniffle. Plus, she needs to see
her father more. She needs to have you around.
Client
:
 
(whines) Well, I just can’t do more right now. I’m so busy at
school.
Helper
:
 
Okay, let’s stop there. What are you aware of feeling?
Client
:
 
I felt resentful. She’s bossing me around again, and I don’t
like it. She’s right, of course, that I ought to spend more time
taking my share of the burden, but as soon as she starts up, I
just don’t want to do anything. I hear my mother’s voice
nagging me, and I shut down.
Helper
:
 
That’s great, you can really identify what’s going on inside
you. And did you notice your tone of voice?
Client
:
 
Not really. I didn’t notice anything.
Helper
:
 
You sounded totally different from before. You actually
started whining. Before, in talking with me, you were talking
like an adult, but as soon as you role-played talking with your
ex-wife, you sounded like a whiny child (illustrates).
Client
:
 
Wow, that’s incredible. That’s exactly what I do with my
mother. I can’t believe that it came out so quickly without my
awareness. And you played it exactly the way my ex-wife does
—so bossy and controlling. I hate it when we get into these
power struggles. Neither of us wins. But I can see how she feels
that she has no choice but to get bossy and controlling when I
get so passive and withdrawn.
Helper
:
 
Now what would you like to say to her instead? (Step 2)
Client
:
 
I would like to say that she’s right and that we need to work
out a schedule because I really want to do my part. I want to
411
spend more time with my daughter—that’s really not a chore.
But I wish she wouldn’t treat me like a child. Perhaps if we
could work on this like two equal adults, we could resolve this
problem. I recognize my side of it, but she’s got to see what
she’s doing too.
Helper
:
 
That sounds great. Let’s try it out here. Say this to her. (Step
4—note that Step 3 was skipped because the client did not
seem to need a model.)
Client
:
 
(to ex-wife) I really want to make this work. Could we set up
a schedule?
Helper
:
 
(as ex-wife) Well, I don’t know if I trust you.
Client
:
 
(to ex-wife) I’ve done a lot of work, and I’m beginning to see
my side of the problem. I can’t promise that I will be perfect,
but I do want to try.
Helper
:
 
(as ex-wife) OK, let’s try, but I’m cautious about how this is
going to work.
Client
:
 
(to ex-wife) I’m cautious too, but I think it’s worth it to try.
Perhaps we could go for some couples counseling to get some
help?
Helper
:
 
(as ex-wife) Sounds like a really good idea. (as helper) How
was that for you?
Client
:
 
Good. I liked how it went. Thank you.
Helper
:
 
You were terrific when you said you wanted to set up a
schedule. You sounded firm but not nasty. You weren’t whiny.
You sounded more in control of the situation, and I believed
that you wanted to work it out with her. I think if I were your
ex-wife, I would be willing to talk with you rationally. Do you
think that you could do this with her?
Client
:
 
I think I could. I would have to overcome a lot of past
experiences with her. But I think I could do that. I want to
because I want things to change.
Helper
:
 
Well, you were able to do it here, so I have confidence that
you could be assertive with her. One thing that might help is if
you took a deep breath before you say anything to her. Think
about what you want to say, what you want to accomplish.
Remind yourself that you are an adult and that she’s not your
mother.
Client
:
 
Yeah, I think that would work. If I told her ahead of time
what I was trying to do, she would be very understanding. She
often has said that we get tangled up in these situations that we
can’t seem to resolve. I think she knows that she gets bossy and
doesn’t want to but just feels really frustrated with the
412
situation.
Helpe
r
:
 
Let’s role-play it one more time to make sure you have it
down. Again, I’m your ex-wife. (as ex-wife) Sam, I want you to
take more responsibility for our daughter. I want you to spend
more time with her and help me out more when she needs to
go to the doctor. I can’t keep taking off work every time she
needs to be taken out of day care (pause). (as helper) Now
remember to take a deep breath, Sam, and think about what
you want to say to her.
Client
:
 
You know, you’re absolutely right to be angry at me. I
haven’t done my share in the past, and I want to start doing my
share now. But we need to step back and talk about how you
and I are going to handle this situation. I want to quit acting
like the bad child and forcing you to play the nagging mother
to increase my involvement with our daughter. I’d like us to
work on this like equal adults because I want us to have a better
relationship.
Helper
:
 
That’s great. You didn’t have any whine in your voice. You
assertively told her what you would like to happen rather than
blaming her.
Client
:
 
Thanks, it felt good. I might have to practice it a couple
more times, but I liked how it felt. I think it would work with
her too.
Helper
:
 
Unfortunately, we are almost out of time for today. But I
wanted to check in with you about how you felt about the ideas
we came up with for you to make some changes.
Client
:
 
I am really excited because I think this is something I can
try. I feel hopeful about being able to have a better relationship
with her.
Helper
:
 
So you think you’ll be able to try this out with your wife?
(Step 5)
Client
:
 
Yes, I definitely will.
Helper
:
 
Great. Try it out and let’s talk next week about how it went.
We can see if we need to make any changes in the plan then
after we see how it goes.
(Next session)
Helper
:
 
So how did it go this last week when you tried to talk with
your ex-wife? (Step 6)
Client
:
 
Well, some good, some bad. The part that worked was I did
say that I wanted to set up a schedule. And I was clear and
didn’t whine.
Helper
:
 
Terrific. Way to go.
413
Client
:
 
But the part that didn’t go so good was that she didn’t
respond positively, and then I slipped back into the same old,
whiny pattern.
Helper
:
 
That often happens. So let’s do some problem solving. What
might you do when she doesn’t respond well? (continues, and
does another role-play with how the ex-wife responded)
Decision Making
Clients often have major life decisions to make: which job to take, whether to go
to graduate school, whether it is best to buy a house or rent an apartment, or
whether or not to get married to a specific person. In decision making, helpers
work with clients to help them articulate their options, explore their values, and
evaluate the options according to their values (Carkhuff, 1973; Hill, 1975).
I should note that students have varying reactions to this exercise. Some
love the clear, specific steps, whereas others feel that the process is too
mechanistic. Whether or not students like the task probably depends on
personality, but I suggest that trainees try it out and see if there is anything
valuable that can be taken from it.
As they do with the other three behavioral tasks, clients reveal during the
exploration and insight stages that they need to make a decision about
something (e.g., choosing between graduate programs, deciding where to go on
vacation, deciding between two people for a dating partner, choosing between
three nursery schools for a child). Sometimes clients easily make the decision by
exploring, and sometimes they are able to make a decision after simply listing
the pros and cons of each possibility, but other times clients still feel blocked. At
this point, the helper can ask if the client would like to try an exercise to help
make the decision. The steps for decision making are summarized in 
Exhibit
17.4
.
414
EXHIBIT 17.4
Steps for Decision Making
STEP 1: ARTICULATE THE OPTIONS
The helper first asks the client to describe and explore various options. This step
often involves work on generating options (similar to steps in behavior change
and behavioral rehearsal). It sometimes takes a fair amount of exploration for all
the options to emerge, and clients sometimes add or modify options as they go
through the steps so helpers may need to go back and add to this list.
As an example, let us consider that the helper is working with a middle-aged
teacher, Bess, who is trying to plan her future. Bess states that she has several
options she has been considering: She and her husband could retire at 55, sell
their house, and travel around the country in a recreational vehicle; she could
wait until 65 to retire and then get involved in volunteer activities; she could
keep teaching indefinitely since there is no mandatory retirement age in her job.
As Bess is talking, the helper makes a grid and records the options along the top
with one option in each column (see 
Exhibit 17.5
).
415
EXHIBIT 17.5
Example of Bess’s Decision-Making Chart: Articulating the Options
STEP 2: VALUES CLARIFICATION
Next, the helper asks the client to generate no more than 10 relevant values,
desires, needs, or things that influence the choice and are relevant to making the
decision. Once again, the client may need help in generating values because
these are often not things we are aware of.
Through considerable exploration, Bess says that the important
considerations for her are that she wants to travel, she likes to be intellectually
stimulated, she wants to spend time with her husband, she wants more time to
be with friends, she wants to have enough money to be comfortable, she wants
to feel that she is doing something meaningful with her life, and she wants to be
near her children, especially when they have grandchildren. The helper writes
these values in the rows of the grid (see 
Exhibit 17.6
).
416
EXHIBIT 17.6
Example of Bess’s Decision-Making Chart: Articulating the Values
STEP 3: WEIGHT THE RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF THE
VALUES
The helper then asks the client to weight the importance of each value, desire,
and need (1 
=
 
not important,
 10 
=
 
extremely important
). Each weight is used only
once so that the client is forced to figure out priorities, and it helps to suggest
that the least important receives a weighting of 1 and the most important a
weighting of 10, with some numbers left unused if fewer than 10 values are
listed. Bess says that intellectual stimulation is her most important value and
gives it a weight of 9, whereas she ranks having time to spend with friends at the
bottom of her list and gives it a weight of 2 (see 
Exhibit 17.7
).
417
EXHIBIT 17.7
Example of Bess’s Decision-Making Chart: With Weighted Values
STEP 4: RATE THE OPTIONS
The goal in this step is to evaluate all the options based on the values. Using a
scale of 
−
3 to 
+
3 (
−
3, 
−
2, 
−
1, 0, 
+
1, 
+
2, 
+
3), the helper asks the client to rate the
various options on each of the values and also to discuss the reasons for the
ratings. Thus, for each option and value, the helper asks, “If you were to do this
option, rate the result based on this specific value.”
For example, Bess says that retiring at 55 would get a 
+
3 on travel because
they would be touring the country, but she rates retirement at 55 a 
−
3 on
intellectual stimulation because she would not be teaching any longer and
probably would not be doing as much reading and talking with others about
ideas (see 
Exhibit 17.8
).
418
EXHIBIT 17.8
Example of Bess’s Decision-Making Chart: With Ratings of Options
The next step is to multiply the rating for the option by the weight for the
value and then add up the scores for each option. For Bess, the options of
retiring at 65 and working indefinitely both received the highest total scores,
indicating that she preferred these two options to the other option. The process
of putting numbers on feelings helped Bess sort through her feelings (see 
Exhibit
17.9
).
419
EXHIBIT 17.9
Example of Bess’s Decision-Making Chart
STEP 5: EVALUATE THE RESULTS AND REVISE THE
WEIGHTINGS
The goal here is to look at the results and see how they fit for the client. A key is
to pay attention to the client’s reaction upon learning the results. If the client is
happy, the task is done. But if the client seems disappointed, this indicates that
something is wrong in the grid and we want to discover the problem. It might
be necessary to modify the options or add more options, to revise the values, or
to change the ratings, all based on extensive exploration. It might also be helpful
to use behavioral rehearsal or a two-chair technique to help the client think
through the various options and obstacles.
Thus, the helper asked Bess what she thought about these results. When
Bess looked at the total scores for each option, she realized that the scores were
not reflective of what she truly wanted. In fact, she realized that traveling and
having free time were less important than she had initially thought because she
could think of ways to travel and get free time while still working, but that being
near children was more important because she did not want to miss out on
420
seeing her grandchildren grow up, so she revised these ratings (see 
Exhibit
17.10
).
421
EXHIBIT 17.10
Example of Bess’s Decision-Making Chart: Revised
STEP 6: FOLLOW-UP
It is important for helpers to come back in subsequent sessions and check in
with clients about their feelings. In the case of Bess, the helper asked her
reactions during the next session. Bess replied that she had gone home and
talked with her husband. She realized that she and her husband had different
values related to retirement, and talking about the decision-making grid helped
them clarify these differences. They decided they needed a few sessions of
marital counseling to resolve their differences.
What Do You Think?
Debate the merits of working on specific types of action versus just
allowing the client to do action on his or her own after attaining
insight.
422
How do you know when to move from one action step to another?
How do you know when you have spent enough time in each of the
steps?
How should helpers decide which action possibilities to pursue for
clients?
What do you think is going on when clients say “Yes, but 
. . . ”
frequently?
How can you tell the difference between client resistance to change
and the helper’s lack of competence in progressing through the action
steps?
423
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Directives in China
Citation: 
Duan, C., Hill, C. E., Jiang, G., Hu, B., Chui, H., Hui, K., 
. . . Yu, L. (2012).
Therapist directives: Use and outcomes in China. 
Psychotherapy Research, 22,
 442–457. doi:
10.1080/10503307.2012.664292
Rationale: 
Asians are commonly thought to view therapy as much like going to a medical
doctor, with the expectation that therapists will quickly diagnose and fix problems by
giving directives (i.e., homework, advice, suggestions, and recommendations). Hence, we
would expect that Asians (in this study, Chinese) would prefer to work more in the action
stage than in the exploration and insight stages. The empirical literature on directives,
which has been conducted in the United States, has shown that directives are used quite
often, especially by cognitive-behavioral therapists. Furthermore, Scheel, Seaman, Roach,
Mullin, and Mahoney (1999) found that clients were more likely to implement homework
assignments when they perceived the therapist to have influence, and when the homework
assignment was not difficult to complete. Duan et al. wondered if these results would
generalize to clients in China.
Method: 
Ninety-six Chinese college students who sought counseling at a university
counseling center in mid-China were seen by 43 therapists who mostly had a client-
centered orientation. After every session, clients and therapists separately wrote all the
directives that therapists provided during sessions, rated the quality of the primary
recommendation, and rated the quality of the working alliance. Starting with the second
session, clients indicated how much they had implemented the primary recommendation
and rated their psychological functioning.
Interesting 
Findings:
Clients indicated that therapists had provided about two directives per session, whereas therapists indicated they
had provided about one directive per session.
Both therapists and clients reported that directives typically focused on cognitive or behavioral changes rather than
emotional changes.
Clients typically reported in the second session that they had implemented the primary directive given in the first
session, particularly if it was easy.
Client implementation of directives was not related to treatment outcome.
The more therapists reported having given directives, the higher the clients rated the working alliance and the
outcome of therapy.
Conclusions:
Directives seem to influence counseling outcomes differently in China than in the United States. In the United
States, when therapists use their influence and give easy-to-implement directives, clients implement these
directives and feel better (Scheel, Hanson, & Razzhavaikina, 2004). In contrast, Chinese therapists use directives
to strengthen therapeutic relationships. Directives seem to make Chinese clients feel that the therapist is an expert
who cares about them and invests in helping them by giving directives, which creates a strong alliance with the
therapist, in turn leading to a positive outcome.
We cannot assume that interventions operate in the same manner cross-culturally.
Implications:
With Chinese clients, helpers might consider offering one or two directives for cognitive or
behavioral changes per session so that clients feel that helpers are experts who care about
424
them. But because directives may work more through building the relationship than
through implementation, helpers should not expect that Chinese clients will necessarily
implement the directives. Remember that this study was conducted in China, so results
may not generalize to clients of Chinese origin in the United States (refer back to 
Chapter 5
about the importance of not assuming that everyone from a given culture will have the
same reactions or need the same interventions).
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
425
Ideal teachers are those who use themselves as bridges over which they invite their
students to cross, then having facilitated their crossing, joyfully collapse, encouraging
them to create bridges of their own.
—Leo Buscaglia
Tako came into therapy feeling vague dissatisfaction in his marriage and work. He
worked long hours and felt that he was not very connected with his wife. Working with
his helper, he explored his desire to change his lifestyle. In the insight stage, he came to
understand that he worked too much because of cultural demands about providing for
his family and achieving. In the action stage, Tako decided that he wanted to have a
better relationship with his wife. He and his helper brainstormed several ways that Tako
could make changes.
I
n initial sessions, helpers may focus completely on exploration and insight,
with only minimal attention to action (depending on client needs). If action is
approached in initial sessions, it is usually brief and focused on exploring the
possibility of changing, helping clients think about whether and what they want
to change or if they want to return for another session. In later sessions, the
focus of the action stage moves to discussing and choosing specific action plans,
evaluating the positive and negative consequences of changes the client has tried
to make, making modifications in action plans, and planning for termination of
the helping relationship.
The action stage is often challenging for beginning helpers, who tend either
to avoid action in favor of being empathic and insightful or become overly
directive and authoritarian while neglecting their empathic skills. Leaving
enough time for action can also be difficult for beginning helpers who have
trouble with time management in sessions.
Action is also difficult for many clients. Demoralization and hopelessness
are major hurdles that clients must overcome before they can change (Frank &
Frank, 1991). Clients often feel discouraged or defeated about their ability to
change because of negative experiences with past attempts. Accordingly, helpers
426
might encourage clients to take “baby steps” (i.e., make small changes such as 15
minutes of walking) and explore the idea of change first, while recognizing how
hard it is to change.
Although the action stage presents many challenges for both helpers and
clients, helpers should not neglect helping clients make changes in their lives.
They do, however, need to approach the action stage with appropriate caution,
self-awareness, and empathy for their clients.
Implementing the Action Skills
It is difficult to make changes, so clients need empathy, support, and
encouragement from helpers throughout the entire action stage, even if they
decide not to change or have only accomplished one small step toward their
goals. Clients need to feel that helpers are on their side. In addition, clients
appreciate knowing that their helpers are benevolent coaches or guides rather
than harsh parents or dictators.
NEED FOR FLEXIBILITY
Flexibility and creativity are critical in the action stage. I presented the steps for
the four types of action in a clear-cut linear manner in the previous chapter so
students can learn them easily. But in practice, these steps are rarely
implemented in such a straightforward manner, and the four types are not so
easily distinguished. Helpers need to learn the steps for all four types and then
modify them to fit the needs of the client.
If one intervention does not work, helpers need to try something else. If
several interventions are unsuccessful or the client continually says, “Yes, but
. . . ” in response to interventions, helpers might explore how clients feel about
the therapeutic relationship or the process of change. Helpers also can use
insight skills to help clients understand their resistance to change.
Furthermore, when clients implement changes in the real world, things
rarely go as planned. Clients need to be prepared for disappointment or for
others not responding well to their changes. It can be useful for helpers to
prepare clients for such disappointment.
NEED TO REMAIN HUMBLE ABOUT THE DIFFICULTIES IN
CHANGING
Changing is hard, and people are complicated. Helpers need to remember that
carrying out action ideas is not easy. If it were easy, clients would have already
implemented the ideas. All of us sometimes have a fantasy about the wizard who
427
will be able to tell us what to do, but taking over for clients has the potential of
undermining their efficacy and self-healing potential.
It can also be useful for helpers to recall that the problems clients bring in
are real and that their suggestions can have major consequences. For example, if
a client is asking for help about whether she should tell her father about dating
someone of another race or religion, the helper needs to be sensitive that advice
to be open and honest might have adverse consequences (e.g., the client being
disowned). This concern speaks to the helper being cautious about exploring
carefully the full context before rushing to action.
Remembering how difficult it is to make changes in our own lives can assist
helpers in being empathic with clients who are struggling with changing.
Helpers also need to remember that clients’ problems developed over many
years; changing ingrained patterns is difficult.
CULTURAL CONSIDERATIONS
Some clients want and expect a lot of action and direction from their helpers,
whom they perceive as authorities or wise people (Pedersen, Draguns, Lonner,
& Trimble, 2002). If a helper does not focus on action, these clients might lose
respect for the helper and the helping process. Such clients may get frustrated if
helpers do not tell them what to do.
Another cultural consideration is that helpers may need to incorporate
spirituality into the action stage (e.g., using prayer as an action strategy) for
clients for whom spirituality and religion are important issues (Fukuyama &
Sevig, 2002). If helpers are not responsive to such needs, clients may feel
disrespected and may devalue the helping process. But because spirituality is a
sensitive topic, helpers might wait to pick up clues from clients as to whether
they would like a focus on spirituality. And of course helpers should only work
with spirituality if they feel that they can do so authentically.
Finally, helpers need to be aware of barriers to action faced by clients from
other cultures. For example, clients who are poor may not have transportation,
child care, or access to public services. Clients who are immigrants often face
discrimination and language problems. Clients who are elderly and infirm may
not be able to leave their houses. Asian clients may not want to go outside the
family for help or may not know how to change in a way that respects and
incorporates the family’s needs. Helpers need to be aware of such cultural
considerations, ask clients about possible barriers, and be sensitive to different
needs.
As I mentioned at the end of the insight stage, it may be difficult for a
majority group client (e.g., a middle-aged White male) to engage in the action
stage with a minority individual (e.g., a younger biracial female) because it
upsets the normative power differential in society. This older male client may
428
feel a need to assert his dominance and feel uncomfortable receiving guidance
from a younger woman.
Difficulties Helpers Might Experience in the
Action Stage
MOVING TOO QUICKLY TO ACTION
Some helpers rush to action before they have established a firm enough
foundation of exploration and insight. They might feel impatient with the long
process of exploration and insight; they might feel that they “know” what the
client should do; they might feel compelled to “do” something for the client.
Unfortunately, when helpers move too quickly to action, clients often are
resistant, not attuned with the helper, unable to take responsibility for their
changes, or unmotivated to make changes. Helpers need to remember to spend
the majority of their time in exploration to establish the foundation for insight
and action.
If information or advice is provided before clients are ready for it, clients
might not be able to use it. For example, some volunteers in battered women’s
shelters provide information to the women about how to make it on their own
when the women first come in. At this point, the women more often need to
explore their feelings about being in an abusive relationship. They are not ready
yet to use information, no matter how helpful or well intentioned it is.
Some helpers move to action before they know enough about the client’s
situation. They might jump quickly to a solution before exploring the
complexity of the situation. It can appear disparaging to clients for helpers to
jump to quick solutions and imply that they were inept for not knowing how to
solve such simple problems. If problems were so simple, clients would have
solved them on their own.
NEEDING TO BE THE EXPERT
Providing information and giving advice gratify some helpers’ needs to be
viewed as the expert. Some helpers like being perceived as “knowing it all” and
enjoy having clients admire them. These helpers might be trying to look like the
experts at the expense of encouraging clients to seek out their own information
and make their own decisions. Other helpers might embrace the role of expert
because they want to assist clients, and they believe that helpers should provide
all the answers and give lots of helpful information to clients. Both types of
helpers do a disservice in neglecting the client’s role in the information-
generating process. Although helpers might know more about helping than their
429
clients do, they do not know more than clients about clients’ inner experiences
or what actions clients should implement.
TOO MUCH INVESTMENT IN THE CLIENT CHANGING
Perhaps the major clinical issue that arises in the action stage is the helper
becoming too invested in the client changing. Some helpers feel so responsible
for developing action plans that they try to make decisions for the client. They
feel that things would be much easier if clients just did what they were told to
do. However, taking over for clients is typically counterproductive (except in
extreme cases of suicidal or homicidal ideation or intent) because clients become
dependent and do not develop the skills needed to make changes in the future.
In addition, what might work for the helper might not work for the client.
Furthermore, if helpers become too invested in what they think clients should
do, it is difficult for helpers to listen supportively and objectively to clients.
Hence, helpers generally need to be uninvested (but not uncaring) in what
action the client chooses (or does not choose). Helpers must allow clients to
make their own decisions and should serve as guides and supporters rather than
as bosses.
IMPOSING ONE’S VALUES ON CLIENTS
Sometimes helpers lose sight of trying to help clients uncover their values and
instead impose their own beliefs and values on clients. It can be difficult for
helpers to accept that clients have different values, especially when the values
differ significantly from the helper’s cherished beliefs. For example, a client
dying of a terminal illness might want to talk about the possibility of suicide. If
helpers are rigid about the value of life, they might not allow clients to explore
the possibility of suicide, thus limiting the client’s ability to contemplate all the
options thoroughly and make an informed decision. In another example, a
helper might tell a client to smile more because he wants all women to appear
happy. Helpers always need to be attentive to their own issues and needs and try
to minimize their effect on clients.
NOT BEING BOLD ENOUGH IN ENCOURAGING CLIENTS
TO MAKE CHANGES
Helpers may not challenge clients enough to make changes. Some helpers are
worried about intruding on their clients and thus do not encourage them to
change. They believe it is not their place to challenge. Although clients need to
be the ones who choose to change, helpers can encourage and challenge clients
when they are stuck and struggling. In addition, helpers are sometimes nervous
about challenging clients because they are not sure what to do to help.
430
NOT BEING SUPPORTIVE ENOUGH
Sometimes helpers become so involved in developing the action plan during this
stage that they forget to be supportive. Encouragement and reinforcement are
crucial for both actual change and efforts to change. I suspect that when helpers
remember aspects of their lives that are difficult to change, they may be more
sympathetic to clients who have difficulty changing.
GETTING STUCK ON ONE ACTION IDEA
Helpers often remain committed to action ideas that they have developed, even
when it is clear that these ideas are inappropriate and clients cannot or will not
follow them. Perhaps these helpers have spent a lot of time thinking about what
their clients should do and have become invested in the action plans. However,
helpers need to realize that helping requires flexibility and that action ideas often
require adjustment because helpers and clients are not aware of all the problems
that can arise. They need to select and keep the parts of the action plans that
work and revise the parts that do not.
ADHERING TOO RIGIDLY TO THE STEPS
Helpers who follow the action steps in 
Chapter 17
 precisely will probably feel
frustrated because the exact sequence of steps will not apply to every client.
These steps are provided so that students can see a structure of how to proceed
through the action stage. Helpers will need to learn and practice the steps as
presented but then use their creativity and flexibility to modify the procedures
for themselves and the individual client. This stage allows for incredible
flexibility as helpers try to creatively work with individual clients to help them.
Strategies for Overcoming the Difficulties
There are a number of strategies that helpers can use to manage the difficulties.
SELF-REFLECTION
When helpers get trapped in any of the pitfalls (moving too quickly to action,
becoming too invested in clients’ changing, imposing their values on clients, not
being challenging enough, not being supportive enough, or getting stuck on one
plan), they might spend some time reflecting and hypothesizing about what
caused them to have problems. If helpers discover that they get overly invested
or use a lot of direct guidance across several clients and clients are reacting with
431
resistance, helpers need to look inward to understand themselves so that they do
not harm clients. Consulting with peers, seeking personal therapy, and receiving
supervision are all helpful methods for learning more about oneself. In addition,
helpers can go back and use the management strategies suggested in 
Chapters 10
and 
17
 for dealing with anxiety (e.g., relaxation, imagery, positive self-talk, focus
on the client).
USE EXPLORATION SKILLS
When an impasse or problem arises in the action stage, it is often helpful to
return to cultivating an empathic attitude and using the exploration skills (open
questions and probes, restatement, and reflection). The helper needs to try to
understand what is going on with the client at this particular time. When clients
feel misunderstood, helpers also need to rebuild trust and reassure clients that
helpers can listen to and collaborate with them.
DEAL WITH PROBLEMS IN THE THERAPEUTIC
RELATIONSHIP
Helpers can ask clients how they are feeling about what is going on in the
helping relationship, particularly when they have reached an impasse, defined by
Elkind (1992) as a deadlock or stalemate that causes helping to become so
difficult that progress is not possible. Using immediacy to deal with the
relationship and resolve problems is particularly crucial (see 
Chapter 14
).
Helpers need to listen for feedback from clients and be willing to hear how they
might improve their work with their clients. If appropriate for the helping
situation, helpers can talk about their own immediate feelings (without
burdening clients with their personal problems). Acknowledging their part in
the problems in helping relationships (e.g., apologizing if they have made a
mistake) can be therapeutically beneficial. Helpers also can thank clients for
sharing their feelings and working hard to make positive changes in their lives.
What Do You Think?
Which of the following obstacles do you anticipate that you are most
likely to experience in using the action skills?
_____ Moving too quickly to action
_____ Needing to be the expert
_____ Being too invested in clients’ changes
_____ Imposing one’s values on clients
_____ Not encouraging enough change
432
_____ Not being supportive
_____ Getting stuck on one action idea
_____ Adhering too rigidly to the steps
Which strategies would work to help you cope with the obstacles in the
action stage?
_____ Self-reflection
_____ Address issues related to the therapeutic relationship
_____ Consultation with supervisors, peers, or teachers
_____ Return to exploration skills
433
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Encouraging Clients to Do Homework
Citation:
 Mahrer, A. R., Gagnon, R., Fairweather, D. R., Boulet, D. B., & Herring, C. B.
(1994). Client commitment and resolve to carry out postsession behaviors. 
Journal of
Counseling 
Psychology,
 
41,
 407–414. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.41.3.407
Rationale: 
Mahrer et al. noted that many therapists, especially those who have a behavioral
orientation, assign homework. But they contended that therapists do not just assign
homework; rather, they also use certain interventions to encourage clients to commit
themselves to carrying out the homework. Given that ultimately clients are the ones who
have to go out and implement the homework, it seems important to figure out how to
motivate clients to want to implement it. Furthermore, they speculated that different kinds
of homework may require different types of motivational strategies.
Method: 
The authors found 241 published transcripts from a wide variety of therapists and
individual adult clients. Judges read transcripts and identified all instances in which clients
explicitly and manifestly expressed a commitment, resolution, intention, readiness,
willingness, and determination to carry out some postsession behavior. These events were
grouped into two categories of different types of postsession behaviors (problem reduction
and new ways of being and behaving). Judges then went back through the transcripts and
identified all the therapist methods used to encourage clients to carry out these postsession
behaviors.
Interesting 
Findings:
Of the 241 transcripts, only 22 (9%) included clear explicit client statements of commitment and resolve to carry
out postsession behaviors. The therapists in these 22 cases were disproportionately often cognitive–behavioral in
orientation and disproportionately less often psychodynamic or humanistic or client-centered in orientation.
Half of the client statements were of a commitment to reduce a specific behavior, whereas the other half were of a
commitment to increase some particular behavior.
Sixteen therapist methods were identified as occurring before clients stated a commitment to carrying out
homework assignments (about five methods were used per instance).
A method commonly used for both types of problems was concrete specificity (the therapist being specific about
defining the exact behavior to be implemented, the context in which it might occur, the other people who might
be involved, and when and how to carry out the behavior).
In addition, to help clients reduce some behavior, therapists often
justified the rationale (argued for how and why the change should be implemented),
encouraged or pressured (pushed the client to carry out the behavior), and/or
assigned specific homework (requested that the client carry out the homework).
In addition, to help clients increase some behavior, therapists often
encouraged client initiation (allowed the client to come up with the specific postsession behavior without
blocking or getting in the client’s way),
asserted or asked about client readiness and willingness to carry out the behavior,
did behavior-context clarification (clarified the behavior and situation in which the change would take place),
and/or
did in-session role-plays with clients to help them practice new behaviors).
Conclusions:
Therapists had many methods for helping clients develop a resolve to carry out postsession changes.
The most typical methods involved encouraging the client to come up with his or her own ideas for changes.
Therapists often persisted using several methods until client resolve and commitment was obtained. It appeared
that clients and therapists were working together collaboratively to develop change strategies.
434
Implications for Therapy:
It is often a good idea to let clients initiate the change process.
Therapists may need to use a number of methods to encourage clients to make changes, but it is important to
collaborate with clients in this process.
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
435
436
And the time came when the risk to remain tight in a bud was more painful than the risk it
took to blossom.
—Anaïs Nin
I
n this final chapter, I discuss putting all the helping skills detailed in previous
chapters together to work in sessions with clients. As I have said before, it is
important to learn the individual skills to make sure you have the ability to use
each one, and practicing the individual skills is crucial. But once you have the
basic ability to use the skills, you then need to integrate them for use with
specific clients. Thus, once you learn the individual skills, they recede into the
background, and session management and case conceptualization become more
salient.
There is no “right” way to implement the helping model. Each helper has a
different style, and each client has different needs and unique reactions.
Furthermore, because there are a myriad of settings with different policies and
procedures, it is not possible to provide an exact road map or cookbook for
helpers for everything that they need to know.
In this chapter, I focus on some general issues that cross approaches and
settings, but I recognize that these will not fit perfectly for any given setting. A
caveat before starting, however, is that I do not focus here on issues such as
matching helpers and clients or on client and therapist characteristics that
predict outcome, although obviously these are important for the helping process
(see Lambert, 2013, for excellent reviews of these literatures). In addition, the
guidelines presented here focus on helping provided in an open-ended manner
using the exploration–insight–action skills rather than manual-driven
therapeutic approaches (e.g., manualized cognitive–behavior therapy).
437
Session Management
The first big task for helpers is to figure out what to do during sessions with
clients. I focus on goals and tasks for intakes with new clients, between sessions,
supervision, subsequent sessions with clients, and termination.
INTAKES
Many mental health clinics use initial intake sessions with potential clients to
formulate a diagnosis, assess for risk, and determine the best treatment. The
actual intake protocol depends on the agency, but it is usually based on a clinical
interview. Whiston (2005) noted that a good intake usually involves gathering
information about the following:
Client demographics (e.g., name, age, sex, address, ethnicity, education
and work history, previous counseling experiences).
Presenting concerns (e.g., specific problems, urgency of request):
Gather information about each problem from affective, cognitive, and
relational perspectives; gather details about each problem (when the
problem began, its history, what was going on in the client’s life at the
time of the problem, how others contribute to the problem, intensity
of the problem, changeability of the problem, methods used to solve
the problem).
Client background information or psychosocial history: Obtain a brief
overview of the client’s background as it relates to the presenting
problem (e.g., family of origin, current family and relationships,
employment and school status, living situation).
Health and medical history: This information is needed to understand
the client holistically and usually includes current health issues,
medications, substance use or abuse, caffeine intake, sleep, eating
patterns, and exercise patterns.
Risk factors: Assess for danger to self and others and alcohol and
substance abuse.
Expectations for therapy: Assess what the client expects related to the
process (i.e., what goes on during sessions) and outcome (i.e., what
changes as a result) of helping.
Although the purpose of the intake is to gather information and thus calls
for the helper to be more directive and to use more closed questions than she or
he normally would in helping sessions, it is important for helpers to use
attending and exploration skills (e.g., reflections of feelings, restatements,
summaries) to help the client feel at ease and explore. Without good attending
438
and helping skills, helpers will not get much information from clients.
At the end of the intake, helpers ask clients if they want to commit to
becoming involved in the helping process. If clients are uncertain about whether
they want to commit to helping, helpers might suggest that they meet for three
to six sessions and then reevaluate.
FIRST SESSION
For the purposes of this chapter, I am assuming that the actual helping is
conducted by a different person than the one who conducted the intake.
Research shows that it is better for the same person to conduct the intake and
therapy (Nielsen et al., 2009), but I present them separately here to distinguish
between their different purposes and because they are often conducted by
different people.
Before the first session, helpers review the intake record to see what to
expect but remain open to making their own assessments of clients. In terms of
the session itself, helpers start the session, establish goals, clarify expectations,
develop a focus, check in about continuing, and end the session.
Beginning the Session
Helpers begin the initial session by informing clients whether they will be
recorded, observed live, or supervised (e.g., “I will be recording this session, and
my supervisor is watching through that one-way mirror”) and about the
disposition of any such tape recordings (“All recordings will be erased as soon as
my supervisor listens to them”). Helpers also clarify issues of confidentiality.
They say something like,
Everything you say will be kept in strict confidence, with a couple of exceptions: If you reveal
anything about abuse or intent to harm yourself or others, or if a child or older person is
suspected of being abused in some way, I will need to break confidentiality.
Note that such statements about the limits of confidentiality are not just good
therapeutic practice, they are also legally required. Although it is crucial to
provide relevant information about confidentiality at this point, clients do not
usually need a lot of detail because they are more interested in moving on to talk
about what brought them to helping.
Helpers should also inform clients at the beginning of the session about the
helping process. First, the helper explains the process (e.g., “We are going to be
spending 30 minutes together, and our goal is to help you explore whatever
topic you would like to address”). Helpers can also briefly self-disclose about
facts or credentials to educate clients about their background as helpers (e.g., “I
am a beginning helper”), especially if clients ask for such information.
In addition, helpers often tell clients about some of the rules (e.g., length of
sessions, cost) at the beginning of the initial session. They inform clients about
439
other rules in later sessions as the need arises (e.g., when clients ask for
information that is too personal, the helper might explain why he or she chooses
not to divulge such information; when a client repeatedly asks for hugs, the
helper might explain why that is not a good idea). Providing information about
the process of helping educates clients about what to expect given that they are
more likely to be full partners in the helping process if they know what is
expected.
Helpers can then ask clients whether they have any questions about what to
expect from the process (e.g., “Is there anything you want to know about the
process?”). After answering questions, helpers turn the focus onto clients by
using an open question or probe, such as “What would you like to talk about?”
or “What’s on your mind?” to encourage clients to share their concerns. It is
sometimes an awkward transition from providing information to turning the
focus over to the client, so helpers might take a deep breath and explain that the
focus is shifting.
If a client does not respond right away to the opening probe, or if she or he
responds by saying “I don’t have anything to talk about,” the helper might pause
(empathically of course) to give the client a chance to think and talk. It is
important not to rush clients but to give them the message that it is their turn to
talk. When helpers listen patiently and empathically, clients often begin talking
within a few minutes. If the client still does not talk, the helper might reflect
possible feelings (e.g., discomfort, uncertainty) to allow the client to focus on
feelings. Some clients are anxious about whether what they have to say is
important enough to be discussed in the session and need reassurance that the
helper is listening and thinks what they are talking about is important. If the
client still does not talk, the helper might ask an open-ended question, such as
“Can you tell me more about the problems that brought you here?”
The most important thing helpers do at this point in the session is to listen
empathically to encourage the client to begin talking and exploring. Throughout
the exploration stage, helpers listen carefully to what clients are saying and use
appropriate attending behaviors to provide a warm presence and encourage
clients to explore. They also carefully observe clients’ responses and modify
attending behaviors accordingly (e.g., if clients draw away from eye contact,
helpers should not look at them intensely). In addition, helpers offer approval
and reassurance (e.g., “That’s tough,” “You’re doing a good job talking about
the problem”) if the client seems to need encouragement. Most important, when
clients are talking productively about their concerns, helpers sit quietly and
listen attentively and empathically.
Establish Goals and Clarify Expectations
An important task of the first session is to determine why the client sought out a
440
helping experience at this particular time and what the client’s goals are for
counseling. It is helpful to know what motivated the client to seek help at a
given time because this tells the helper something about what is going on with
the client. Many people have experienced distress for a long period, but
something tips them over the edge to seek help at a particular time.
In addition, it is important to learn what the client expects and wants from
the helping experience (“What do you want to accomplish?”). If expectations are
unrealistic, the helper can clarify what helping can realistically provide. If the
number of sessions is limited, helpers and clients need to have realistic
expectations for what can be accomplished. With more sessions, helpers can help
clients with more deeply rooted personality problems (e.g., working through
childhood sexual abuse, engrained interpersonal deficits). The helper and the
client must agree that the goals are reasonable and possible to attain.
Throughout this process of establishing goals, the helper may come to
realize that he or she is not the best helper for this client (e.g., the client has an
active eating disorder, and the helper has no expertise in eating disorders; the
client needs medication, and the helper cannot prescribe; the client wants a
cognitive–behavioral approach, and the helper uses a psychodynamic approach;
the helper has strong negative countertransference reactions to the client). The
most ethical thing to do in this situation is to gently and nonjudgmentally refer
the client to a more qualified service provider.
Establish a Relationship
The ultimate goal in the first session is to establish rapport and let clients know
that the helper is interested in them and their experiences. If a client is able to
talk and explore, the helper would use exploration skills, perhaps especially
focusing on reflections of feelings to see how much the client can engage with
feelings. If a client just wants to just talk without reflecting deeply, if the client is
silent and has a hard time engaging, if a client gets embarrassed and seems
anxious with the helper, of if a client seems especially avoidant, the helper might
want to be incredibly gentle and use more open questions and probes about
thoughts and feelings. Of course, the helper would notice all these observations
and reflect about them after the session, but during the first session, the helper
would primarily want to be patient and try to understand the client’s
experiential world.
Check in About Continuing
Near the end of the first session, helpers can use immediacy to ask clients how
they felt about the session and the work that was done. This processing of
sessions is important so that helpers can become aware of how clients reacted to
various interventions. For helpers to be able to plan the next sessions, they need
441
to know what worked and what was not effective. As discussed in 
Chapter 2
,
clients often do not reveal their feelings about the helper and the helping process
unless asked explicitly. Helpers should not, however, ask only for clients’
reactions to elicit platitudes about their skills. In fact, they should be suspicious
if clients talk only about how wonderful helpers were. Instead, they should be
genuinely interested in hearing both the positive and negative reactions from
clients.
Ending the First Session
Helpers need to be aware of the time in sessions. Five to 10 minutes before the
end of the session, helpers might mention that the session is almost over.
Mentioning the approaching end of the session sets the boundary that time is
important and gives clients time to prepare for leaving the session and to reflect
on what they have accomplished. Some clients wait until a couple of minutes
before the end of session to bring up important feelings. They could be
ambivalent about discussing the topic, anxious about the helper’s reaction, or
hoping to manipulate the helper into extending the session.
HELPERS’ WORK BETWEEN SESSIONS
Helpers need to think about their clients between sessions to try to
conceptualize their problems. Specifically, they need to think about the origins
of clients’ problems, the underlying themes in the problems, and appropriate
interventions.
One way to facilitate this conceptualization process is for helpers to listen to
the audiotapes or, even better, to watch the videotapes of their sessions.
Observing sessions enables helpers to recreate what they were thinking and
feeling and to observe clients’ reactions to their interventions. Watching sessions
can also provide a powerful self-confrontation about one’s use of attending and
helping skills.
I suggest that helpers write process notes (see Web Form F for an example
form) after each session to facilitate their recall of the salient issues that were
covered during the session. In the process notes, which are best completed
immediately after sessions, helpers can use their experience and perceptions to
write about the following areas:
manifest content (what the client talked about),
underlying content (unspoken meanings in what the client said),
defenses and barriers to change (how the client avoids anxiety),
client distortions (ways in which the client responds to you as she or he
has to other significant persons in her or his life, i.e., transference),
countertransference (ways in which your emotional, attitudinal, and
442
behavioral responses may have been stimulated by the process), and
personal assessment (your evaluation of your interventions; what you
would do differently and why).
Helpers should look for underlying themes and recurring patterns across all
the problems that clients raise. For example, is the client always the passive
victim in every encounter, does the client idealize everyone, or is the client
always angry? These themes provide important clues for the underlying
problems that need attention in therapy.
Thorough exploration allows helpers to develop hypotheses about clients
that lay the foundation for choosing interventions. They should pay close
attention to each client’s personality and verbal and nonverbal behaviors. How
does the client respond to interventions? How does the client’s way of
interacting influence the helping process?
Helpers can make observations about clients and develop hypotheses about
what factors led clients to come to their current state. After thinking about a
client, helpers should be able to answer several questions:
How serious is the problem?
How is the client behaving?
How much does the client disclose or withhold about the problem?
Are there discrepancies in what the client is saying?
What is the client’s role in the creation and maintenance of the
problem?
Helpers also need to educate themselves about theories and research to
obtain a framework with which to understand client dynamics (i.e., what causes
and maintains problems). Helpers need to select a theoretical framework and
read current research so they can think carefully about their interventions with
clients. Furthermore, if a client is from a different culture or has a problem with
which the helper is not familiar, the helper should read about the issue and
consult with supervisors between sessions to ensure that she or he is giving the
best available services to the client.
SUPERVISION
In addition to reflecting on their own about clients, beginning helpers meet with
supervisors for assistance in conceptualizing clients. Supervisors can aid helpers
in thinking about various hypotheses about what caused and maintained
problems as well as possible interventions to help clients. They can also provide
a different perspective to aid helpers when they become stuck in their
perceptions and countertransferences.
SUBSEQUENT SESSIONS
443
Subsequent sessions differ slightly from intake and initial sessions. Helpers need
to be prepared to shift gears a bit.
Beginning the Session
At the beginning of subsequent sessions, helpers might sit quietly and wait for
clients to talk about what is on their minds, although they might need to
educate clients that they are expected to bring in material to begin the session if
clients seem confused about why the helper is not taking the initiative.
Alternatively, helpers might summarize what took place in the former session,
start by asking how the client felt about the previous session, or simply ask what
the client would like to talk about during the session. All are appropriate, but
which helpers choose to use depends on the client and the helper. The helper
might personally like more or less structure or assess that the client needs more
or less structure.
Helpers cannot assume that clients will continue talking about what they
discussed the previous session or that clients have the same feelings that they had
during the previous session. Many beginning helpers spend a great deal of time
debriefing after sessions and approach subsequent sessions with an agenda about
what to do to help clients with problems raised in the previous session. Helpers
are often surprised, however, when clients are not concerned with or interested
in talking about the same issues. When clients leave the therapy setting, many
things happen that change the way they feel. They may have spent time thinking
about the issues and resolved them, or they may want to discuss other issues that
might have become more salient in the interim. Thus, helpers have to be
prepared to respond to clients in the moment. Being prepared, yet flexible, is
one of the biggest challenges for beginning helpers.
Develop a Focus
It is best for helpers to focus on one problem at a time; otherwise, there is a
danger of becoming so diffuse that nothing gets accomplished. A clear focus
typically involves a specific incident or behavior, such as a fight with a
roommate, procrastination over completing assignments, or concern over how
to communicate with a partner. The focus should be neither too vague nor too
diffuse. To develop a focus, helpers typically ask clients what is troubling them
now.
 It may take a while, however, to determine the most pressing issue because
clients often start with one concern, although another issue is actually more
critical. For example, Michael initially said that he was concerned about his
grandmother’s imminent death. After talking for a few minutes, it emerged that
Michael was actually more concerned about the end of a relationship with a
woman whom he had been dating for 4 years. Thus, the helper shifted to focus
on Michael’s feelings about the breakup for the rest of the session. If it is not
444
possible to get the client to focus, the lack of focus in itself becomes the
important issue for the session that the helper needs to talk about with the
client.
Helpers must respect the client’s decisions about the focus of the sessions.
For example, Moira wanted to work on existential issues such as the meaning of
life, whereas the helper was much more concerned with the high likelihood that
Moira was about to flunk out of school and lose her job. Although the helper
needs to keep the holistic picture of the client in mind (and perhaps later
challenge the client about the discrepancies), it is important especially in the
initial session for the helper to not impose his or her wishes on the client (unless
the client is in imminent danger). Of course, helpers can reflect about whether
their perceptions of client needs are motivated by their own needs.
Helpers also need to maintain the focus on a specific concern (even though
each specific concern has many parts). Many beginning helpers let clients jump
from topic to topic (e.g., academic concerns, interpersonal relationships,
spirituality), so that by the end of a session, clients have covered a lot of things
superficially but have not explored anything in depth. Focusing on a specific
issue is important to making progress, especially in brief treatments. Helpers can
use a combination of skills to assist clients in focusing on one issue in depth.
Specifically, they can observe clients to determine which issue has the most
salience for them (e.g., where is the most intense affect?). After identifying the
most important issue, helpers can reflect the feelings clients are experiencing
about that issue. Helpers can branch off to explore aspects of the central focus.
Although the focus stays on the problem, helpers also facilitate client exploration
of how the concern is affected by, and influences, other parts of the person’s
past, current, and future life. For example, if the helper determines that
academic concerns are the central focus for Sam, the helper might ask him to
explore parental expectations for academic performance and to explore thoughts
about his future occupational preferences, then encourage him to talk about
study skills. In this way, the helper is sticking to the central topic of academic
concerns but is helping Sam explore many aspects of it.
In addition, helpers need to remember to keep the focus on the client, even
when the client talks primarily about others. For example, if a client says, “My
mother is really awful,” the helper can say, “You are really irritated with your
mother,” thereby changing the focus from the mother to the client’s reaction to
her or his mother. The guiding principle is that it is easier and more efficient
(and more ethical) to help a client change than to attempt to help the client
change another person.
The Working Phase
The goal during subsequent sessions is to respond to issues that clients bring up
445
in each session. Essentially, the helper cycles through exploration, insight, and
action with many problems to help the client begin to be able to do this process
independently. Essentially, the goal is for helpers to work themselves out of a job
so that clients can function on their own with good support systems in place.
There are often many phases in the work with clients, but these vary
considerably based on the individual client. Some clients just want symptom
relief, and so the work with them is often brief (e.g., 12 to 20 sessions) and
primarily involves a clear focus on specific problems (e.g., anxiety about public
speaking, fear of flying). Other clients want more focus on interpersonal
problems and may need longer term work gaining insight into maladaptive
patterns and coming up with more adaptive behaviors. Still other clients are
more interested in longer term work to understand more deep-rooted problems
that require considerable exploration (e.g., personality problems, dealing with
troubling family issues, resolving grief or trauma, exploring the meaning of life).
Still others who are quite disturbed might need supportive maintenance
throughout life.
During longer term therapy, in addition to working on clients’ presenting
problems, there is also often a focus on the therapeutic relationship using
immediacy skills. Conflicts inevitably arise in every relationship; if these conflicts
can be dealt with in a different way than the clients are accustomed to, clients
can have a corrective experience (Castonguay & Hill, 2012; Hill & Knox,
2009). Furthermore, if clients can learn to behave differently in the therapeutic
relationship, they might learn new behaviors that they can use in outside
relationships.
Ending Sessions
Because it is important to set clear boundaries, helpers need to begin and end
sessions on time. If clients are late, helpers typically end sessions at the
appointed time. Helpers might say something like, “Our time is up for today.”
Helpers might also want to reinforce clients for what they have accomplished in
the session and encourage them to think about carrying these changes over to
their lives outside the sessions.
TERMINATION
Therapy does not continue forever (even in long-term psychoanalytic therapy),
so separation is inevitable. After helpers and clients have accomplished as much
as they can within the confines of their contracted relationship, it is time to end
the therapy relationship. The helper and client might have gone through several
cycles of exploration–insight–action, dealing with several different problems,
with the client gradually taking more responsibility until he or she feels ready to
manage his or her life independently. One goal of therapy is to prepare clients to
446
leave therapy and become self-reliant. Just as parents raise children to grow up
and leave home, helpers teach and encourage clients to cope without the helper.
When to Terminate
Sometimes the end of helping is imposed by external time limits (e.g., beginning
helpers often are only allowed to provide one to three sessions with volunteer
clients; some counseling centers on university campuses allow only six sessions,
although others allow 12 sessions). Other times, the client or therapist moves or
the client can no longer afford treatment, and treatment ends. In such cases,
helpers have to be ready to terminate with clients and refer them if needed
(information about referrals is given later in the chapter).
In contrast, in open-ended, long-term therapy, helpers and clients together
decide when they are ready to terminate the relationship. Rarely is there such a
thing as a “cure,” because cure implies a static state rather than the continual
changes and challenges involved in living. Most often, clients decide they are
tired, have reached a plateau and are ready for a break, do not have anything else
pressing to talk about, or have accomplished as much as they can or want to
with a particular helper. Sometimes clients directly tell helpers that they are
ready to terminate. At other times, helpers have to suggest to clients that they
think they are ready to terminate. According to the “Ethical Principles of
Psychologists and Code of Conduct” (American Psychological Association,
2010), helpers should terminate with clients when they feel they are no longer
working productively. Helpers need to be mindful of continuing therapy
sessions only when clients are benefiting from it, although this can be hard to
determine and there can certainly be plateaus. I suggest that it is crucial for
helpers to have frequent discussions with clients about what they are getting out
of treatment and how they feel about continuing.
Budman and Gurman (1988) proposed that helpers adopt a model such as
that of family doctors. Just as one would never expect that antibiotics would
inoculate patients against infections for the rest of their lives, they argued that
helpers should not assume that one course of therapy could cure a client for life.
It makes more sense for helpers to see clients until the current issues or crises are
resolved and then see them again when other crises or life transitions arise. With
such a model, termination is not typically as difficult because clients know that
they can return to their helpers if they need further help (if that helper is still
available).
How to Terminate
Mann (1973) considered termination of therapy to be an important task because
loss is an existential fact of life; everyone must cope with loss. He recommended
that helpers spend considerable time in planning and preparing for termination
447
in both short- and long-term therapy.
Clients sometimes think that helpers are exaggerating the concerns about
termination because they cannot anticipate how they will feel when they leave
the therapy relationship. Once they have terminated, they have an
understanding of the feelings involved, but then it is too late for helpers to
process the feelings of abandonment and loss with clients. Hence, before
termination, helpers must assess whether clients might have strong feelings
about ending the relationship so that these feelings can be addressed adequately.
There are three main steps to effective termination of therapy relationships:
(a) looking back, (b) looking forward, and (c) saying goodbye (Dewald, 1971;
Marx & Gelso, 1987; Ward, 1984).
In looking back, helpers review with clients what they have learned and how
they have changed. Clients can also provide feedback about the most and least
helpful aspects of the therapy process. Reviewing the process can help clients
consolidate their changes and feel a sense of accomplishment and can aid helpers
in gaining a sense of what skills they need to improve for future clients.
In looking forward, helpers and clients discuss future plans, and consider
the client’s need for possible additional counseling. Helpers review with clients
the issues they still want to address, given that no therapy process is ever
complete. We keep changing (for better or worse) for the rest of our lives. The
task for helpers is to assist clients in identifying the ongoing issues, determining
how they will address these issues, and clarifying how they can find support in
their lives for making changes. If such plans are not realistic, helpers can gently
confront clients so they do not set themselves up for failure.
Finally, in saying goodbye, both helpers and clients share their feelings
about ending and say their farewells.
Termination is often challenging for both helpers and clients. Once two
people have spoken about many deep and personal issues, it is frequently
difficult for them to think about not seeing each other again. Thus, termination
often brings up issues of loss for both helpers and clients. Some evidence shows
that helpers and clients who have the most trouble with termination are those
who have a history of painful losses (Boyer & Hoffman, 1993; Marx & Gelso,
1987). If loss has been painful in the past, it can be difficult to go through
another loss. Other clients may not experience intense sadness but may struggle
with how to thank the helper and show appreciation for the helper’s role in their
process of change. Other clients may be disappointed about not having received
the “magic cure” and feel upset that they still have unresolved problems. Yet
other clients have such a difficult time thinking about termination that they quit
prematurely to avoid having to process the loss.
Helpers need to talk openly with clients about the separation. Furthermore,
they need to make sure that they have time to deal with the clients’ feelings that
might arise from ending the relationship (and deal with their own loss issues in
448
therapy or supervision).
Making Referrals or Transfers
Clients’ needs are sometimes beyond what helpers are qualified to address or
capable of delivering. For example, a client might have an eating disorder,
substance abuse problem, or serious mental illness, and the helper might lack
expertise in that area. Sometimes the helper and client have accomplished as
much as they can together, and the client needs a different kind of help. For
example, a referral may be needed because a client needs marital or family
therapy, but the helper is trained only in individual therapy (note that family
treatment is typically more beneficial than individual treatment if clients are
having difficulties with family members; Haley, 1987; Minuchin, 1974; Nichols
& Schwartz, 1991; Satir, 1988). In addition, clients might need referrals for
medication, long-term therapy, assessment of learning disabilities, financial
assistance, housing information, spiritual guidance, or legal advice.
With a referral, the helper provides the name of another provider but leaves
it up to the client to follow through. In contrast, with a transfer, the helper
facilitates the client’s process of switching to someone else for treatment. For
example, in the clinic in our department, when a doctoral student therapist
leaves for internship, she or he often discusses with ongoing clients whether they
would like to be transferred to another therapist within the clinic. Some clients
are eager to continue their work with another therapist, although others do not
want to see another therapist. If the client wishes to be transferred, the helper
introduces the client to the new helper and tries to facilitate the process of the
transfer.
The helper needs to explain the reason for the referral or transfer to the
client. Otherwise, clients could easily feel that they are hopeless, need endless
treatment, or are “bad clients.” If helpers do a thorough job of the three steps of
termination discussed earlier, clients are less likely to have negative feelings
about being referred or transferred.
Dealing With Difficult Clients and Clinical
Situations
Even helpers who are generally talented in using the helping skills have
difficulties with some clients. Sometimes they try to get such clients to quit or
try to refer them to other treatment. Knowledge of different types of clients,
along with good supervision, can assist helpers in dealing with difficult clients.
In this section, I discuss some of the most challenging situations that helpers
449
face.
RELUCTANT AND RESISTANT CLIENTS
Most clients (and indeed most people) have at least some reluctance to change.
Some possible roots of reluctance are lack of trust, fear of falling apart, shame,
fear of change, and lack of motivation to change (Egan, 1994; Young, 2001).
For many clients, it is easier to stick with known misery than to face the
unknown of what life might be like after changing. Signs of reluctance are varied
and often covert. Reluctant clients might talk only about safe subjects, seem
unsure of what they want from therapy, act overly cooperative, set unrealistic
goals and then give up on them, not work very hard at changing, blame others
for their problems, criticize the helper, come late to sessions, fail to keep
appointments, forget to pay fees, intellectualize, terminate prematurely, use
humor, ask for personal favors, present irrelevant material, engage in small talk,
or disclose important things on the way out the door.
Whereas reluctance is relatively passive, resistance (i.e., feeling coerced and
wanting to fight back) is more active (Egan, 1994). Resistant clients often
present themselves as not needing help and as feeling misused. They show
minimal willingness to form a relationship and often try to manipulate the
helper. They might be resentful, try to sabotage the therapy process, terminate as
quickly as possible, and act abusively or belligerently to the helper. Clients who
come to therapy because they are forced to do so (e.g., are ordered by the court
to participate in therapy) are often resistant. For example, one male client who
was ordered by a judge to participate in 12 therapy sessions because he had
urinated on public property was resistant about being there and got very little
out of the experience (he even asked the helper for a date!).
Egan (1994) suggested that resistance can come from seeing no reason for
therapy, resenting being referred for help, feeling awkward about participating
in therapy, or having a history of rebelliousness. Other reasons for resistance are
having values or expectations that are inconsistent with the help being offered,
having negative attitudes about therapy, feeling that going for therapy is
admitting weakness and inadequacy, feeling a lack of trust, or disliking the
helper. Reluctant and resistant clients are typically at the precontemplation stage
in terms of readiness to change (refer back to 
Chapter 2
).
When faced with clients who are reluctant or resistant, helpers often
become confused, panicked, angry, guilty, or depressed (Egan, 1994). They
might try to placate the client, become impatient with or hostile to the client,
become passive, or lower their expectations and do a halfhearted job.
Alternatively, helpers might become warmer and more accepting to win over the
client, engage in a power struggle with the client, allow themselves to be abused
or bullied, or try to terminate the therapy process. The source of the stress is not
450
only the client’s behavior but also the helper’s self-defeating attitudes and
assumptions. Helpers might be saying things to themselves like, “All clients
should be committed to change,” “Every client must like and trust me,” “Every
client can be helped,” “No unwilling client can be helped,” “I am responsible for
what happens to the client,” “I must succeed with every client,” or “I am a
rotten helper if I cannot help this client.” Becoming aware of these self-defeating
attitudes and assumptions can enable helpers to reduce their influence on the
therapy process.
Helpers need to deal with reluctance and resistance, and they also should
avoid reinforcing these processes in clients (Egan, 1994). Goldfried and Davison
(1994) suggested that the role of the helper is to make the reluctant or resistant
client ready for change; hence, the challenge for helpers is to find creative ways
to deal with reluctance and resistance. Here are several suggestions for dealing
with reluctance and resistance (Egan, 1994; Pipes & Davenport, 1999; van
Wormer, 1996; Young, 2001):
Learn to see reluctance and resistance as normal.
Recognize that reluctance and resistance are sometimes a form of
avoidance and are not necessarily due to ill will toward the helper.
Explore your own reluctance and resistance to changing problematic
aspects of your life. Once helpers figure out how they cope with their
own reluctance and resistance, they probably are more able to help
clients with theirs. An awareness of their own foibles can make helpers
more empathic and less impatient.
Examine the quality of your interventions. Helpers might be provoking
resistance by being too directive or too passive or by disliking the
client.
Consider whether you would be willing to do what you’re asking the
client to do.
Be empathic; try to understand what it is like to be the client. It is hard
to fight with someone who is being empathic, accepting, not
threatening, and not wanting to fight. In effect, you join with the
client rather than resisting the client.
Do not use labels, jargon, or bureaucratic language with hostile clients.
Work directly with the client’s reluctance and resistance rather than
ignoring it, being intimidated by it, or being angry at the clients for his
or her behaviors.
Help clients explore feelings about their reluctance or resistance to
therapy.
Be realistic about what you can accomplish with a client.
Establish a relationship on the basis of mutual trust and shared
planning rather than trying to assume all the power.
451
Work with the client to search for incentives for changing.
Draw attention to the behavior and invite the client to explore it.
Listen carefully to what the client says and agree with part of it but
then show that you are doing something different; this can provide
some reassurance and enhance your credibility.
Do not give up.
CLIENTS WHO ARE ANGRY
For most helpers, it is extremely stressful when clients are angry at them and
express that anger in a direct and hostile way (Deutsch, 1984; Farber, 1983;
Hill, Kellems, et al., 2003; Matsakis, 1998; Plutchik, Conte, & Karasu, 1994).
In fact, in one study, more than 80% of helpers said that they felt afraid or
angry when clients were verbally abusive toward them (Pope & Tabachnick,
1993). Matsakis (1998) noted that client anger often disrupts the therapy
process, especially when helpers feel angry, confused, hurt, guilty, anxious, or
incompetent, instead of being able to remain empathic and objective and talk
about the client’s anger.
To avert the negative consequences associated with inappropriately
managing client anger, several authors have suggested that helpers respond to
client anger as they would to any other emotion by encouraging clients to talk
openly about it (Adler, 1984; Burns & Auerbach, 1996; Cahill, 1981; Hill,
Kellems, et al., 2003; Joines, 1995; Kaplan, Brooks, McComb, Shapiro, &
Sodano, 1983; Lynch, 1975; Matsakis, 1998; Newman, 1997; Ormont, 1984).
These authors also recommended that helpers work with clients to help them
uncover underlying feelings, express anger verbally instead of acting it out
physically, and decide what to do about the anger. To achieve these goals, they
suggested that helpers need to listen nonjudgmentally and nondefensively when
clients are angry and try to understand the anger.
Furthermore, if clients are justified in their anger at the helpers, helpers can
apologize and alter their inappropriate or unhelpful behaviors. Clients often
have valuable feedback for helpers, and helpers are wise to attend to this
feedback. If clients are not justified in their anger at helpers, helpers can listen
carefully and try to understand the client’s feelings. Consultation with
supervisors can be helpful in such difficult situations to try to understand what is
happening.
OVERLY TALKATIVE CLIENTS
Some clients talk nonstop about things that are not related to therapeutic goals
(although helpers have to be careful about making judgments about what is
worth discussing in therapy). In the Client Behavior System (see 
Chapter 2
 and
Web Form H), this type of client behavior is considered recounting rather than
452
affective or cognitive–behavioral exploration. Talkativeness is often a defense on
the part of clients, in that it is an attempt to keep others at a distance. In
situations in which the client’s talking is not productive, the helper needs to
intervene cautiously after several minutes and interrupt the talking, saying
something such as, “Sorry to interrupt, but I’m not going to be able to help you
unless I can add a few things here and there. Let me see if I understand what
you’re saying right now . . . .” Subsequently, helpers could hold up a hand or
make a T-sign to indicate a timeout, and say, “Excuse me again, but I want to
make sure I am hearing you correctly.” Thus, helpers let clients know that they
are interrupting to assist (not because of boredom or irritation).
Interruptions done in a hostile manner (“Whoa, hold on there, you’re
talking too much”) could hinder the therapeutic relationship and make the
client feel that she or he had done something bad. If interruptions are done
appropriately, gently, and respectfully, however, clients could feel relieved that
their helpers interrupted them to help them overcome their defenses and learn
how to interact more appropriately.
Rather than getting angry at a client for monopolizing the conversation, the
helper can empathize with the client’s difficulty in communicating. The helper
can also hypothesize about why the client uses talking as a defense, recognizing
that it keeps the client from forming close relationships. Such conceptualization
can lead to the development of better interventions.
Helpers can also use their immediacy skills with overly talkative clients if
they judge that the client can handle the interpersonal challenge. Helpers can
talk about how they feel when clients do not let them have a chance to talk and
ask about clients’ experiences when talking.
OVERLY QUIET CLIENTS
Clients are sometimes shy and do not talk much anywhere. Other times clients
are quiet because they are anxious or have difficulty expressing themselves; they
may fear being in interpersonal situations because of poor interactions with
significant others in the past. At yet other times, clients are resistant and hostile
and may defiantly challenge the helper to break through and get them to talk. It
is important for the helper to try to assess why the client is being quiet. Being
aware of the likely reason for the quietness can enable the helper to think about
what to do. Helpers will want to use a different strategy with the client who is
introverted and shy than with the hostile, defiantly silent client.
First and foremost, the helper can try to adjust to the client’s pace and let
her or him open up gradually. Open questions and probes can be quite helpful
with quiet clients because they clearly specify what the helper wants the client to
talk about. But I would emphasize that often helpers fill silence because of their
own anxiety rather than respecting clients’ needs to go slowly. Again, it can help
453
to talk about this issue with clients.
CLIENTS WITH SUICIDAL IDEATION
When a client mentions suicide or appears to be depressed and considering
suicide, the helper needs to take the suicide gestures seriously. Suicide is a
leading cause of death (the 11th leading cause of death across all age groups, the
third leading cause of death among youth ages 15 to 24) and is often viewed by
clients as the only way out of problems. The helper needs to actively and directly
assess the seriousness of the suicide risk rather than ignoring or minimizing it
(Berman, Jobes, & Silverman, 2006; Rudd, Joiner, Jobes, & King, 1999).
Helpers can assume clients are asking for help when they bring up the topic of
suicide.
There are a series of steps that helpers can follow with suicidal clients. First,
a general assessment of suicidal risk usually involves asking directly about
suicidal potential. Helpers might ask the following questions:
“Are you thinking about suicide?”
“Do you have a plan for attempting suicide?”
“Do you have the means to carry out the plan?”
“Have you attempted suicide in the past?”
“Do you use (or plan on using) alcohol or drugs?”
“Have you been withdrawn and isolated lately?”
“Have you been focused on death (e.g., giving away prized possessions
or planning your funeral)?”
“Are you feeling helpless or worthless?”
“Do you have plans for the future?”
“Who knows about your suicidal feelings?”
“How do you think others would feel if they knew you committed
suicide?”
If a client indicates a clear intent to commit suicide, has a clear viable plan,
and has the means to carry out the plan (e.g., a client plans on killing himself or
herself in the immediate future and has obtained the means necessary to
accomplish this plan), the client is at a high risk of suicide. In such a case, the
helper needs to take steps to ensure the client’s safety (Frankish, 1994). Given
that procedures will vary depending on the setting, helpers should acquaint
themselves with the procedures before seeing clients. The following are general
suggestions.
Ideally, the beginning helper would consult with a colleague or supervisor
to determine the best steps to take. In some cases, helpers (in consultation with
supervisors) might decide that suicidal clients need to be hospitalized to protect
themselves from self-injury. Some clients realize the danger and agree to be
454
hospitalized to receive intensive psychiatric and psychological treatment. In
other cases, helpers may have to admit clients to the hospital against their will.
In yet other cases, helpers (in consultation with supervisors) may ascertain that
hospitalization is not necessary and instead can develop a written behavioral
contract with the client that involves the client agreeing not to hurt himself or
herself and promising to contact the helper or a crisis line for assistance if
thoughts of suicide occur (this should be done only if there is a good
relationship with the client and the helper has help from a supervisor). In these
cases, it may be useful for helpers to notify the client’s family, close friends, or
significant others about the client’s suicidal ideation. Note that when clients
threaten to harm themselves, confidentiality no longer applies. Hence, helpers
can perform the necessary steps to ensure the safety of suicidal clients (still, of
course, being empathic rather than authoritarian and demanding).
Helpers can provide the numbers of 24-hour crisis lines and assist the client
in identifying a support system to help the client. Additional sessions can be
suggested, or the helper can offer to talk to the client by phone between sessions
to provide extra support. Helpers can also refer clients for additional treatment
(e.g., group therapy). If a suicidal client does not show up for treatment, the
helper might consider (after consultation with the supervisor) calling the client.
For legal purposes, helpers should document in writing the procedures that were
followed to assess and assist suicidal clients, including the questions that were
asked, consultations that occurred, the decision-making process, and
interventions that were made.
As helpers who have provided crisis counseling know, dealing with someone
who is contemplating suicide can be challenging and frightening. Beginning
helpers often fear that asking about suicidal feelings encourages clients to think
about or commit suicide. In fact, the opposite is typically true—by talking about
suicidal feelings, clients can bring their worst fears into the open and feel like
someone listens and understands them. Clients often appreciate that helpers
view their problems as serious. If helpers are not willing to discuss suicidal
feelings, clients often feel even more alone, ashamed, strange, or crazy. Perhaps
the worst thing to do is to diminish or negate the feelings (e.g., “You’ll feel
better tomorrow”), point out positive aspects of their lives (e.g., “You have so
much to live for”), or give false reassurance (e.g., “Everything will be okay”).
These responses often result in clients feeling not only depressed and suicidal but
also desperate because they cannot get help, hopeless that they are beyond help,
misunderstood, and worried that their suicidal feelings are unacceptable or too
frightening to others. But it is also important that helpers not feel that they have
to become the only lifeline for the suicidal client, or else the helper will burn out
and not be of help to anyone; mobilizing other resources is crucial.
One of the most difficult issues any mental health professional can face is
dealing with the aftermath of a client’s suicide. Many helpers agonize, feel guilty,
455
and spend a lot of time second-guessing whether there was something else they
could have done to prevent the suicide. A certain amount of introspection is
important and may enable helpers to handle similar situations better in the
future, but helpers should not unnecessarily take on too much responsibility. It
is often wise for helpers to seek supervision and therapy after such a difficult
situation to help them cope and understand their feelings (Knox, Burkard,
Jackson, Schaak, & Hess, 2006).
SEXUAL ATTRACTION
Sexual attraction toward clients is a common occurrence in therapeutic
relationships. Approximately 87% of surveyed helpers reported that they have
been sexually attracted to a client at some point in their careers, and many of
these helpers felt guilty, anxious, and confused about the attraction (Pope,
Keith-Spiegel, & Tabachnick, 1986; Pope & Tabachnick, 1993). Feeling
attracted is not unethical, but acting on the attraction (e.g., socializing with the
client, having a sexual relationship) is considered unethical because it can harm
clients.
As a beginning helper, you may find yourself sexually attracted to someone
you are trying to help. Although discussing this attraction with a supervisor
could be uncomfortable (some helpers might feel ashamed or guilty for having
these feelings), a supervisor can assist you in working through these feelings in a
healthy, rather than destructive, manner (Ladany et al., 1997; Pope, Sonne, &
Holroyd, 1993; The research summary at the end of the chapter further explores
Ladany et al.’s research). It is important to talk about the attraction with a
supervisor to reduce the likelihood of acting out in sessions with clients. For
example, Sally found herself attracted to a client who communicated
admiration, respect, and even awe for the assistance she provided for him.
Although Sally had a good relationship with her partner, she enjoyed the
positive feedback from the client and began thinking about him in a romantic
way. Fortunately, she talked with her supervisor, who helped her sort out her
feelings and come to understand that they related at least partially to the
intimacy of the helping situation. Sally benefited from coming to understand
how these feelings developed and how they could negatively influence the
therapy process. The supervisor also normalized the helper’s feelings by letting
the helper know that many helpers (including the supervisor) become attracted
to clients during their career.
Yet another difficult situation is when the client expresses sexual attraction
to the helper, especially given that it is often gratifying for the helper to feel
attractive. The helper needs to strike a balance between allowing the client to
express his or her feelings and not actively encouraging the attraction. Of course,
any sexual contact is unethical, as is becoming involved with clients outside of
456
sessions. Consultation with a supervisor and self-reflection about one’s
motivations are important here.
Example of an Extended Interaction
An example of a therapeutic interaction is presented here to illustrate working
through all three stages (exploration, insight, and action). For ease of
presentation, this example presents the three stages in a single session, although
working through all three stages for a given problem often requires more than a
single session. The process is condensed considerably to allow for illustration of
all three stages.
The example involves a first session with a young woman, Maria, who
sought assistance because she could not decide on a major. Career concerns are
common issues that many people struggle with throughout the life cycle (Brown
& Brooks, 1991; Zunker, 1994). However, career difficulties are not as
simplistic as psychologists once thought. It is not simply a matter of deciding on
one’s talents, interests, and skills. Our career identities are intertwined with our
personal lives (Blustein, 1987; Brown, 1985; Hackett, 1993; Herr, 1989;
Richardson, 1993; Savickas, 1994; Spokane, 1989) and hence both must be
addressed in the helping process.
EXPLORATION STAGE
Helper
:
 
Tell me a little about yourself and why you came for helping
today. (The helper uses an open question or probe to start the
interaction and to allow Maria to communicate her most
pressing concerns.)
Client
:
 
I’m a junior at the university. I should have declared a major
already, but I just cannot decide what I want to do. I feel stuck,
and they’re trying to force me to declare something in the next
couple of weeks. I don’t want to just put something down and
then have to shift after a semester or two. But I just don’t have
anything that I’m particularly good at. You know, in high
school when everyone else was in plays or orchestra or dancing
or sports, I wasn’t really doing anything. I don’t have any major
talents. I seem to be mediocre in everything.
Helper
:
 
You sound anxious about having to declare a major so
quickly. (The helper wants to focus Maria on her feelings about
the urgency of the situation.)
Client
:
 
I am really anxious. You wouldn’t believe how anxious I am.
I haven’t been able to sleep at night. I just keep trying to figure
457
out what I want to do with my life. I guess I have never had any
major ambitions.
Helper
:
 
I wonder if you have feelings about trying to figure out who
you are? (The helper wants to determine how much of Maria’s
life is influenced by this issue.)
Client
:
 
I have been feeling out of sorts. But I guess it’s really hard to
tell how much of it is because of trying to choose a major and
not knowing who I am or where I’m going, and how much of it
is due to feeling badly that I have never had a boyfriend and
also feeling under stress that my parents are going through a
divorce.
Helper
:
 
Wow! Sounds like you have a lot of difficult things going on
right now. (The helper wants to support Maria.)
Client
:
 
Yeah, it’s been a rough semester. I just found out my parents
were going to get a divorce over the holidays. They said that
they stayed together until my younger sister went to college.
I’m not sure that their staying together was actually so good for
us because they were always fighting. Each of my parents has
always talked to me about how horrible the other one was. I
feel like I’ve always been the mediator, trying to help each of
them understand the other.
Helper
:
 
How was it for you being the one in the middle? (The
helper wants to allow Maria to explore her feelings more
deeply.)
Client
:
 
Part of me liked it because they both needed me. But it was
also pretty bad because I felt like they both depended on me
too much and I couldn’t live my own life. I was glad to get
away to college, but then I felt guilty about leaving. I go home
a lot. I also feel like I have to take care of my little sister and
shield her from the pain. I don’t want her to end up feeling as
badly about herself as I do about myself.
Helper
:
 
It sounds like you feel pretty overwhelmed right now. (The
helper wants to help Maria become aware of her feelings.)
Client
:
 
I do. I feel about 20 years older than the other kids here.
They are always talking about parties and drinking. It all seems
so trivial.
Helper
:
 
You mentioned that you have to choose a major soon. You
also said that there’s nothing you’re particularly good in. Tell
me more about that. (The helper wants to guide Maria back to
exploring her problem in choosing a major.)
Client
:
 
Well, I think I’m an average student. I get 
B
s in most of my
courses. I probably don’t put as much time in as I could, but I
458
just can’t get into studying.
Helper
:
 
Tell me something about the courses that you have enjoyed.
(The helper wants to help Maria explore specific interests.)
Client
:
 
Well, I’m rotten at math and science. I almost flunked
biology last semester. I guess the classes I have enjoyed most are
my psychology courses. I like trying to figure people out. You
know, I’m always the person whom people talk to about their
problems. I’m taking this class in helping skills and am excited
about it. I think I’m pretty good at helping. At least I enjoy
being a helper.
INSIGHT STAGE
Helper
:
 
What do you think got you so excited about learning
helping skills? (The helper wants to assist Maria in thinking
about her motives.)
Client
:
 
Everyone has always come to me with their problems, and I
feel like I’m good at listening. And I was able to help my sister
when she got so upset.
Helper
:
 
I wonder if operating as a helper in your family helped you
become interested in the helping field? (The helper tries an
interpretation to see whether Maria can engage in the
interpretive process.)
Client
:
 
You know, you may be right. Maybe helping my sister and
mediating my parents’ arguments helped me develop effective
helping skills. It’s funny that I’ve never really thought about
majoring in psychology before. I guess my parents have always
looked down on psychology. They would never go to a helper
because they have always said people should solve their own
problems. Well, they didn’t do too good a job on their own.
But I don’t know, what do you think I should do? Why did
you choose psychology?
Helper
:
 
I really liked to help other people with their problems. I also
found that all my friends turned to me to talk about their
problems. (The helper uses disclosure to reassure Maria that her
feelings are normal.)
Client
:
 
That’s interesting. Do you like the field?
Helper
:
 
Yes, I like it a lot. Tell me more about your thoughts about
psychology. (The helper wants to turn the focus back to
Maria.)
Client
:
 
Well, I think I might like to do it, but I don’t know if I’m
smart enough for it. I’ve heard an awful lot about how you have
459
to be really smart to get into graduate school in psychology. I
might not be able to make it.
Helper
:
 
You know, you say you’re not really smart, but I haven’t
heard much evidence for that. (The helper challenges Maria
about her lack of self-efficacy.)
Client
:
 
Well, I haven’t gotten very good grades in college. I did get
pretty good grades in high school though, and my SAT scores
were pretty high. In fact, I was close to the top of my class.
Helper
:
 
So something has happened during college to make you lose
your confidence and not do as well in your classes. What might
have contributed to your inability to study? (The helper wants
to facilitate Maria to think about insight and so restates and
then asks an open question.)
Client
:
 
I’m not sure. Perhaps it has to do with my family, but I’m
not sure how.
Helper
:
 
Perhaps your concern about your parents and leaving home
has distracted you from your ability to study. (The helper
works with Maria to stimulate insight. Maria had a glimmer
that her difficulties were related to her family, so the helper
gives an interpretation that goes just beyond what Maria has
stated.)
Client
:
 
Hmm, I had never thought about that, but you’re probably
right. I’ve been so concerned about everyone else that I haven’t
had time to take care of myself. It’s not really fair that my
parents messed up my life just because they can’t get their act
together.
Helper
:
 
Yeah, you seem angry at them. (Maria has responded well to
the interpretation, so the helper wants to help her explore her
feelings about her discoveries.)
Client
:
 
I am. I have been so worried about leaving my sister at home
and not being able to calm my parents during their horrible
arguments. These are supposed to be the best years of my life.
And all I’m concerned about is them. When do I get my
chance?
Helper
:
 
I wonder if your parents really need you as much as you
think they do? (The helper challenges Maria about her assumed
need to be in the middle.)
Client
:
 
Maybe they don’t. In fact, maybe if I quit interfering, they
would be able to make a decision about what they need to do.
And, you know, my sister is not a kid anymore. She’s 18 years
old. I mean, I love them, but maybe I’ve been doing too much,
going home all the time.
460
ACTION STAGE
Helper
:
 
So what would you like to do differently? (The helper wants
to move Maria into thinking about how to make changes in her
life.)
Client
:
 
Well, I think I’m going to tell my parents that I am going to
stop listening to each of their problems. I am going to suggest
that they go to a helper. It’s been so helpful talking to you.
That’s what I think they need to do. If they don’t do it, that’s
their problem, but I’ve got to get out from the middle.
Helper
:
 
What feelings might come up for you in telling your parents
your decision not to be in the middle? (The helper wants to
have Maria explore her feelings about this change.)
Client
:
 
I’m pretty fed up right now, so I think I could do it. The
difficult part will come when my mom calls late at night crying
and says I’m the only one who really understands her. You
wouldn’t believe how many times she’s done that right before a
major exam.
Helper
:
 
What could you do when that happens? (The helper wants
to guide Maria into problem solving what to do in the specific
situation.)
Client
:
 
Well, I could go to the library to study when I really need to
focus on my work. Then my mom couldn’t reach me. I really
study better at the library anyway because the residence hall is
so noisy.
Helper
:
 
That’s a great idea. (The helper reinforces Maria’s feelings.)
Client
:
 
Yeah, I don’t know why I didn’t think of that sooner. I guess
I was just stuck in thinking I was the only one who could help
my mom. You know, maybe I even kept her from going to a
helper because she could always talk to me. In fact, maybe I
wanted her to talk to me because it made me feel so important
and helpful.
Helper
:
 
Yeah, that might be hard to give up. You feel pretty special
when you believe that you’re the one who can make everyone
feel better. (The helper wants to warn Maria that it might be
hard to change.)
Client
:
 
Yeah, it could be hard. But I think it’s time to start living my
own life instead of living in their world.
Helper
:
 
What could you do to make the transition easier? (Again,
the helper wants to prepare Maria for the difficulties involved
in changing.)
461
Client
:
 
Well, I would like to continue to talk with you. Would that
be possible? I think if I had your support, it would be easier to
change.
Helper
:
 
Sure, we could arrange for eight sessions. That’s the limit of
the number of sessions I can offer to you through the
counseling center. (The helper wants to let Maria know the
limits of her availability.)
Client
:
 
That would be great. Thanks.
Helper
:
 
Now back to the major. What are your thoughts about what
you would like to do about that at this point? (The helper
wants to bring some closure to the topic about the major since
that was Maria’s presenting concern.)
Client
:
 
I’m leaning toward psychology. I get excited about some of
the psychology courses I’ve had, particularly the ones that
involve personality and helping people. But I’m also interested
in English. I’ve always liked to write. I’ve kept a journal for
years. I have a fantasy of some day writing a novel or working
on a newspaper.
Helper
:
 
Perhaps you can do some more thinking about your likes
and dislikes before the next session. It would also be a good
idea to gather some information about majors and careers.
There’s some excellent information in the career center on
campus. Perhaps you could go there before our next session.
(The helper wants to give Maria specific guidance about how to
proceed with this issue but does not want to seem too pushy.)
Client
:
 
Terrific. Sounds like a great idea. Where do I take the tests?
Helper
:
 
I’ll take you down and show you where to sign up after the
session. How are you feeling about what we’ve done today?
(The helper wants to give Maria specific information about
how to find the tests and also wants to assess how Maria felt
about the session.)
Client
:
 
I feel better than I’ve felt for so long. I actually have energy. I
can’t wait to take the tests. I can’t wait to talk to my parents. I
think they are going to understand that I need to do this for
myself. They’ve been worried about me. It’s not like me to be
as upset as I’ve been. I can see some light at the end of the
tunnel. It’s very exciting.
Helper
:
 
Good for you. So let’s plan on meeting next week at the
same time?
Although this example may seem a little too easy, it is fairly typical of
sessions with motivated undergraduate psychology majors at my university.
462
Again, as I noted earlier, every session is different, but this example provides
some idea of how a beginning session might go.
Concluding Comments
I hope this book has provided you with the essential tools to begin your journey
toward becoming a helper. I would encourage you to complete the Counselor
Self-Efficacy Measure (Web Form K) so you can make a self-assessment of your
therapy skills, your skills in managing sessions, and your skills in terms of
handling difficult clinical situations. You can complete the measure for how you
feel right now, as well as retrospectively for how you think you were before
reading this book and practicing the skills. This assessment might give you some
ideas about what you have learned as well as areas that still need work.
As a result of learning about helping skills, many of you may have decided
that you would like to pursue a career that involves extensive use of these skills;
others may have decided not to pursue such a career. Regardless of the path you
have chosen, these helping skills can be used to enhance your personal and
professional functioning. I encourage each of you to set specific goals on how to
continue to develop these skills, given that this text and these practice exercises
provide only a foundation on which your skills can be cultivated. Many sites are
available for advanced training in therapy skills (e.g., graduate programs in
counseling and clinical psychology, social work, counseling, psychiatry,
psychiatric nursing). Volunteering at nonprofit agencies also provides a useful
setting for obtaining additional practice for your skills while assisting people
with pressing concerns. Whatever your path, I hope that it involves continued
exploration of your feelings, increased self-awareness and insight, and positive
changes that enable you to fulfill your potential and succeed in your
interpersonal relationships and in your career.
I would appreciate any feedback (using the form at the end of the book)
that you might have about this text. I continue to revise this book to make it
responsive to student needs, and hearing about your experiences helps me do
that.
Thank you for joining me on this journey of learning helping skills. I wish
you the best in your continued endeavors.
What Do You Think?
What do you think would be the effects of discussing confidentiality
for the therapeutic relationship?
463
How would you know when you have explored enough?
Discuss other possible ways that helpers could manage sessions (e.g.,
begin sessions, develop a focus, end sessions).
Debate whether clients should ever be forced to go for helping.
Describe the personality characteristics a helper could have that might
influence her or his ability to respond effectively to reluctant or
resistant clients, overly talkative clients, suicidal clients, or angry
clients.
What would you do if you felt sexual attraction for a client?
What steps might you take if you were a helper dealing with a suicidal
client?
What do you think about the suggestions regarding termination?
Who should decide that it is an appropriate time to terminate, and
what marker should help them decide that termination is appropriate?
What do you think the ideal length of a therapy relationship is?
Debate the issue of whether time limits are beneficial for the
therapeutic process.
What theoretical orientation is emerging for you? Describe your goals
for learning more about this theoretical orientation.
What goals do you have for the continued development of your
therapy skills?
464
RESEARCH SUMMARY
Sexual Attraction
Citation:
 Ladany, N., O’Brien, K. M., Hill, C. E., Melincoff, D. S., Knox, S., & Petersen,
D. A. (1997). Sexual attraction toward clients, use of supervision, and prior training: A
qualitative study of predoctoral psychology interns. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 44,
413–424. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.44.4.413
Rationale: 
Researchers (Gabbard, 1994, 1995; Pope, Keith-Spiegel, & Tabachnik, 1986)
have found that more than 84% of therapists have been sexually attracted to a client at
some point during their practice of psychotherapy. Such feelings are generally thought to
be both reality-based but also evidence of countertransference and clearly need to be dealt
with because sexual contact between therapists and clients is expressly considered unethical.
Ladany et al. wondered about the experience of being attracted to a client, how the
attraction develops, what client and therapist factors are associated with the attraction, the
impact of the attraction on the therapy, and how the attraction was managed.
Method: 
Thirteen psychology interns (students at the end of their doctoral training) were
interviewed about one case in which they felt sexual attraction. Interviews were analyzed
using qualitative research methods.
Interesting 
Findings:
Sexual attraction typically emerged as the relationship grew closer.
Therapists typically felt scared and guilty about feeling attracted to a client.
Therapists typically described clients to whom they became attracted as physically attractive and good therapy
clients (e.g., brilliant, sophisticated, articulate).
Therapists did not think that clients were aware of their attraction.
Therapists typically believed that they were more involved, invested, caring, and attentive than usual when they
felt attracted to the client, but they also believed that the attraction created tension or distance and they had
trouble terminating with the client.
Therapists typically believed that their sexual attraction did not influence therapy outcome, and they reported that
their feelings were resolved by the end of therapy.
Therapists typically reported that they tried to manage the attraction by spending time thinking about it (self-
supervision). Only half of therapists disclosed their attraction to their supervisors; those who did talk to their
supervisors about it found it to be helpful because supervisors normalized, validated, and supported them.
Conclusions:
Attraction can play a major role for therapists in the process of working with clients.
Therapists often feel guilty and anxious about being sexually attracted to their clients. Therapists may be especially
vulnerable when clients are particularly engaging.
Implications for Therapy:
Therapists need to be aware of their feelings about clients, and try to understand where these feelings come from.
Discussing both positive and negative feelings about clients with a trusted supervisor can be helpful.
Supervisors should be alert to the possibilities of both positive and negative feelings about clients and should ask
supervisees about such feelings.
BONUS
MATERIALS
Practice exercises, labs, and other resources for students and teachers are
available on the companion website: 
http://pubs.apa.org/books/supp/hill4
.
465
Glossary
Acculturation:
 adapting to the norms of the dominant culture.
Action:
 making changes in one’s thoughts, emotions, or behaviors.
Action stage:
 helpers collaborate with clients to explore the idea of change,
explore options for change, and help them figure out how to make changes.
Adaptors:
 habitual nonverbal acts that are often outside awareness and have no
communicative purpose (e.g., head scratching, licking one’s lips, playing with
a pen).
Anal stage:
 the second stage of development from a psychoanalytic perspective;
babies obtain their gratification from anal (toileting) activities.
Approval–reassurance:
 provides emotional support, reassurance,
encouragement, and reinforcement.
Assertiveness training:
 teaching clients to stand up for their rights in a
nonaggressive and nonpassive way that does not infringe on the rights of
others.
Attachment theory:
 explains the behavioral and emotional responses that keep
young children in close proximity to caregivers. With secure attachment,
people feel connected with a significant person as a secure base and feel safe
to explore; with insecure attachment, the person worries about whether she
or he can rely on others, deal with emotions, or is worthy of care. If the
caretaker repeatedly withdraws when the child seeks proximity, the child
learns to not rely on others for help when threatened. If the attachment
figure is unpredictable, the child typically tries even harder to get a response
from the caregiver.
Attending:
 helpers orienting themselves physically toward clients so that they
can listen.
Autonomy:
 an ethical principle that refers to the right (of both the consumer
and the provider) to make choices and take actions, provided the results do
not adversely affect others.
Awareness:
 recognition of feelings or thoughts but not of the underlying
466
motivations for these feelings or thoughts.
Baby steps:
 small changes.
Behavior change:
 increasing desired behaviors or decreasing undesired
behaviors.
Behavioral rehearsal:
 teaching skills for responding in more adaptive ways to
specific life situations.
Behavioral theory:
 an approach that focuses on behavior; the assumption is that
behavior is learned and can be modified.
Beneficence:
 an ethical principle that refers to the intent “to do good” by
helping and promoting growth in others.
Blank screen:
 when the helper is neutral and reveals as little about himself or
herself as possible so that the client can project his or her own issues onto the
helper.
Body posture:
 orienting one’s body (typically forward or back), to communicate
listening to the other person.
Boundaries:
 the ground rules and limits of the helping relationship, typically
about the structure of helping (e.g., length, fees, policies about touching and
violence, confidentiality) or the interpersonal nature of the relationship (e.g.,
not having sex with client, having boundaries on friendships with clients).
Brief therapy:
 helping is limited to a few sessions.
Burnout:
 being emotionally or physically exhausted from caring for others.
Case conceptualization:
 hypotheses about the client’s functioning and
dynamics, typically based on theoretical orientation and observation of the
client.
Chair work:
 exercises that help the client work on conflicts between two
opposing sides in oneself (e.g., “I wish I could, but I’m scared” or “I’d like to,
but I stop myself”; two-chair technique) or conflicts with significant others
(empty-chair technique).
Challenges:
 point out maladaptive beliefs and thoughts, discrepancies, or
contradictions of which the client is unaware or unwilling to change.
Client:
 the person receiving support.
Client-centered theory:
 a theory based on humanistic assumptions that people
are oriented toward self-actualization and that clients are active agents
engaged in a self-healing process.
Closed question:
 inquiries that request a one- or two-word answer (“yes,” “no,”
confirmation) and is used to gather data or information.
Cognitive theory:
 helps clients restructure their thinking and make it more
rational.
Collaboration:
 working jointly with clients to explore, gain insight, and move
to action, rather than giving clients answers.
Collectivism:
 the relative importance placed on the group as opposed to the
individual. Collectivist cultures tend to focus more on the family and view
467
people as interdependent.
Compassion:
 feeling aware of and open to another person’s suffering without
judgment. Compassion goes beyond empathy and understanding by
genuinely allowing oneself to feel the pain and suffering and desire to relieve
it. Another way to think of compassion is loving kindness, of genuinely
caring about the other person because of who they are, not because they
deserve it or not.
Confidentiality:
 the ethical principle of not divulging information shared in the
helping session, except in limited circumstances (intent to harm self or other,
abuse, need for supervision).
Consciousness:
 mental activity that is readily available to awareness.
Contemplation:
 thinking about change.
Core conflictual relationship theme:
 describes how people engage in typical
interpersonal patterns, composed of wishes or needs, expected responses from
others, and subsequent responses from the self.
Countertransference:
 the helper’s reactions to the client that originate in the
unresolved issues of the helper.
Cultural competence:
 being culturally sensitive, particularly in terms of striving
to understand culture and how it influences work with clients; striving to
understand how culture influences beliefs about helping; honestly
confronting biases, prejudices, and discriminatory behaviors and working to
keep them out of the helping process; having a wide range of helping skills
and using them flexibly to fit the needs of clients from different cultures;
being knowledgeable about the cultures of clients; understanding the extent
to which discrimination and oppression influence clients’ lives and
contribute to their problems; acknowledging and addressing cultural
differences while still communicating willingness to help, seeking supervision
or referring when necessary.
Culture:
 the customs, values, attitudes, beliefs, characteristics, and behaviors
shared by a group of people at a particular time in history, or any group of
people who identify or associate with one another on the basis of some
common purpose, need, or similarity of background. Culture includes
race/ethnicity, gender, age, ideology, religion, socioeconomic status, sexual
orientation, disability status, occupation, and dietary preferences.
Decision making:
 helping clients articulate their options, explore their values,
evaluate the options according to their values, and then make choices.
Defenses/Defense mechanisms:
 unconscious methods for dealing with anxiety
through denial or distortion of reality.
Denial:
 actively rejecting painful affect.
Direct guidance:
 making suggestions, giving directives, or providing advice for
what helpers think clients should do outside of helping sessions.
Disclosure of fact:
 reveals information about the helper.
468
Disclosure of feelings:
 reveals personal nonimmediate information about the
helper’s feelings to provide a model and help the client explore feelings.
Disclosure of insight:
 reveals an understanding the helper has learned about
himself or herself and is used to facilitate the client’s understanding of his or
her thoughts, feelings, behaviors, and issues.
Disclosure of similarities:
 reveals personal nonimmediate information about
ways in which helpers and clients are similar; used to encourage clients to
think about their personality.
Disclosure of strategies:
 helpers reveal strategies they personally have used in
the past to provide ideas for clients and help clients feel less alone or
different.
Displacement:
 shifting uncomfortable feelings toward someone who is less
powerful and less threatening than the individual from whom the feelings
originated.
Dual relationships:
 when someone in power (e.g., a helper, professor,
supervisor) adds another role to his or her interaction with a less powerful
individual (e.g., a client, student, supervisee). Dual relationships may lead to
the harm or exploitation of the less powerful person.
Ego:
 an internal mechanism that develops to help the child delay gratification
and negotiate with the outside world.
Electra conflict:
 a psychoanalytic construct suggesting that girls develop an
attraction for their fathers; resolution occurs when girls identify with their
mothers.
Emblems:
 nonverbal substitutes for words (e.g., a wave is a universal greeting).
Emotion-focused therapy:
 an approach that assumes that emotions are at the
core of both unhealthy and healthy functioning and thus need to be the focus
of intervention.
Empathy:
 understanding clients at both a cognitive level (their thoughts and
expressions) and an affective level (their feelings). Empathy also includes
genuinely caring about the client, nonjudgmentally accepting the client,
being able to predict the client’s reactions, and communicating one’s
experience to the client in a sensitive and accurate manner. Empathy is not a
specific response type or skill; rather, it is an attitude or manner of
responding with genuine caring and a lack of judgment. Empathy involves a
deep respect for clients and for the clients’ willingness and courage to explore
their problems, gain insights, and make changes.
Enculturation:
 refers to retaining the norms of one’s indigenous culture.
Ethics:
 principles and standards that ensure that professionals provide quality
services and are respectful of the rights of the people with whom they work.
Existential psychotherapy:
 an approach that focuses on helping clients examine
existential issues such as meaning of life, death anxiety, isolation, and
freedom.
469
Exploration:
 talking in depth about thoughts and feelings related to the clients’
problems.
Exploration stage:
 helpers work with clients to enable them to establish a
relationship, tell their stories, talk about problems, and express related
feelings.
Extinction:
 reduces the probability of a behavior occurring by with holding
reinforcers after the behavior is established.
Eye contact:
 looking directly into another person’s eyes.
Facial expression:
 communicating thoughts and feelings through eyes, mouth,
and facial muscles.
Fidelity:
 an ethical principle related to keeping promises and being trustworthy
in relationships with others.
Focus:
 working on one problem at a time.
Focusing:
 a method for helping the client experience feelings at a deeper level.
Free association:
 saying whatever thoughts come to mind without censure.
Gaze avoidance:
 avoiding looking directly at another person.
Generalization:
 the transfer of learning from one situation to similar situations.
Gestures:
 arm movements that often communicate meaning, especially when
used in conjunction with verbal activity.
Giving feedback:
 giving information to the client about his or her behaviors or
impact on others.
Giving information:
 providing specific data, facts, resources, answers to
questions, or opinions.
Grammatical style:
 the way language is used.
Head nods:
 moving one’s head up and down to indicate listening to another
person and encouraging him or her to continue talking.
Helper:
 an individual providing assistance to another person.
Helping:
 one person assisting another in exploring feelings, gaining insight, and
making changes.
Homework assignments:
 a type of direct guidance; given to help clients practice
what they learned in session.
Hot buttons:
 biases that get triggered or set off in the helping setting.
Id:
 primitive urges that seek immediate gratification.
Identification:
 emulating characteristics in others.
Illustrators:
 nonverbal behaviors that accompany speech (e.g., measuring the
size of a fish with the hands).
Immediacy:
 helper’s disclosure of immediate feelings about the client, himself
or herself in relation to the client, or the therapeutic relationship.
Individualism:
 the relative importance placed on the individual as opposed to
the group, such that people are viewed as independent and autonomous.
Information about the helping process:
 educates clients about what to expect
during helping.
470
Informed consent:
 agreement to the contract involved in the helping process,
typically related to such things as length of treatment, fees, confidentiality,
and limits on confidentiality.
Insight:
 seeing things from a new perspective, making connections between
things, or having an understanding of why things happen as they do.
Intellectual insight refers to having a cognitive understanding or explanation,
whereas emotional insight refers to having connected affect to intellect such
that there is a sense of personal involvement and responsibility for the
understanding.
Insight stage:
 helpers work with clients to assist them in gaining awareness and
insight.
Intakes:
 an initial session with clients in which helpers get background
information, formulate a diagnosis, assess for risk, and determine the best
treatment.
Intellectualization:
 avoiding painful feelings by focusing on ideas.
Intentions:
 conscious and unconscious goals or plans for what the helper would
like to accomplish in sessions in working with clients.
Internal representations:
 images clients form of their helpers to help them cope
between sessions.
Internal working models:
 mental representations of self, others, and
relationships.
Interpersonal psychotherapy:
 an approach that helps clients work on
interpersonal relationships, with a major emphasis on examining the
therapeutic relationship.
Interpretations:
 interventions that go beyond what a client has overtly stated or
recognized and present a new meaning, reason, or explanation for behaviors,
thoughts, or feelings so clients can see problems in a new way.
Interruption:
 cutting off the other person’s speech.
Justice:
 an ethical principle of fairness or equality of opportunities and resources
for all people.
Kinesics:
 the relationship of bodily movements (arm and leg movements, head
nods) and communication.
Listening:
 trying to hear and understand the messages that clients communicate
at both verbal and nonverbal levels.
Marker:
 indicators of readiness for the implementation of a particular skill.
Metacommunication:
 communication about communication; helpers disclose
to clients about their perceptions of and reactions to client actions.
Mindfulness:
 attending to each aspect of experience as it unfolds in the present
moment.
Minimal encouragers:
 nonlanguage sounds, nonwords, and simple words such
as “um-hmm,” “yeah,” and “wow” that encourage others to continue talking.
Modeling or observational learning:
 occurs when a person observes another
471
person (a model) perform a behavior and receive consequences.
Narrative therapy:
 an approach that helps clients tell their stories and then
rewrite their stories in more adaptive ways.
Narratives:
 stories or accounts of events or experiences.
Nonmaleficence:
 an ethical principle that refers to helpers ensuring that their
interventions and actions do not inadvertently harm their clients.
Observing:
 paying attention to what is going on overtly with clients in terms of
nonverbal behaviors and mannerisms, trying to pick up on the behavioral
cues of the client and how the client is coming across.
Oedipal conflict:
 a psychoanalytic construct suggesting that boys develop an
attraction for their mothers; resolution occurs when boys identify with their
fathers.
Open-ended therapy:
 a structure such that an ending is not initially planned
but occurs naturally.
Open questions about the relationship/process statements:
 the helper invites
the client to share feelings about the therapeutic relationship. These inquiries
are probes into the client’s reactions to the relationship and address what is
going on in the immediate moment.
Open questions and probes for action:
 questions aimed specifically at helping
clients explore making changes.
Open questions and probes for feelings:
 ask clients to clarify or explore feelings
but do not request specific information or purposely limit the nature of the
client response.
Open questions and probes for insight:
 questions that invite clients to think
about deeper meanings for their thoughts, feelings, or behaviors.
Open questions and probes for thoughts:
 ask clients to clarify or explore
thoughts in general but do not request specific information or purposely
limit the nature of the client response.
Operant conditioning:
 behaviors are controlled by their consequences.
Oral stage:
 The first stage of development from psychoanalytic theory in which
babies obtain their gratification from oral (eating, biting) activities.
Outcome:
 changes that occur as a result of what goes on during helping
sessions.
Preconscious:
 thoughts and experiences that can be accessed if one attends to it.
Precontemplation:
 not thinking about change; not being ready to change.
Process:
 what goes on during helping sessions.
Process advisement:
 directing clients to do things 
within
 helping sessions; a type
of advice or direct guidance that is confined to directing what goes on in the
session.
Process notes:
 written summaries of what occurred in sessions.
Projection:
 perceiving that others have the characteristics that are unconsciously
disliked in one’s self.
472
Proxemics:
 how space is used in interactions.
Psychodynamic/psychoanalytic theory:
 a complex, rich description of the
development of personality and treatment, based on examining the inner and
often unconscious dynamics (underlying processes such as feelings, ideas,
impulses, drives) of people.
Punishment:
 occurs after a behavior and reduces the probability that the
behavior will occur again.
Racial identity:
 refers to how individuals identify with their racial or ethnic
culture.
Rationalization:
 making excuses for an anxiety-producing thought or behavior.
Reaction formation:
 acting in a manner that is opposite to what one is feeling.
Reactions:
 conscious and unconscious responses to the other’s interventions or
behaviors.
Real relationship:
 the genuine, nondistorted connection between the helper and
client.
Referral:
 giving a recommendation for another service provider. The helper
provides the name of another provider but leaves it up to the client to follow
through.
Reflections of feelings:
 statements that repeat or paraphrase the client’s
statements, including an explicit emphasis on the client’s feelings.
Regression: 
engaging in behaviors from an earlier stage of development at times
when one is anxious.
Regulators:
 nonverbal behaviors (e.g., head nods, postural shifts) that monitor
the flow of conversation.
Reinforcement:
 anything that follows a behavior and increases the probability
that the behavior will occur again. An event, behavior, privilege, or material
object whose addition increases the likelihood of a behavior occurring again
is a positive reinforcer. Primary reinforcers (e.g., food, water, sex) are
biological necessities, whereas secondary reinforcers (e.g., praise, money) gain
their reinforcing properties through association with primary reinforcers.
Relaxation:
 a bodily state of being nonanxious, at ease, at peace, relieved of
pressure, low tension, or absence of arousal.
Reluctance:
 being passively unwilling to change, perhaps because of lack of
trust, fear of falling apart, shame, fear of change, or lack of motivation to
change.
Repression:
 not allowing painful material into one’s conscious thought.
Resistance:
 active unwillingness to change because of feeling coerced and
wanting to fight back.
Restatements:
 a repeating or paraphrasing of the content or meaning of what a
client has said; typically contain fewer but similar words as the client’s and
are more concrete and clear than the client’s statement.
Schemas:
 clusters of related thoughts, feelings, actions, and images.
473
Self-aw
areness:
 a stable characteristic (i.e., self-knowledge or self-insight) or a
state of heightened self-focus (i.e., sensitivity in the here-and-now).
Self-care:
 taking care of oneself.
Self-compassion:
 having compassion for yourself or loving yourself as you truly
are.
Self-reflection:
 thinking about oneself and one’s motivations.
Session management:
 organizing one’s time, goals, and tasks in helping
sessions.
Sexual attraction:
 feeling physically or emotionally drawn to another person.
Shaping:
 the gradual training of a complex response by reinforcing closer and
closer approximations to the desired behavior.
Silence:
 a pause during which neither helper nor client is speaking.
Social support:
 having a network of family and friends on whom one can count
for emotional or instrumental help.
Skills:
 verbal interventions that helpers use to intervene with clients.
Sublimation:
 changing unacceptable impulses into socially appropriate actions.
Suicide ideation:
 considering killing oneself.
Summaries:
 ties together several ideas or picks out the highlights and general
themes of the content expressed by the client. Summaries do not go beyond
what the client has said or delve into the reasons for feelings or behaviors but
consolidate what has been said.
Superego:
 an internalization of society’s morals and values; develops through
resolution of the Oedipal/Electra conflict.
Supervision:
 a more experienced helper consulting with or working with a less
experienced helper to help the less experienced person become a better
helper.
Termination:
 ending the helping relationship.
Theoretical orientation:
 beliefs about how people develop and how to help
people change.
Therapeutic relationship:
 the feelings and attitudes that counseling participants
have toward one another and the manner in which those are expressed.
Time-limited therapy:
 helping is limited by a certain number of sessions.
Tone of voice:
 the modulation of the voice to communicate different emotions.
Topdog:
 one’s controlling and dominant voice that engages in criticism
(“shoulds”).
Transfer:
 giving a recommendation for another service provider and facilitating
the process of switching to someone else for treatment.
Transference:
 client distortions of the helper based on past experiences. The
client places on the therapist characteristics that belong to other people with
whom one has unresolved issues.
Unconditional positive regard:
 caring about, understanding, and appreciating
clients for who they are, regardless of how they behave.
474
Unconscious:
 mental activity that is not available to immediate awareness.
Underdog:
 one’s passive voice that often whines and acts helpless.
Undoing:
 behaving in a ritualistic manner to take away or make amends for
unacceptable behaviors.
Values clarification:
 helping people become aware of and clarify what their lives
are for and what is worth working for.
Veracity:
 the ethical principle of telling the truth.
Virtuous manner:
 the ethical principle of behaving in a virtuous manner.
Virtues are not as concerned with laws and rules as much as much as with
striving to be a person of positive moral character.
Working (or therapeutic) alliance:
 the part of the relationship focused on the
therapeutic work. The alliance consists of the bond (i.e., the connection
between the helper and client), an agreement on goals (a consensus about
changes the client needs to make), and an agreement on tasks (a consensus
about what is to take place during the helping process to meet the goals).
475
References
Adler, G. (1984). Special problems for the therapist. 
International Journal of
Psychiatry in Medicine,
 
14,
 91–98.
Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1989). Attachments beyond infancy. 
American
Psychologist,
 
44,
 709–716. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.44.4.709
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). 
Patterns of
attachment: A psychological study of the Strange Situation.
 Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Alberti, R. E., & Emmons, M. L. (2001). 
Your perfect right: 
Assertiveness and
equality in your life and relationships
 (8th ed.). Atascadero, CA: Impact.
American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy. (2002). 
AAMFT code of
ethics.
 Alexandria, VA: Author.
American Psychological Association. (2003). Guidelines for multicultural
education, training, research, practice, and organizational change for
psychologists. 
American Psychologist,
 
58,
 377–402
American Psychological Association. (2010). 
Ethical principles of psychologists and
code of conduct (2002, Amended June 1, 2010).
 Retrieved from
http://www.apa.org/ethics/code/index.aspx
American Psychological Association, with Hill, C. E. (2013). 
Dream work in
practice
 [DVD]. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Andersen, B., & Anderson, W. (1985). Client perceptions of counselors using
positive and negative self-involving statements. 
Journal of Counseling
Psychology,
 
32,
 462–465. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.32.3.462
Archer, D., & Akert, R. M. (1977). Words and everything else: Verbal and
nonverbal cues in social interpretation. 
Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology,
 
35,
 443–449. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.35.6.443
Arlow, J. A. (1995). Psychoanalysis. In R. J. Corsini & D. Wedding (Eds.),
Current psychotherapies
 (5th ed., pp. 15–50). Itasca, IL: F. E. Peacock.
Arredondo, P., Toporek, R., Brown, S. P., Jones, J., Locke, D. C., Sanchez, J.,
& Stadler, H. (1996). Operationalization of the multicultural competencies.
476
Journal of Multicultural Counseling and Development,
 
24,
 42–78.
doi:10.1002/j.2161-1912.1996.tb00288.x
Atkinson, A. P., Dittrick, W. H., Gemmell, A. J., & Young, A. W. (2004).
Emotion perception from dynamic and static body expressions in point-light
and full-light displays. 
Perception,
 
33,
 717–746. doi:10.1068/p5096
Atkinson, D. R., & Hackett, G. (1998). 
Counseling diverse populations
 (2nd ed.).
Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Atkinson, D. R., Morten, G., & Sue, D. W. (1998). 
Counseling American
minorities: A cross-cultural perspective
 (5th ed.). Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Axelson, J. A. (1999). 
Counseling and development in a multicultural society
 (3rd
ed.). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Ayoko, O. B., & Hartel, C. E. J. (2003). The role of space as both a conflict
trigger and a conflict control mechanism in heterogeneous workgroups.
Applied Psychology: An International Review,
 
52,
 383–412. doi:10.1111/1464-
0597.00141
Bachelor, A. (1995). Clients’ perception of the therapeutic alliance: A qualitative
analysis. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
42,
 323–337. doi:10.1037/0022-
0167.42.3.323
Bandura, A. (1965). Influence of models’ reinforcement contingencies on the
acquisition of imitative responses. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
1,
 589–595. doi:10.1037/h0022070
Bandura, A. (1969). 
Principles of behavior modification.
 New York, NY: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.
Bandura, A. (1977). 
Social learning theory.
 Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Barkham, M., & Shapiro, D. A. (1986). Counselor verbal response modes and
experienced empathy. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
33,
 3–10.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.33.1.3
Basch, M. F. (1980). 
Doing psychotherapy.
 New York, NY: Basic Books.
Basescu, S. (1990). Tools of the trade: The use of self in psychotherapy. 
Group,
14,
 157–165. doi:10.1007/BF01459151
Beattie, G., & Shovelton, H. (2005). Why the spontaneous images created by
the hands during talk can help make TV advertisements more effective.
British Journal of Psychology,
 
96,
 21–37. doi:10.1348/000712605X103500
Beauchamp, T. L., & Childress, J. F. (1994). 
Principles of biomedical ethics
 (4th
ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Beck, A. T. (1976). 
Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders.
 New York,
NY: International Universities Press.
Beck, A. T., & Emery, G. (1985). 
Anxiety disorders and phobias: A cognitive
perspective.
 New York, NY: Basic Books.
Beck, A. T., & Freeman, A. (1990). 
Cognitive therapy of the personality disorders.
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. R., & Emery, G. (1979). 
Cognitive therapy of
477
depression.
 New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Beck, J. S. (1995). 
Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond.
 New York, NY:
Guilford Press.
Benson, H. (1975). 
The relaxation response.
 New York, NY: Morrow.
Berman, A. L., Jobes, D. A., & Silverman, M. M. (2006). 
Adolescent suicide:
Assessment and intervention
 (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/11285-000
Bernstein, D. A., & Borkovec, T. D. (1973). 
Progressive relaxation training.
Champaign, IL: Research Press.
Berry, J., & Sam, D. (1996). Acculturation and adaptation. In J. Berry, M.
Segall, & C. Kagitcibasi (Eds.), 
Handbook of cross-cultural psychology: Social
behavior and applications
 (Vol. 3, pp. 291–325). Boston, MA: Allyn &
Bacon.
Beutler, L. E., & Bergan, J. (1991). Value change in counseling and
psychotherapy: A search for scientific credibility. 
Journal of Counseling
Psychology,
 
38,
 16–24. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.38.1.16
Bibring, E. (1954). Psychoanalysis and the dynamic psychotherapies. 
Journal of
the American Psychoanalytic Association,
 
2,
 745–770.
doi:10.1177/000306515400200412
Bischoff, M. M., & Tracey, T. J. G. (1995). Client resistance as predicted by
therapist behavior: A study of sequential dependence. 
Journal of Counseling
Psychology,
 
42,
 487–495. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.42.4.487
Blanck, G. (1966). Some technical implications of ego psychology. 
The
International Journal of Psychoanalysis,
 
47,
 6–13.
Blustein, D. L. (1987). Integrating career counseling and psychotherapy: A
comprehensive treatment strategy. 
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice,
Training,
 
24,
 794–799. doi:10.1037/h0085781
Bohart, A. C., Elliott, R., Greenberg, L. S., & Watson, J. C. (2002). Empathy.
In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), 
Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapist
contributions and responsiveness to patients
 (pp. 89–108). New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Book, H. E. (1998). 
Ho
w to practice brief psychodynamic psychotherapy: The core
conflictual relationship theme method.
 Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/10251-000
Borys, D. S., & Pope, K. S. (1989). Dual relationships between therapist and
client: A national survey of psychologists, psychiatrists, and social workers.
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
 
20,
 283–293.
doi:10.1037/0735-7028.20.5.283
Bowlby, J. (1969). 
Attachment and loss:
 
Vol. 1.
 
Attachment.
 New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Bowlby, J. (1988). 
A secure base.
 New York, NY: Basic Books.
Boyer, S. P., & Hoffman, M. A. (1993). Counselor affective reactions to
478
termination: Impact of counselor loss history and perceived client sensitivity
to loss. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
40,
 271–277. doi:10.1037/0022-
0167.40.3.271
Brainerd, C. J., & Reyna, V. F. (1998). When things that never happened are
easier to “remember” than things that did. 
Psychological Science,
 
9,
 484–489.
doi:10.1111/1467-9280.00089
Brammer, L. M., & MacDonald, G. (1996). 
The helping relationship: Process and
skills
 (6th ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Breier, A., & Strauss, J. S. (1984). The role of social relationships in the
recovery from psychotic disorders. 
The American Journal of Psychiatry,
 
141,
949–955.
Brown, D. (1985). Career counseling: Before, after, or instead of personal
counseling. 
Vocational Guidance Quarterly,
 
33,
 197–201.
doi:10.1002/j.2164-585X.1985.tb01310.x
Brown, D., & Brooks, L. (1991). 
Career counseling techniques.
 Boston, MA:
Allyn & Bacon.
Brownell, K. D., Marlatt, G. A., Lichenstein, E., & Wilson, G. T. (1986).
Understanding and preventing relapse. 
American Psychologist,
 
41,
 765–782.
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.41.7.765
Budman, S. H., & Gurman, A. S. (1988). 
Theory and practice of brief therapy.
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Bugental, J. T. (1965). 
The search for authenticity.
 New York, NY: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.
Burns, D. D. (1999). 
The feeling good handbook
 (rev. ed.). New York, NY:
Plume/Penguin Books.
Burns, D. D., & Auerbach, A. (1996). Therapeutic empathy in cognitive-
behavioral therapy: Does it really make a difference? In P. M. Salkovskis
(Ed.), 
Frontiers of cognitive therapy
 (pp. 135–164). New York, NY: Guilford
Press.
Cahill, A. J. (1981). Aggression revisited: The value of anger in therapy and
other close relationships. 
Adolescent Psychiatry,
 
9,
 539–549.
Carkhuff, R. R. (1969). 
Human and helping relations
 (Vols. 1 and 2). New York,
NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Carkhuff, R. R. (1973). 
The art of problem-solving.
 Amherst, MA: Human
Resource Development.
Carkhuff, R. R., & Anthony, W. A. (1979). 
The skills of helping: An introduction
to counseling skills.
 Amherst, MA: Human Resources Development.
Carkhuff, R. R., & Berenson, B. G. (1967). 
Beyond counseling and psychotherapy.
New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Carroll, L. (1962). 
Alice’s adventures in wonderland.
 Harmondsworth, England:
Penguin Books. (Original work published 1865)
Cashdan, S. (1988). 
Object relations therapy.
 New York, NY: Norton.
479
Cassidy, J., & Shaver, P. R. (Eds.). (2008). 
Handbook of attachment: Theory,
research, and clinical application
 (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Castonguay, L., & Hill, C. E. (Eds.). (2007). 
Insight in psychotherapy.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/11532-
000
Castonguay, L. & Hill, C. E. (Eds.) (2012). 
Transformation in psychotherapy:
Corrective experiences across cognitive behavioral, humanistic, and
psychodynamic approaches.
 Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Chui, H., Hill, C. E., Ain, S., Ericson, S., Del Pino, H. G., Hummel, A., . . . &
Spangler, P. T. (2013). 
Training undergraduate students to use challenges:
Changes in self-efficacy and written challenges, helpfulness of training
components, and predictors of the effects of training.
 Manuscript in preparation.
Claiborn, C. D., Goodyear, R. K., & Horner, P. A. (2002). Feedback. In J. C.
Norcross (Ed.), 
Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapist contributions
and responsiveness to patients
 (pp. 217–233). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Cobb, S. (1976). Social support as a moderator of life stress. 
Psychosomatic
Medicine,
 
38,
 300–314.
Conoley, C. W., Padula, M. A., Payton, D. S., & Daniels, J. A. (1994).
Predictors of client implementation of counselor recommendations: Match
with problem, difficulty level, and building on client strengths. 
Journal of
Counseling Psychology,
 
41,
 3–7. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.41.1.3
Conte, H. R., Plutchik, R., Picard, S., & Karasu, T. B. (1989). Ethics in the
practice of psychotherapy: A survey. 
American Journal of Psychotherapy,
 
43,
32–42.
Cornett, C. (1991). The “risky” intervention: Twinship self-object impasses and
therapist self-disclosure in psychodynamic psychotherapy. 
Clinical Social
Work Journal,
 
19,
 49–61.
Cournoyer, R. J., & Mahalik, J. R. (1995). Cross-sectional study of gender role
conflict examining college-aged and middle-aged men. 
Journal of Counseling
Psychology,
 
42,
 11–19. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.42.1.11
Crits-Christoph, P., Barber, J. P., & Kurcias, J. S. (1991). Introduction and
historical background. In P. Crits-Christoph & J. P. Barber (Eds.),
Handbook of short-term dynamic psychotherapy
 (pp. 1–16). New York, NY:
Basic Books.
Crits-Christoph, P., Cooper, A., & Luborsky, L. (1988). The accuracy of
therapists’ interpretations and the outcome of dynamic psychotherapy.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
 
56,
 490–495.
doi:10.1037/0022-006X.56.4.490
Crits-Christoph, P., & Gibbons, M. B. C. (2002). Relational interpretations. In
J. C. Norcross (Ed.), 
Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapist
480
contributions and responsiveness to patients
 (pp. 285–300). New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Cunha, C., Goncalves, M. M., Hill, C. E., Mendes, I., Ribiero, A. P., Sousa, I.,
Angus, L., & Greenberg, L. S. (2012). Therapist interventions and client
innovative moments in emotion-focused therapy for depression.
Psychotherapy,
 
49,
 536–548.
Curtis, J. M. (1981). Indications and contraindications in the use of therapist’s
self-disclosure. 
Psychological Reports,
 
49,
 499–507.
doi:10.2466/pr0.1981.49.2.499
Curtis, J. M. (1982). Principles and techniques of non-disclosure by the
therapist during psychotherapy. 
Psychological Reports,
 
51,
 907–914.
doi:10.2466/pr0.1982.51.3.907
Darwin, C. R. (1872). 
The expression of the emotions in man and animals
 (1st
ed.). London, England: John Murray. doi:10.1037/10001-000
Delaney, D. J., & Heimann, R. A. (1966). Effectiveness of sensitivity training
on the perception of non-verbal communications. 
Journal of Counseling
Psychology,
 
13,
 436–440. doi:10.1037/h0023975
Deutsch, C. J. (1984). Self-reported sources of stress among psychotherapists.
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
 
15,
 833–845.
doi:10.1037/0735-7028.15.6.833
Dewald, P. A. (1971). 
Psychotherapy: A dynamic approach.
 New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Duan, C., & Hill, C. E. (1996). Theoretical confusions in the construct of
empathy: A review of the literature. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
43,
261–274. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.43.3.261
Duan, C., Hill, C. E., Jiang, G., Hu, B., Chui, H., Hui, K., Liu, J., & Yu, L.
(2012). Therapist directives: Use and outcomes in China. 
Psychotherapy
Research,
 
22,
 442–457.
Duan, C., Hill, C. E. Jiang, G., Hu, B., Lei, Y., Chen, J., & Yu, L. (2013). 
The
use of directives in counseling in China: The counselor perspective.
 Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Eells, T. D. (2007). 
Handbook of psychotherapy case formulation
 (2nd ed.). New
York, NY: Guilford Press.
Egan, G. (1994). 
The skilled helper
 (5th ed.). Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, I. (1971). 
Love and hate: The natural history of behavior patterns.
New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Ekman, P. (1993). Facial expression and emotion. 
American Psychologist,
 
48,
384–392. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.48.4.384
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1969). Non-verbal leakage and clues to
deception. 
Psychiatry: Journal for the Study of Interpersonal Processes,
 
32,
 88–
106.
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1984). 
Unmasking the face
 (reprint ed.). Palo
481
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Elkind, S. N. (1992). 
Resolving impasses in therapeutic relationships.
 New York,
NY: Guilford Press.
Elliott, R. (1985). Helpful and nonhelpful events in brief counseling interviews:
An empirical taxonomy. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
32,
 307–322.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.32.3.307
Elliott, R., Barker, C. B., Caskey, N., & Pistrang, N. (1982). Differential
helpfulness of counselor verbal response modes. 
Journal of Counseling
Psychology,
 
29,
 354–361. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.29.4.354
Elliott, R., Greenberg, L. S., Watson, J., Timulak, L., & Freire, E. (2013).
Research on humanistic-experiential psychotherapies. In M. J. Lambert
(Ed.), 
Bergin and Garfield’s handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change
(6th ed., pp. 495–538). New York, NY: Wiley.
Elliott, R., Shapiro, D. A., Firth-Cozens, J., Stiles, W. B., Hardy, G. E.,
Llewelyn, S. P., & Margison, F. R. (1994). Comprehensive process analysis
of insight events in cognitive–behavioral and psychodynamic–interpersonal
psychotherapies. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
41,
 449–463.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.41.4.449
Elliott, R., Watson, J. C., Goldman, R. N., & Greenberg, L. S. (2004). 
Learning
emotion-focused therapy: The process–experiential approach to change.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/10725-
000
Ellis, A. (1962). 
Reason and emotion in psychotherapy.
 New York, NY: Lyle
Stuart.
Ellis, A. (1995). Rational emotive behavior therapy. In R. Corsini & D.
Wedding (Eds.), 
Current psychotherapies
 (5th ed., pp. 161–196). Itasca, IL:
R. E. Peacock.
Epstein, R. S., Simon, R. I., & Kay, G. G. (1992). Assessing boundary
violations in psychotherapy: Survey results with the exploitation index.
Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic,
 
56,
 150–166.
Erikson, E. H. (1963). 
Childhood and society
 (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Norton.
Etkin, A., Pittenger, C., Polam, H. J., & Kandel, E. R. (2005). Toward a
neurobiology of psychotherapy: Basic science and clinical applications. 
The
Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences,
 
17,
 145–158.
doi:10.1176/appi.neuropsych.17.2.145
Falk, D., & Hill, C. E. (1992). Counselor interventions preceding client
laughter in brief therapy. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
39,
 39–45.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.39.1.39
Farber, B. A. (1983). Psychotherapists’ perceptions of stressful patient behavior.
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
 
14,
 697–705.
doi:10.1037/0735-7028.14.5.697
Farber, B. A., & Doolin, E. M. (2011). Positive regard and affirmation. In J. C.
482
Norcross (Ed.), 
Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-based
responsiveness
 (2nd ed., pp. 168–186). New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Farber, B. A., & Geller, J. D. (1994). Gender and representation in
psychotherapy. 
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training,
 
31,
 318–
326. doi:10.1037/h0090216
Fitzpatrick, M. R., Stalikas, A., & Iwakabe, S. (2001). Examining counselor
interventions and client progress in the context of the therapeutic alliance.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training,
 
38,
 160–170.
doi:10.1037/0033-3204.38.2.160
Fonagy, P., Gergely, G., & Target, M. (2008). Psychoanalytic constructs and
attachment theory and research. In J. Cassidy & P. Shaver (Eds.), 
Handbook
of attachment
 (2nd ed., pp. 783–810). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Fouad, N. A., & Brown, M. T. (2000). Role of race and social class in
development: Implications for counseling psychology. In S. D. Brown & R.
W. Lent (Eds.), 
Handbook of counseling psychology
 (3rd ed., pp. 379–408).
New York, NY: Wiley.
Frank, J. D., & Frank, J. B. (1991). 
Persuasion and healing: A comparative study
of psychotherapy
 (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Frankish, C. J. (1994). Crisis centers and their role in treatment: Suicide
prevention versus health promotion. 
Death Studies,
 
18,
 327–339.
doi:10.1080/07481189408252681
Frankl, V. (1959). 
Man’s search for meaning.
 New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Freud, S. (1958). Recommendations to physicians practicing psycho-analysis. In
J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), 
The standard edition of the complete psychological
works of Sigmund Freud
 (Vol. 12, pp. 109–120). London, England: Hogarth
Press. (Original work published 1912)
Freud, S. (1933). 
New introductory lectures on psychoanalysis
 (J. H. Sprott,
Trans.). New York, NY: Norton.
Freud, S. (1943). 
A general introduction to psychoanalysis
 (J. Riviere, Trans.).
New York, NY: Garden City. (Original work published 1920)
Freud, S. (1949). 
An outline of psychoanalysis
 (J. Strachey, Trans.). New York,
NY: Norton. (Original work published 1940)
Freud, S. (1953a). Fragment of an analysis of a case of hysteria. In J. Strachey
(Ed.), 
Standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud
(Vol. 7, pp. 15–122). London, England: Hogarth. (Original work published
1905)
Freud, S. (1953b). Remembering, repeating, and working through. In J.
Strachey (Ed.), 
Standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund
Freud
 (Vol. 12, pp. 147–156). London, England: Hogarth. (Original work
published 1914)
Freud, S. (1959). The dynamics of transference. In E. Jones (Ed.), J. Riviere
483
(Trans.), 
Collected papers
 (pp. 312–322). New York, NY: Basic Books.
(Original work published 1912)
Freud, S. (1961). The ego and the id. In J. Strachey (Trans. & Ed.) 
The
standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud
 (Vol. 19,
pp. 3–66). London, England: Hogarth. (Original work published 1923)
Freud, S. (1963). 
Character and culture.
 Oxford, England: Crowell-Collier.
(Original work published 1923)
Friedman, E. H. (1990). 
Friedman’s fables.
 New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Fromm-Reichmann, F. (1950). 
Principles of intensive psychotherapy.
 Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Fukuyama, M. A., & Sevig, T. D. (2002). Spirituality in counseling across
cultures: Many rivers to the sea. In P. B. Pedersen, J. G. Draguns, W. J.
Lonner, & J. E. Trimble (Eds.), 
Counseling across cultures
 (5th ed., pp. 273–
296). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Fuller, F., & Hill, C. E. (1985). Counselor and helpee perceptions of counselor
intentions in relationship to outcome in a single counseling session. 
Journal
of Counseling Psychology,
 
32,
 329–338. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.32.3.329
Gabbard, G. O. (1994). Sexual excitement and countertransference love in the
analyst. 
Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association,
 
42,
 1083–1106.
Gabbard, G. O. (1995. The early history of boundary violations in
psychoanalysis. 
Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association,
 
43,
 1115–
1136.
Geller, J. D. (2003). Self-disclosure in psychoanalytic and existential therapy.
Journal of Clinical Psychology,
 
59,
 541–554. doi:10.1002/jclp.10158
Geller, J. D., Cooley, R. S., & Hartley, D. (1981). Images of the
psychotherapist: A theoretical and methodological perspective. 
Imagination,
Cognition and Personality,
 
1,
 123–146. doi:10.2190/64EY-QLW8-765A-
K0KH
Geller, J. D., & Farber, B. A. (1993). Factors influencing the process of
internalization in psychotherapy. 
Psychotherapy Research,
 
3,
 166–180.
doi:10.1080/10503309312331333769
Gelso, C. J., & Carter, J. A. (1985). The relationship in counseling and
psychotherapy. 
The Counseling Psychologist,
 
13,
 155–243.
doi:10.1177/0011000085132001
Gelso, C. J., & Carter, J. A. (1994). Components of the psychotherapy
relationship: Their interaction and unfolding during treatment. 
Journal of
Counseling Psycholog
y,
 
41,
 296–306. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.41.3.296
Gelso, C. J., & Fretz, B. R. (2001). 
Counseling psychology
 (2nd ed.). Belmont,
CA: Thomson-Wadsworth.
Gelso, C. J., & Hayes, J. A. (1998). 
The psychotherapy relationship: Theory,
research, and practice.
 New York, NY: Wiley.
Gelso, C. J., & Hayes, J. A. (2007). 
Countertransference and the therapist’s inner
484
experience: Perils and possibilities.
 Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gelso, C. J., Hill, C. E., Mohr, J., Rochlen, A., & Zack, J. (1999). Describing
the face of transference: Psychodynamic therapists’ recollections about
transference in cases of successful long-term therapy. 
Journal of Counseling
Psychology,
 
46,
 257–267. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.46.2.257
Gendlin, E. T. (1981). 
Focusing
 (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Bantam Books.
Gendlin, E. T. (1996). 
Focusing-oriented psychotherapy: A manual of the
experiential method.
 New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Gillespie, J. F., Jr. (1951). Verbal signs of resistance in client-centered therapy.
Dissertation Abstracts International, 5
(01), 454B. (University Microfilms No.
AAI000305)
Glass, A. L., & Holyoak, L. J. (1986). 
Cognition
 (2nd ed.). New York, NY:
Random House.
Goates-Jones, M. K., Hill, C. E., Stahl, J., & Doschek, E. (2009). Therapist
response modes in the exploration stage: Timing and effectiveness.
Counselling Psychology Quarterly,
 
22,
 221–231.
doi:10.1080/09515070903185256
Goldfried, M. R. (2012). The corrective experience: A core principle for
therapeutic change. In L. G. Castonguay & C. E. Hill (Eds.), 
Transformation
in psychotherapy: Corrective experiences across cognitive behavioral, humanistic,
and psychodynamic approaches
 (pp. 13–30). Washington DC: American
Psychological Association.
Goldfried, M. R., Burckell, L. A., & Eubanks-Carter, C. (2003). Therapist self-
disclosure in cognitive–behavior therapy. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology,
 
59,
555–568. doi:10.1002/jclp.10159
Goldfried, M. R., & Davison, G. C. (1994). 
Clinical behavior therapy
 (expanded
ed.). Oxford, England: Wiley.
Goldfried, M. R., & Trier, C. S. (1974). Effectiveness of relaxation as an active
coping skill. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
 
83,
 348–355.
doi:10.1037/h0036923
Good, G. E., Robertson, J. M., O’Neil, J. M., Fitzgerald, L. E., Stevens, M.,
DeBrod, K. A., . . . Braverman, D. G. (1995). Male gender role conflict:
Psychometric issues and relations to psychological distress. 
Journal of
Counseling Psychology,
 
42,
 3–10. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.42.1.3
Gourash, N. (1978). Help-seeking: A review of the literature. 
American Journal
of Commu
nity Psychology,
 
6,
 413–423. doi:10.1007/BF00941418
Grace, M., Kivlighan, D. M., & Kunce, J. (1995). The effect of nonverbal skills
training on counselor trainee nonverbal sensitivity and responsiveness and on
session impact and working alliance ratings. 
Journal of Counseling
 &
Development,
 
73,
 547–552. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6676.1995.tb01792.x
Greenberg, L. S. (2002). 
Emotion-focused therapy.
 New York, NY: Guilford
Press.
485
Greenberg, L. S. (2011). 
Emotion-focused therapy.
 Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Greenberg, L. S., Rice, L. N., & Elliott, R. (1993). 
Facilitating emotional change.
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Greenson, R. R. (1967). 
The technique and practice of psychoanalysis
 (Vol. 1).
Madison, CT: International Universities Press.
Grissom, G. R., Lyons, J. S., & Lutz, W. (2002). Standing on the shoulders of a
giant: Development of an outcome management system based on the dose
model and phase model of psychotherapy. 
Psychotherapy Research,
 
12,
 397–
412. doi:10.1093/ptr/12.4.397
Gross, A. E., & McMullen, P. A. (1983). Models of the help-seeking process. In
B. DePaulo, A. Nadler, & J. D. Fisher (Eds.), 
New directions in helping
 (Vol.
2, pp. 45–70). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Haase, R. F., & Tepper, D. T., Jr. (1972). Nonverbal components of empathic
communication. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
19,
 417–424.
doi:10.1037/h0033188
Hackett, G. (1993). Career counseling and psychotherapy: False dichotomies
and recommended remedies. 
Journal of Career Assessment,
 
1,
 105–117.
doi:10.1177/106907279300100201
Haldeman, D. C. (2002). Gay rights, patient rights: The implications of sexual
orientation conversion therapy. 
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
33,
 260–264. doi:10.1037/0735-7028.33.3.260
Haley, J. (1987). 
Problem-solving therapy.
 San Francisco. CA: Jossey-Bass.
Hall, E. T. (1963). A system for the notation of proxemic behavior. 
American
Anthropologist,
 
65,
 1003–1026. doi:10.1525/aa.1963.65.5.02a00020
Hall, E. T. (1968). Proxemics. 
Current Anthropology,
 
9,
 83–108.
doi:10.1086/200975
Hanna, F. J., & Ritchie, M. H. (1995). Seeking the active ingredients of
psychotherapeutic change: Within and outside the context of therapy.
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
 
26,
 176–183.
doi:10.1037/0735-7028.26.2.176
Harper, R. G., Wiens, A. N., & Matarazzo, J. D. (1978). 
Nonverbal
communication: The state of the art.
 New York, NY: Wiley.
Hays, P. A. (2001). 
Addressing cultural competencies in practice: A framework for
clinicians and counselors.
 Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. doi:10.1037/10411-000
Helms, J. E. (1990). 
Black and White racial identity: Theory, research, and
practice.
 Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Helms, J. E., & Cook, D. A. (1999). 
Using race and culture in counseling and
psychotherapy
: Theory and practice.
 Needham, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Herr, E. L. (1989). Career development and mental health. 
Journal of Career
Development,
 
16,
 5–18.
486
Highlen, P. S., & Hill, C. E. (1984). Factors affecting client change in
individual counseling: Current status and theoretical speculations. In S. D.
Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), 
Handbook of counseling psychology
 (pp. 334–
398). New York, NY: Wiley.
Hill, C. E. (1975). A process approach to establishing counseling goals and
outcomes. 
The Personnel & Guidance Journal,
 
53,
 571–576.
doi:10.1002/j.2164-4918.1975.tb04586.x
Hill, C. E. (1978). Development of a counselor verbal response category system.
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
25,
 461–468. doi:10.1037/0022-
0167.25.5.461
Hill, C. E. (1989). 
Therapist techniques and client outcomes: Eight cases of brief
psychotherapy.
 Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Hill, C. E. (1992). An overview of four measures developed to test the Hill
process model: Therapist intentions, therapist response modes, client
reactions, and client behaviors. 
Journal of Counseling & Development,
 
70,
728–739. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6676.1992.tb02156.x
Hill, C. E. (Ed.). (2004). 
Dream work in therapy: Facilitating exploration, insight,
and action.
 Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
doi:10.1037/10624-000
Hill, C. E. (2005a). The role of individual and marital therapy in my
development. In J. D. Geller, J. C. Norcross, & D. E. Orlinsky (Eds.), 
The
psychotherapist’s own psychotherapy: Patient and clinician perspectives
 (pp. 129–
144). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Hill, C. E. (2005b). Therapist techniques, client involvement, and the
therapeutic relationship: Inextricably intertwined in the therapy process.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, & Practice,
 
42,
 431–442. doi:10.1037/0033-
3204.42.4.431
Hill, C. E. (2007). My personal reactions to Rogers (1957): The facilitative but
neither necessary nor sufficient conditions of therapeutic personality change.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training,
 
44,
 260–264.
doi:10.1037/0033-3204.44.3.260
Hill, C. E., Carter, J. A., & O’Farrell, M. K. (1983). A case study of the process
and outcome of time-limited counseling. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
30,
3–18. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.30.1.3
Hill, C. E., & Gormally, J. (1977). Effects of reflection, restatement, probe, and
nonverbal behavior on client affect. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
24,
 92–
97. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.24.2.92
Hill, C. E., Helms, J. E., Spiegel, S. B., & Tichenor, V. (1988). Development of
a system for categorizing client reactions to therapist interventions. 
Journal of
Counseling Psycho
logy,
 
35,
 27–36. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.35.1.27
Hill, C. E., Helms, J. E., Tichenor, V., Spiegel, S. B., O’Grady, K. E., & Perry,
E. S. (1988). The effects of therapist response modes in brief psychotherapy.
487
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
35,
 222–233. doi:10.1037/0022-
0167.35.3.222
Hill, C. E., Kellems, I. S., Kolchakian, M. R., Wonnell, T. L., Davis, T. L., &
Nakayama, E. Y. (2003). The therapist experience of being the target of
hostile versus suspected-unasserted client anger: Factors associated with
resolution. 
Psychotherapy Research,
 
13,
 475–491. doi:10.1093/ptr/kpg040
Hill, C. E., & Knox, S. (2002). Therapist self-disclosure. In J. C. Norcross
(Ed.), 
Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapist contributions and
responsiveness to patients
 (pp. 255–265). Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press.
Hill, C. E., & Knox, S. (2008). Facilitating insight in counseling and
psychotherapy. In S. D. Brown & R. W. Lent (Eds.), 
Handbook of counseling
psychology
 (4th ed., pp. 284–302). New York, NY: Wiley.
Hill, C. E., & Knox, S. (2009). Processing the therapeutic relationship.
Psychotherapy Research,
 
19,
 13–29.
Hill, C. E., Knox, S., Hess, S., Crook-Lyon, R., Goates-Jones, M., & Sim, W.
(2007). The attainment of insight in the Hill dream model: A single case
study. In L. G. Castonguay & C. E. Hill (Eds.), 
Insight in psychotherapy
 (pp.
207–230). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
doi:10.1037/11532-010
Hill, C. E., & Lambert, M. J. (2004). Methodological issues in studying
psychotherapy processes and outcomes. In M. J. Lambert (Ed.), 
Handbook of
psychotherapy and behavior change
 (5th ed., pp. 84–136). New York, NY:
Wiley.
Hill, C. E., & Lent, R. W. (2006). A narrative and meta-analytic review of
helping skills training: Time to revive a dormant area of inquiry.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training,
 
43,
 154–172.
doi:10.1037/0033-3204.43.2.154
Hill, C. E., Lystrup, A., Kline, K., Gebru, N. M., Birchler, J., Palmer, G., . . .
Pinto-Coelho, K. (2013). Aspiring to become a therapist: Personal strengths
and challenges, influences, motivations, and expectations of future
psychotherapists. 
Counselling Psychology Quarterly,
 
26,
 267–293.
Hill, C. E., Nutt-Williams, E., Heaton, K. J., Thompson, B. J., & Rhodes, R.
H. (1996). Therapist retrospective recall of impasses in long-term
psychotherapy: A qualitative analysis. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
43,
207–217. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.43.2.207
Hill, C. E., & O’Grady, K. E. (1985). List of therapist intentions illustrated in a
case study and with therapists of varying theoretical orientations. 
Journal of
Counseling Psychology,
 
32,
 3–22. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.32.1.3
Hill, C. E., Roffman, M., Stahl, J., Friedman, S., Hummel, A., & Wallace, C.
(2008). Helping skills training for undergraduates: Outcomes and predictors
of outcomes. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
55,
 359–370.
488
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.55.3.359
Hill, C. E., Satterwhite, D. B., Larrimore, M. L., Mann, A. R., Johnson, V. C.,
Simon, R., . . . Knox, S. (2012). Attitudes about psychotherapy: A qualitative
study of introductory psychology students who have never been in
psychotherapy and the influence of attachment style. 
Counselling &
Psychotherapy Research,
 
12,
 13–24. doi:10.1080/14733145.2011.629732
Hill, C. E., Siegelman, L., Gronsky, B., Sturniolo, R., & Fretz, B. R. (1981).
Nonverbal communication and counseling outcome. 
Journal of Counseling
Psychology,
 
28,
 203–212. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.28.3.203
Hill, C. E., Sim, W., Spangler, P., Stahl, J., Sullivan, C., & Teyber, E. (2008).
Therapist immediacy in brief psychotherapy therapy: Case Study II.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training,
 
45,
 298–315.
doi:10.1037/a0013306
Hill, C. E., Sullivan, C., Knox, S., & Schlosser, L. (2007). Becoming
psychotherapists: Experiences of novice therapists in a beginning graduate
class. 
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training,
 
44,
 434–449.
doi:10.1037/0033-3204.44.4.434
Hill, C. E., Thompson, B. J., Cogar, M. M., & Denman, D. W. (1993).
Beneath the surface of long-term therapy: Client and therapist report of their
own and each other’s covert processes. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
40,
278–287. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.40.3.278
Hill, C. E., Thompson, B. J., & Corbett, M. M. (1992). The impact of
therapist ability to perceive displayed and hidden client reactions on
immediate outcome in first sessions of brief therapy. 
Psychotherapy Research,
2,
 143–155. doi:10.1080/10503309212331332914
Hill, C. E., Thompson, B. J., & Ladany, N. (2003). Therapist use of silence in
therapy: A survey. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology,
 
59,
 513–524.
doi:10.1002/jclp.10155
Hill, C. E., Thompson, B. J., & Mahalik, J. R. (1989). Therapist interpretation.
In C. E. Hill (Ed.), 
Therapist techniques and client outcomes: Eight cases of brief
psychotherapy
 (pp. 284–310). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Holroyd, J. C., & Brodsky, A. (1977). Psychologists’ attitudes and practices
regarding erotic and nonerotic physical contact with patients. 
American
Psychologist,
 
32,
 843–849. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.32.10.843
Honos-Webb, L., & Stiles, W. B. (1998). Reformulation of assimilation analysis
in terms of voices. 
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training,
 
35,
 23–
33. doi:10.1037/h0087682
Horvath, A. O., & Bedi, R. P. (2002). The alliance. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.),
Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapist contributions and responsiveness
to patients
 (pp. 37–70). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Horvath, A. O., Del Re, A. C., Flückiger, C., & Symonds, D. (2011). Alliance
in individual psychotherapy. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), 
Psychotherapy
489
relationships that work: Evidence-based responsiveness
 (2nd ed., pp. 25–69).
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Howard, K. I., Lueger, R. J., Maling, M. S., & Martinovich, Z. (1993). A phase
model of psychotherapy outcome: Causal mediation of change. 
Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
 
61,
 678–685.
Hunter, M., & Struve, J. (1998). 
The ethical use of touch in psychotherapy.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. doi:10.1080/10720169808400156
Israel, T., Gorcheva, R., Burnes, T. R., & Walther, W. A. (2008). Helpful and
unhelpful therapy experiences of LGBT clients. 
Psychotherapy Research, 18,
294–305.
Ito, T. A., & Batholow, B. D. (2009). The neural correlates of race. Trends in
Cognitive. 
Neuroscience,
 
13,
 524–531.
Ivey, A. E. (1994). 
Intentional interviewing and counseling: Facilitating client
development in a multicultural society
 (3rd ed.). Pacific Grove, CA:
Brooks/Cole.
Izard, C. E. (1977). 
Human emotions.
 New York, NY: Plenum.
Jackson, J., Hill, C. E., Spangler, P. T., Ericson, S., Merson, E., Liu, J., . . . &
Reen, G. (2013). 
Training undergraduate students to use interpretation:
Changes in self-efficacy and interpretation use, helpfulness of training
components, and predictors of the effects of training.
 Manuscript in preparation.
Jacobson, E. (1929). 
Progressive relaxation.
 Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Joines, V. S. (1995). A developmental approach to anger. 
Transactional Analysis
Journal,
 
25,
 112–118.
Jourard, S. M. (1971). 
The transparent self.
 New York, NY: Van Nostrand
Reinhold.
Jung, C. G. (1984). 
Dream analysis.
 Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (2003). Mindfulness-based interventions in context: Past,
present, and future. 
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice,
 
10,
 144–156.
doi:10.1093/clipsy.bpg016
Kaplan, A., Brooks, B., McComb, A. L., Shapiro, E. R., & Sodano, A. (1983).
Women and anger in psychotherapy. 
Women & Therapy,
 
2,
 29–40.
doi:10.1300/J015v02n02_04
Kazdin, A. E. (2013). 
Behavior modification in applied settings
 (7th ed.). Long
Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
Kendon, A. (1967). Some functions of gaze-direction in social interaction. 
Acta
Psychologica,
 
26,
 22–63. doi:10.1016/0001-6918(67)90005-4
Kertay, L., & Reviere, S. L. (1998). Touch in context. In E. W. Smith, P. R.
Clance, & S. Imes (Eds.), 
Touch in psychotherapy: Theory, research, and
practice
 (pp. 16–35). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Kestenbaum, R. (1992). Feeling happy versus feeling good: The processing of
discrete and global categories of emotional expressions by children and
490
adults. 
Developmental Psychology,
 
28,
 1132–1142. doi:10.1037/0012-
1649.28.6.1132
Kiesler, D. J. (1988). 
Therapeu
tic metacommunication: Therapist impact disclosure
as feedback in psychotherapy.
 Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Kiesler, D. J. (1996). 
Contemporary interpersonal theory and research: Personality,
psychopathology, and psychotherapy.
 Oxford, England: Wiley.
Kim, B. S. K., & Abreu, J. M. (2001). Acculturation measurement: Theory,
current instruments, and future directions. In J. G. Ponterotto, J. M. Casas,
L. A. Suzuki, & C. M. Alexander (Eds.), 
Handbook of multicultural counseling
(2nd ed., pp. 394–424). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kim, B. S. K., Atkinson, D. R., & Umemoto, D. (2001). Asian cultural values
and the counseling process: Current knowledge and directions for future
research. 
The Counseling Psychologist,
 
29,
 570–603.
doi:10.1177/0011000001294006
Kim, B. S. K., Atkinson, D. R., & Yang, P. H. (1999). The Asian Values Scale:
Development, factor analysis, validation, and reliability. 
Journal of Counseling
Psychology,
 
46,
 342–352. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.46.3.342
Kitchener, K. S. (1984). Intuition, critical evaluation and ethical principles: The
foundation for ethical decisions for counseling psychology. 
The Counseling
Psychologist,
 
12,
 43–55. doi:10.1177/0011000084123005
Kitson, C., & Sperlinger, D. (2007). Dual relationships between clinical
psychologists and their clients: A survey of UK clinical psychologists’
attitudes. 
Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice, 80,
279–295.
Kleinke, C. L. (1986). Gaze and eye contact: A research review. 
Psychological
Bulletin,
 
100,
 78–100. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.100.1.78
Knox, S., Burkard, A. W., Jackson, J. A., Schaak, A. M., & Hess, S. (2006).
Therapists-in-training who experience a client suicide: Implications for
supervision. 
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
 
37,
 547–557.
doi:10.1037/0735-7028.37.5.547
Knox, S., Goldberg, J. L., Woodhouse, S., & Hill, C. E. (1999). Clients’
internal representations of their therapists. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
46,
 244–256. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.46.2.244
Knox, S., Hess, S. A., Petersen, D. A., & Hill, C. E. (1997). A qualitative
investigation of client perceptions of the effects of helpful therapist self-
disclosure in long-term therapy. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
44,
 274–
283.
Kolden, G. G., Klein, M. H., Wang, C., & Austin, S. B. (2011).
Congruence/genuineness. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), 
Psychotherapy relationships
that 
work: Evidence-based responsiveness
 (2nd ed., pp. 187–202). New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Kopta, S. M., Howard, K. I., Lowry, J. L., & Beutler, L. E. (1994). Patterns of
491
symptomatic recovery in psychotherapy. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology,
 
62
,
 1009–1016. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.62.5.1009
Kraft, H. S. (2007). 
Rule number two: Lessons I learned in a combat hospital.
 New
York, NY: Little, Brown.
Ladany, N., Hill, C. E., Thompson, B. J., & O’Brien, K. M. (2004). Therapist
perspectives on using silence in therapy: A qualitative study. 
Counselling &
Psychotherapy Research,
 
4,
 80–89. doi:10.1080/14733140412331384088
Ladany, N., O’Brien, K. M., Hill, C. E., Melincoff, D. S., Knox, S., & Petersen,
D. A. (1997). Sexual attraction toward clients, use of supervision, and prior
training: A qualitative study of psychotherapy predoctoral interns. 
Journal of
Counseling Psychology,
 
44,
 413–424. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.44.4.413
Laing, R. D., & Esterson, A. (1970). 
Sanity, madness, and the family.
 Middlesex,
England: Penguin.
Lambert, M. J. (2013). The efficacy and effectiveness of psychotherapy. In M. J.
Lambert (Ed.), 
Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change
 (6th ed., pp.
169–209). New York, NY: Wiley.
Lang, P. J., Melamed, B. G., & Hart, J. (1970). A psychophysiological analysis
of fear modification using an automated desensitization procedure. 
Journal of
Abnormal Psychology,
 
76,
 220–234. doi:10.1037/h0029875
Lauver, P., & Harvey, D. R. (1997). 
The practical counselor: Elements of effective
helping.
 Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Levy, L. H. (1963). 
Psychological interpretation.
 New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart
& Winston.
Lieberman, M. D., Eisenberger, N. I., Crockett, M. J., Tom, S. M., Pfeifer, J.
H., & Way, B. M. (2007). Putting feelings into words: Affect labeling
disrupts amygdala activity in response to affective stimuli. 
Psychological
Science,
 
18,
 421–428. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01916.x
Liu, X., Ramirez, S., Pang, P. T., Puryear, C. B., Govindarajan, A., Deisseroth,
K., & Tonegawa, S. (2012). Optogenetic stimulation of a hippocampal
engram activates fear memory recall. 
Nature,
 
484,
 381–385.
Loftus, E. (1988). 
Memory.
 New York, NY: Ardsley House.
Luborsky, L., & Crits-Christoph, P. (1990). 
Understanding transference: The
CCRT method.
 New York, NY: Basic Books.
Lynch, C. (1975). The freedom to get mad: Impediments to expressing anger
and how to deal with them. 
Family Therapy,
 
2,
 101–122.
Madigan, S. (2011). 
Narrative therapy.
 Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Mahalik, J. R. (1994). Development of the Client Resistance Scale. 
Journal of
Counseling Psychology,
 
41,
 58–68. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.41.1.58
Mahler, M. S. (1968). 
On human symbiosis of the vicissitudes of individuation.
New York, NY: International Universities Press.
Mahrer, A. R., Gagnon, R., Fairweather, D. R., Boulet, D. B., & Herring, C. B.
492
(1994). Client commitment and resolve to carry out postsession behaviors.
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
41,
 407–414.
Maki, M. T., & Kitano, H. H. L. (2002). Counseling Asian Americans. In P. B.
Pedersen, J. G. Draguns, W. J. Lonner, & J. E. Trimble (Eds.), 
Counseling
across cultures
 (5th ed., pp. 109–131). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Malan, D. H. (1976a). 
The frontier of brief psychotherapy.
 New York, NY:
Plenum. doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-2220-7
Malan, D. H. (1976b). 
Toward a validation of dynamic psychotherapy: A
replication.
 New York, NY: Plenum. doi:10.1007/978-1-4615-8753-8
Mallinckrodt, B. (2000). Attachment, social competencies, social support, and
interpersonal process in psychotherapy. 
Psychotherapy 
Research,
 
10,
 239–266.
doi:10.1093/ptr/10.3.239
Mann, J. (1973). 
Time-limited psychotherapy.
 Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Markus, H., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications for
cognition, emotion, and motivation. 
Psychological Review,
 
98,
 224–253.
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.98.2.224
Maroda, K. J. (2010). 
Psychodynamic techniques: Working with emotion in the
therapeutic relationship.
 New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Martin, J., Martin, W., & Slemon, A. G. (1989). Cognitive–mediational models
of action–act sequences in counseling. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
36,
8–16. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.36.1.8
Marx, J. A., & Gelso, C. J. (1987). Termination of individual counseling in a
university counseling center. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
34,
 3–9.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.34.1.3
Maslow, A. (1970). 
Motivation and personality
 (rev. ed.). New York, NY: Harper
& Row.
Matarazzo, R. G., Phillips, J. S., Wiens, A. N., & Saslow, G. (1965). Learning
the art of interviewing: A study of what beginning students do and their
pattern of change. 
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research & Practice,
 
2,
 49–60.
doi:10.1037/h0088611
Matsakis, A. (1998). 
Managing client anger: What to do when a client is angry at
you.
 Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Matsumoto, D., Kudoh, T., Sherer, K., & Wallbott, H. (1988). Antecedents of
and reactions to emotions in the United States and Japan. 
Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology,
 
19,
 267–286. doi:10.1177/0022022188193001
McCullough, L., Kuhn, N., Andrews, S., Kaplan, A., Wolf, J., & Hurley, C. L.
(2003). 
Treating affect phobia: A manual for short-term dynamic psy
chotherapy.
New York, NY: Guilford.
McGoldrick, M. (Ed.). (1998). 
Re-visioning family therapy: Race, culture, and
gender in clinical practice.
 New York, NY: Guilford Press.
McGoldrick, M., Giordano, J., & Garcia-Preto, N. (Eds.). (2005). 
Ethnicity and
493
family therapy
 (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
McGough, E. (1975). 
Understanding body talk.
 New York, NY: Scholastic Book
Service.
McLeod, J., & McLeod, J. (2011). 
Counselling skills: A practical guide for
counselors and helping professionals
 (2nd ed.). Berkshire, England: McGraw-
Hill Open University Press.
McWhirter, E. H. (1994). 
Counseling for empowerment.
 Alexandria, VA:
American Counseling Association.
McWilliams, N. (2004). 
Psychoanalytic psychotherapy: A practitioner’s guide.
 New
York, NY: Guilford Press.
Meador, B. D., & Rogers, C. R. (1973). Client-centered therapy. In R. Corsini
(Ed.), 
Current psychotherapies
 (pp. 119–166). Itasca, IL: F. E. Peacock.
Meara, N. M., Schmidt, L. D., & Day, J. D. (1996). Principles and virtues: A
foundation for ethical decisions, policies, and character. 
The Counseling
Psychologist,
 
24,
 4–77. doi:10.1177/0011000096241002
Medin, D. L., & Ross, B. H. (1992). 
Cognitive psychology.
 New York, NY:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Meichenbaum, D., & Turk, D. C. (1987). 
Facilitating treatment adherence: A
practitioner’s handbook.
 New York, NY: Plenum. doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-
5359-1
Mendel, W. M. (1964). The phenomenon of interpretation. 
The American
Journal of Psychoanalysis,
 
24,
 184–189. doi:10.1007/BF01872049
Meyer, B., & Pilkonis, P. A. (2002). Attachment style. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.),
Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapist contributions and responsiveness
to patients
 (pp. 367–382). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Mickelson, D., & Stevic, R. (1971). Differential effects of facilitative and
nonfacilitative behavioral counselors. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
18,
314–319. doi:10.1037/h0031231
Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. R. (2007). 
Attachment in adulthood: Structure,
dynamics, and change.
 New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Miller, J. B. (1976). 
Toward a new psychology of women.
 Boston, MA: Beacon.
Miller, W. R., Benefield, R. G., & Tonigan, J. S. (1993). Enhancing motivation
for change in problem drinking: A controlled comparison of two therapist
styles. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
 
61,
 455–461.
doi:10.1037/0022-006X.61.3.455
Minuchin, S. (1974). 
Families and family therapy.
 Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Mitchell, S. A. (1993). 
Hope and dread in psychoanalysis.
 New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Montagu, A. (Ed.). (1971). 
Touching: The significance of the human skin.
 New
York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Muran, J. C. (Ed.). (2007). 
Dialogues on difference: Studies of diversity in the
494
therapeutic relationship.
 Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. doi:10.1037/11500-000
Natterson, J. M. (1993). Dreams: The gateway to consciousness. In G. Delaney
(Ed.), 
New directions in dream interpretation
 (pp. 41–76). Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Neff, K. (2011). 
Self-compassion: Stop beating yourself up and leave insecurity
behind.
 New York, NY: HarperCollins.
Newman, C. R. (1997). Maintaining professionalism in the face of emotional
abuse from clients. 
Cognitive and Behavioral Practice,
 
4,
 1–29.
doi:10.1016/S1077-7229(97)80010-7
Nichols, M., & Schwartz, R. (1991). 
Family therapy: Concepts and methods
 (2nd
ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Nielsen, S. L., Okiishi, J., Nielsen, D. L., Hawkins, E. J., Harmon, S. C.,
Pedersen, T., . . . Jackson, A. P. (2009). Termination, appointment use, and
outcome patterns associated with intake therapist discontinuity. 
Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice,
 
40,
 272–278. doi:10.1037/a0013286
Nirenberg, G. I., & Calero, H. H. (1971). 
How to read a person like a book.
 New
York, NY: Hawthorn Books.
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can know.
Psychological Review,
 
84,
 231–259. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.84.3.231
Norman, S. L. (1982). Nonverbal communication: Implications for and use by
counselors. 
Individual Psychology: Journal of Adlerian Theory and Research,
 
38,
353–359.
Nutt-Williams, E., & Hill, C. E. (1996). The relationship between therapist
self-talk and counseling process variables for novice therapists. 
Journal of
Counseling Psychology,
 
43,
 170–177. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.43.2.170
O’Neil, J. M. (1981). Male sex-role conflicts, sexism, and masculinity:
Psychological implications for men, women, and the counseling psychologist.
The Counseling Psychologist,
 
9,
 61–81. doi:10.1177/001100008100900213
Orlinsky, D. E., & Geller, J. D. (1993). Patients’ representations of their
therapists and therapy: New measures. In N. E. Miller, L. Luborsky, J. P.
Barber, & J. P. Docherty (Eds.), 
Psychodynamic treatment research: A
handbook for psychodynamic research
 (pp. 423–466). New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Orlinsky, D. E., & Ronnestad, M. H. (2005). 
How psychotherapists develop: A
study of therapeutic work and professional growth.
 Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/11157-000
Ormont, L. R. (1984). The leader’s role in dealing with aggression in groups.
International Journal of Group Psychotherapy,
 
34,
 553–572.
Patterson, G. R., & Forgatch, M. S. (1985). Therapist behavior as a
determinant for client noncompliance: A paradox for the behavior modifier.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
 
53,
 846–851.
495
doi:10.1037/0022-006X.53.6.846
Paul, G. L. (1969). Outcome of systematic desensitization: II. Controlled
investigations of individual treatment, technique variations, and current
status. In C. M. Franks (Ed.), 
Behavior therapy: Appraisal and status
 (pp.
105–159). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Pedersen, P. B. (1991). Multiculturalism as a generic approach to counseling.
Journal of Counseling & Development,
 
70,
 6–12. doi:10.1002/j.1556-
6676.1991.tb01555.x
Pedersen, P. B. (1997). 
Culture-centered counseling interventions: Striving for
accuracy.
 Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Pedersen, P. B., Draguns, J. G., Lonner, W. J., & Trimble, J. E. (Eds.). (2002).
Counseling across cultures
 (5th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Pedersen, P. B., & Ivey, A. (1993). 
Culture-centered counseling and interviewing
skills: A practical guide.
 Westport, CT: Praeger.
Perls, F. S. (1969). 
Gestalt therapy verbatim.
 Moab, UT: Real People Press.
Perls, F. S., Hefferline, R. F., & Goodman, P. (1951). 
Gestalt therapy.
 New
York, NY: Julian Press.
Piper, W. E. (2008). Underutilization of short-term group therapy: Enigmatic
or understandable? 
Psychotherapy Research,
 
18,
 127–138.
doi:10.1080/10503300701867512
Pipes, R., & Davenport, D. (1999). 
Introduction to psychotherapy: Common
clinical wisdom
 (2nd ed.). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Plutchik, R., Conte, H. R., & Karasu, T. B. (1994). Critical incidents in
psychotherapy. 
American Journal of Psychotherapy,
 
48,
 75–84.
Poortinga, Y. H. (1990). Toward a conceptualization of culture for psychology.
Cross-Cultural Psychology Bulletin,
 
24,
 2–10.
Pope, K. S. (1994). 
Sexual involvement with therapists: Patient assessment,
subsequent therapy, forensics.
 Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. doi:10.1037/10154-000
Pope, K. S., Keith-Spiegel, P., & Tabachnick, B. (1986). Sexual attraction to
clients: The human therapist and the (sometimes) inhuman training system.
American Psychologist,
 
41,
 147–158. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.41.2.147
Pope, K. S., Sonne, J. L., & Holroyd, J. (1993). 
Sexual feelings in psychotherapy:
Explorations for therapists and therapists-in-training.
 Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/10124-000
Pope, K. S., & Tabachnick, B. (1993). Therapists’ anger, hate, fear, and sexual
feelings: National survey of therapists’ responses, client characteristics, critical
events, formal complaints, and training. 
Professional Psychology: Research and
Practice,
 
24,
 142–152. doi:10.1037/0735-7028.24.2.142
Prochaska, J. O., DiClemente, C. C., & Norcross, J. C. (1992). In search of
how people change: Applications to addictive behavior. 
American Psychologist,
47,
 1102–1114. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.47.9.1102
496
Prochaska, J. O., Norcross, J. C., & DiClemente, C. C. (1994). 
Changing for
good.
 New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Prochaska, J. O., Norcross, J. C., & DiClemente, C. C. (2005). Stages of
change: Prescriptive guidelines. In G. P. Koocher, J. C. Norcross, & S. S.
Hill (Eds.), 
Psychologists’ desk reference
 (2nd ed., pp. 226–231). New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Regan, A. M., & Hill, C. E. (1992). Investigation of what clients and counselors
do not say in brief therapy. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
39,
 168–174.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.39.2.168
Reid, J. R., & Finesinger, J. E. (1952). The role of insight in psychotherapy. 
The
American Journal of Psychiatry,
 
108,
 726–734.
Reik, T. (1935). 
Surprise and the psychoanalyst.
 London, England: Routledge.
Reik, T. (1948). 
Listening with the third ear.
 New York, NY: Grove.
Rennie, D. L. (1994). Clients’ deference in psychotherapy. 
Journal of Counseling
Psychology,
 
41,
 427–437. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.41.4.427
Rhodes, R. H., Hill, C. E., Thompson, B. J., & Elliott, R. (1994). Client
retrospective recall of resolved and unresolved misunderstanding events.
Jour
nal of Counseling Psychology,
 
41,
 473–483. doi:10.1037/0022-
0167.41.4.473
Richardson, M. S. (1993). Work in people’s lives: A location for counseling
psychologists. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
40,
 425–433.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.40.4.425
Rimm, D. C., & Masters, J. C. (1979). 
Behavior therapy: Techniques and
empirical findings.
 New York, NY: Academic Press.
Robitschek, C. G., & McCarthy, P. R. (1991). Prevalence of counselor self-
reference in the therapeutic dyad. 
Journal of Counseling & Development,
 
69,
218–221. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6676.1991.tb01490.x
Rogers, C. R. (1942). 
Counseling and psychotherapy.
 Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R. (1951). 
Client-centered therapy: Its current practice, implications,
and theory.
 Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R. (1957). The necessary and sufficient conditions of therapeutic
personality change. 
Journal of Consulting Psychology,
 
21,
 95–103.
doi:10.1037/h0045357
Rogers, C. R. (1959). A theory of therapy, personality, and interpersonal
relationships, as developed in the client-centered framework. In S. Koch
(Ed.), 
Psychology: A study of a science: Vol. 3. Formulations of the person and the
social context
 (pp. 184–256). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Rogers, C. R. (Ed.). (1967). 
The therapeutic relationship and its impact: A study of
psychotherapy with schizophrenics.
 Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Rogers, C. R. (1980). 
A way of being.
 Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R., & Dymond, R. (1954). 
Psychotherapy and personality change.
497
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Rose, A. J., Carlson, W., & Waller, E. M. (2007). Prospective associations of
co-rumination with friendship and emotional adjustment: Considering the
socio-emotional trade-offs of co-rumination. 
Developmental Psychology,
 
43,
1019–1031. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.43.4.1019
Rosenthal, R., Hall, J. A., DiMatteo, M. R., Rogers, P. L., & Archer, D. (1979).
Sensitivity to nonverbal communication: The PONS test.
 Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Rudd, M. D., Joiner, T. E., Jobes, D. A., & King, C. A. (1999). The outpatient
treatment of suicidality: An integration of science and recognition of its
limitations. 
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
 
30,
 437–446.
doi:10.1037/0735-7028.30.5.437
Safran, J. D., & Muran, J. C. (2000). 
Negotiating the therapeutic alliance: A
relational treatment guide.
 New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Safran, J. D., Muran, J. C., Samstag, L. W., & Stevens, C. (2002). Repairing
alliance ruptures. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), 
Psychotherapy relationships that
work: Therapist contributions and responsiveness to patients
 (pp. 235–254).
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Satir, V. M. (1988). 
The new peoplemaking.
 Palo Alto, CA: Science and Behavior
Books.
Savickas, M. L. (1994). Vocational psychology in the postmodern era:
Comment on Richardson (1993). 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
41,
 105–
107. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.41.1.105
Scheel, M. J., Hanson, W. E., & Razzhavaikina, T. T. (2004). The process of
recommending homework in psychotherapy: A review of therapist delivery
methods, client acceptability, and factors that affect compliance.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training,
 
41,
 38–55.
Scheel, M. J., Seaman, S., Roach, K., Mullin, T., & Mahoney, K. B. (1999).
Client implementation of therapist recommendations predicted by client
perception of fit, difficulty of implementation, and therapist influence.
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
46,
 308–316. doi:10.1037/0022-
0167.46.3.308
Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002). 
Mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy for depression.
 New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Segall, M. H. (1979). 
Cross-cultural psychology.
 Monterey, CA: Brooks-Cole.
Shakespeare, W. (1980). 
Macbeth.
 New York, NY: Bantam. (Original work
published 1623)
Shapiro, E. G. (1984). Help-seeking: Why people don’t. 
Research in the Sociology
of Organizations,
 
3,
 213–236.
Sileo, R. J., & Kopala, M. (1993). An A-B-C-D-E worksheet for promoting
beneficence when considering ethical values. 
Counseling and Values,
 
37,
 89–
95. doi:10.1002/j.2161-007X.1993.tb00800.x
498
Simon, J. C. (1988). Criteria for therapist self-disclosure. 
American Journal of
Psychotherapy,
 
42,
 404–415.
Singer, E. (1970). 
New concepts in psychotherapy.
 New York, NY: Basic Books.
Skinner, B. F. (1953). 
Science and human behavior.
 New York, NY: Macmillan.
Skovholt, T. M., & Jennings, L. (2004). 
Master therapists: Exploring expertise in
therapy and counseling.
 New York, NY: Pearson/Allyn & Bacon.
Skovholt, T. M., & Rivers, D. A. (2003). 
Skills and procedures of helping.
Denver, CO: Love.
Smith, E. W. L. (1998). A taxonomy and ethics of touch. In E. W. Smith, P. R.
Clance, & S. Imes (Eds.), 
Touch in psychotherapy: Theory, research, and
practice
 (pp. 36–51). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Smith, M. L., Glass, G. V., & Miller, T. J. (1980). 
The benefits of psychotherapy.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Snyder, J. F., Hill, C. E., & Derksen, T. P. (1972). Why some students do not
use university counseling facilities. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
19,
 263–
268. doi:10.1037/h0033075
Spangler, P. Hill, C. E., Dunn, M. G., Hummel, A., Walden, T., Liu, J., . . .
Salahuddin, N. (2013). 
Training undergraduate students to use immediacy:
Changes in self-efficacy, helpfulness of training components, and predictors of the
effects of training.
 Manuscript in preparation.
Spangler, P., Hill, C. E., Mettus, C., Guo, A. H., & Heymsfield, L. (2009).
Therapist perspectives on the dreams about clients: A qualitative
investigation. 
Psychotherapy Research,
 
19,
 81–95.
doi:10.1080/10503300802430665
Speisman, J. C. (1959). Depth of interpretation and verbal resistance in
psychotherapy. 
Journal of Consulting Psychology,
 
23,
 93–99.
doi:10.1037/h0047679
Spence, D. P., Dahl, H., & Jones, E. E. (1993). Impact of interpretation on
associative freedom. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
 
61,
 395–
402. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.61.3.395
Spokane, A. R. (1989). Are there psychological and mental health consequences
of difficult career decisions? 
Journal of Career Development,
 
16,
 19–23.
Stadter, M. (1996). 
Object relations brief therapy: The therapeutic relationship in
short-term work.
 Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.
Stahl, J., & Hill, C. E. (2008). A comparison of four methods for assessing
natural helpers. 
Journal of Community Psychology,
 
36,
 289–298.
doi:10.1002/jcop.20195
Stenzel, C. L., & Rupert, P. A. (2004). Psychologists’ use of touch in individual
psychotherapy. 
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, & Practice,
 
41,
 332–345.
doi:10.1037/0033-3204.41.3.332
Strong, S. R., & Claiborn, C. D. (1982). 
Change through interaction: Social
psychological processes of counseling and psychotherapy.
 New York, NY: Wiley.
499
Strupp, H. H., & Binder, J. L. (1984). 
Psychotherapy in a new key: A guide to
time-limited dynamic psychotherapy.
 New York, NY: Basic Books.
Strupp, H. H., & Hadley, S. W. (1977). A tripartite model of mental health
and therapeutic outcomes: With special reference to negative effects in
psychotherapy. 
American Psychologist,
 
32,
 187–196. doi:10.1037/0003-
066X.32.3.187
Sue, D., Sue, D. W., & Sue, S. (1994). 
Understanding abnormal behavior
 (4th
ed.). Princeton, NJ: Houghton Mifflin.
Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (1999). 
Counseling the culturally different: Theory and
practice
 (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Wiley.
Suinn, R. M. (1985). Imagery rehearsal applications to performance
enhancement. 
The Behavior Therapist,
 
8,
 155–159.
Summers, R. F., & Barber, J. P. (2010). 
Psychodynamic therapy: A guide to
evidence-based practice.
 New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Sweeney, M. A., & Cottle, W. C. (1976). Nonverbal acuity: A comparison of
counselors and noncounselors. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
23,
 394–397.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.23.4.394
Teyber, E. (2006). 
Interpersonal process in psychotherapy: A relational approach
(5th ed.). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Thompson, B., & Hill, C. E. (1991). Therapist perceptions of client reactions.
Journal of Counseling and Development,
 
69,
 261–265.
Tinsley, H. E. A., de St. Aubin, T. M., & Brown, M. T. (1982). College
students’ help-seeking preferences. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
29,
 523–
533. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.29.5.523
Truax, C. B. (1966). Reinforcement and nonreinforcement in Rogerian
psychotherapy. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
 
71,
 1–9.
doi:10.1037/h0022912
Truax, C. B., & Carkhuff, R. R. (1967). 
Toward effective counseling and
psychotherapy.
 Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Van den Stock, J., Righart, R., & de Gelder, B. (2007). Body expressions
influence recognition of emotions in the face and voice. 
Emotion,
 
7,
 487–
494. doi:10.1037/1528-3542.7.3.487
van Wormer, L. (1996). Teaching/learning the language of therapy: Guidelines
for teacher and student. 
Issues in Social Work Education,
 
16,
 28–45.
Vivino, B., Thompson, B., Hill, C. E., & Ladany, N. (2009). Compassion in
psychotherapy: The perspective of psychotherapists nominated as
compassionate. 
Psychotherapy Research,
 
19,
 157–171.
doi:10.1080/10503300802430681
Wachtel, P. L. (2008). 
Relational theory and the practice of psychotherapy.
 New
York, NY: Guilford Press.
Wadlinger, H. A., & Isaacowitz, D. M. (2011). Fixing our focus: Training
attention to regulate emotion. 
Personality and Social Psychology Review,
 
15,
500
75–102. doi:10.1177/1088868310365565
Wampold, B. E. (2001). 
The great psychotherapy debate: Models, methods, and
findings.
 Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wampold, B. E., Mondin, G. W., Moody, M., Stich, P., Benson, K., & Ann,
H. (1997). A metaanalysis of outcome studies comparing bona fide
psychotherapies: Empirically “all must have prizes.” 
Psychological Bulletin,
122,
 203–215. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.122.3.203
Ward, D. E. (1984). Termination of individual counseling: Concepts and
strategies. 
Journal of Counseling and Development,
 
63,
 21–25.
doi:10.1002/j.1556-6676.1984.tb02673.x
Waters, D. B., & Lawrence, E. C. (1993). 
Competence, courage, and change: An
approach to family therapy.
 New York, NY: Norton.
Watson, D. L., & Tharp, R. G. (2006). 
Self-directed behavior: Self-modification
for personal adjustment
 (9th ed.). Florence, KY: Cengage Learning.
Watzlawick, P., Weakland, J. H., & Fisch, R. (1974). 
Change: Principles of
problem formation a
nd problem resolution.
 New York, NY: Norton.
Webster, D. W., & Fretz, B. R. (1978). Asian-American, Black and White
college students’ preference for help-giving sources. 
Journal of Counseling
Psychology,
 
25,
 124–130. doi:10.1037/0022-0167.25.2.124
Weiss, J., Sampson, H., & the Mount Zion Psychotherapy Research Group.
(1986). 
The psychoanalytic process: Theory, clinical observations, and empirical
research.
 New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Whiston, S. C. (2005). 
Principles and applications of assessment in counseling.
Belmont, CA: Thomson, Brooks/Cole.
White, M. (2007). 
Maps of narrative practice.
 New York, NY: Norton.
Williams, E. N., Hayes, J. A., & Fauth, J. (2008). Therapist self-awareness:
Interdisciplinary connections and future directions. 
Handbook of counseling
psychology
 (4th ed., pp. 303–319). New York, NY: Wiley.
Williams, E. N., Hurley, K., O’Brien, K., & DeGregorio, A. (2003).
Development and validation of the Self-Awareness and Management
Strategies (SAMS) Scales for therapists. 
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research,
Practice, Training,
 
40,
 278–288. doi:10.1037/0033-3204.40.4.278
Williams, E. N., Judge, A., Hill, C. E., & Hoffman, M. A. (1997). Experiences
of novice therapists in prepracticum: Trainees’, clients’, and supervisees’
perceptions of therapists’ personal reactions and management strategies.
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
44,
 390–399. doi:10.1037/0022-
0167.44.4.390
Wolfe, B. E. (2005). 
Understanding and treating anxiety disorders.
 Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Wonnell, T. L., & Hill, C. E. (2000). Effects of including the action stage in
dream interpretation. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 
47,
 372–379.
Wonnell, T. L., & Hill, C. E. (2002, June). 
The action stage and predictors of
501
action in dream interpretation.
 Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
Society for Psychotherapy Research, Santa Barbara, CA.
Yalom, I. D. (1980). 
Existential psychotherapy.
 New York, NY: Basic Books.
Yalom, I. D. (1995). 
Theory and practice of group psychotherapy
 (4th ed.). New
York, NY: Basic Books.
Young, M. E. (2001). 
Learning the art of helping: Building blocks and techniques.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Zunker, V. G. (1994). 
Career counseling: Applied concepts and life planning
 (4th
ed.). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
502
About the Author
Clara E. Hill, PhD,
 earned her doctorate at Southern Illinois University in
1974. She started her career that year as an assistant professor in the Department
of Psychology, University of Maryland, and is currently still there as a professor.
She has been president of the Society for Psychotherapy Research, editor of the
Journal of Counseling Psychology,
 and co-editor of 
Psychotherapy Research.
 Awards
include the Leona Tyler Award (Society of Counseling Psychology), the
Distinguished Psychologist Award (Division 29 of the American Psychological
Association), the Distinguished Research Career Award (Society for
Psychotherapy Research), and the Outstanding Lifetime Achievement Award
(Section on Counseling and Psychotherapy Process and Outcome Research,
Society for Counseling Psychology). Her major research interests are helping
skills, psychotherapy process and outcome, training therapists, dream work, and
qualitative research. She has published 187 journal articles, 67 chapters in
books, and 11 books (including 
Helping Skills,
 
Dream Work in Therapy,
 
Insight
in Psychotherapy,
 
Transformation in Psychotherapy,
 and 
Consensual Qualitative
Research
). She is married with two children and one grandchild.
503
Feedback Form
To the reader of this book:
I hope that 
Helping Skills: Facilitating Exploration, Insight, and Action
 (4th
ed.), has been useful to you in learning the helping skills. I would like to hear
your feedback so that we can improve future editions of the book. Please
complete this sheet and send it to me.
Thank you for your help.
Name (optional):
_____________________________________
School and address:
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
Department:
_____________________________________
Instructor’s name:
_____________________________________
Name of course for which this book was used:
_____________________________________
1. What did you like most about this book?
2. What did you like least about this book?
3. In the space below or on a separate sheet of paper, please write specific
suggestions for improving this book and anything else that you would like to
write about your experience using this book and trying to learn the helping
504
skills.
4. What is the most important or surprising thing you learned about helping
skills from reading this book?
Please return this form to:
Clara Hill, PhD
Department of Psychology
University of Maryland, College Park
College Park, MD 20474
Fax: (301) 314-9566
e-mail: cehill@umd.edu
505
