BECOMING A THERAPIST
Becoming a Therapist
What Do I Say, and Why?
SUZANNE BENDER
EDWARD MESSNER
THE GUILFORD PRESS
New York London

© 2003 The Guilford Press
A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc.
72 Spring Street, New York, NY 10012
www.guilford.com
Paperback edition 2004
All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced, translated, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording,
or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Last digit is print number: 98765432
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bender, Suzanne
Becoming a therapist : what do I say, and why? / by Suzanne Bender
and Edward Messner.
p. cm.
ISBN 1-57230-804-4 (hardcover) ISBN 1-57230-943-1 (paperback)
1. Psychotherapy. I. Messner, Edward. II. Title.
RC480 .B359 2003
616.89′ 14—dc21
2002007092
To my mother and father, Meri and David Bender
—S. B.
To Marie Messner
—E. M.
About the Authors
Suzanne Bender, MD, is a Staff Psychiatrist, working with children and
adolescents, at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) and Clinical In-
structor in Psychiatry at Harvard Medical School. She received her medi-
cal degree from the University of California, San Francisco, and com-
pleted an adult psychiatry residency and child psychiatry fellowship at
MGH. Dr. Bender received the MGH Psychiatry Department’s Psycho-
dynamic Writing Award in 1998. She also has a private practice, special-
izing in psychotherapy with adolescents and adults.
Edward Messner, MD, is a Senior Psychiatrist at Massachusetts General
Hospital and an Associate Clinical Professor of Psychiatry at Harvard
Medical School. He is a graduate of Harvard Medical School and, fol-
lowing an internship in San Francisco, attended the United States Air
Force (USAF) School of Aviation Medicine. He was later awarded the
USAF Commendation Ribbon for Meritorious Achievement as advisor
to the Surgeon General of the Korean Air Force.
After his military service, Dr. Messner’s psychiatric training con -
sisted of 2 years of adult residency at the Boston Veterans Administra -
tion Hospital, 1 year of child fellowship at the Thom Clinic in Boston,
and then 2 years as a clinical and research fellow at MGH. At the same
time, he received training at the Boston Psychoanalytic Institute and was
graduated as a certified psychoanalyst. During Dr. Messner’s career in
the MGH Psychiatry Department, which has been rated number one in
the United States for 7 consecutive years, he has earned the Teacher of
the Year award six times.
vii
Prologue
I smiled at the empty chair, hoping my facial expression conveyed empa-
thy and wisdom. In 15 minutes, my first psychotherapy patient would
inhabit this seat, and as a solid believer in site-dependent learning, I
hoped these final rehearsals would prepare me for the first moments of
the upcoming session.
One more time, I ran through the details of my scripted introduc-
tion. I tried to assume an assortment of “empathic postures.” I moved
the box of tissues next to the unoccupied chair. I offered my outstretched
hand to the empty space. “I’m Dr. Bender,” I said in the most sensitive,
professional tone I could muster.Pause. Pause. After the first hello, I was
tongue-tied.
Before psychotherapy training, I never had trouble talking with pa-
tients. During a year of medical internship, communicating with the seri-
ously ill seemed to be one of my strengths. Maybe my acute onset of
wordlessness as a psychotherapy trainee was connected to my high per -
sonal expectations. I wanted to be very good. Well, to be honest, I
wanted to be incredible. Instead, 1994 became my year to sweat as I in -
tently listened to my first patients. I half expected (hoped? prayed?) that
healing words would magically emerge from within me, heralding the
first spontaneous psychiatric cure. You know, the patient enters the of -
fice in anguish and leaves 50 minutes later with renewed hope and faith
in the human condition.
I majored in psychology in college and have some relatives who are
therapists, so I hoped I would have a knack for this work. Needless to
say, I was disappointed and had to learn the art of psychotherapy at the
same painstakingly slow rate as everybody else.
During my first few years of training, I started my personal search
for words: words that would calm, words that would firmly confront,
ix
and words that would comfort. Many of my supervisors gently teased
me when I wrote down their advice verbatim for reference presession.
Personally, I still think this approach makes perfect sense. In psychother-
apy, words and sentences are the tools of intervention. A small modifica-
tion in sentence structure changes a comment from judgmental to
empathic. For example, the sentence “Your relationship with your hus -
band seems complicated” is much less disparaging than the comment
“You certainly have trouble dealing with your husband.”
Despite this intensive preparation, I didn’t coast through my first
year as a psychotherapist. I endured patients who never showed for the
first session and others who came to a few meetings and then vanished. I
worried that I was inadvertently causing the recurrent flight reactions.
I fantasized about a sophisticated walkie-talkie system that would
fit discreetly inside my ear and connect me to my supervisor’s office.
With this system, I could obtain the guidance I needed instantly during a
difficult session. I could whisper into my hidden microphone while the
patient blew her nose. “Dr. Messner, are you in? She’s not talking at all.
What should I do next?”
“10-4, Suzanne, why don’t you ask her more about her relationship
with her brother?”
“Gotcha. Thanks. Signing off for now. I’ll keep you posted.”
“What do you really do in there?” became my persistent question
during my first years as a psychiatrist. I was taught almost nothing
about the process of psychotherapy in medical school or internship. A
mental review of psychotherapists in film wasn’t helpful. Except for
Judd Hirsch’s portrayal of a sensitive therapist in the movie Ordinary
People (and how many comforting comments can you glean from a few
thoughtful scenes?), portrayals of sensitive, intelligent, and ethical thera-
pists are hard to come by on the big screen. At best, therapists are fea -
tured as comic relief, quirky, and somewhat odd. At worst, they’re sleep-
ing with their patients or their patients’ family members. In general,
Hollywood provides a clear outline of what not to do.
While my beginning theory/technique courses and supervision pro -
vided some useful guidance, my questions emerged more quickly than
they could be answered. From my novice’s perspective, most books for
the beginning therapist weren’t very useful. One book advised me to cre-
ate “a holding environment” for an agitated patient in crisis. Another
stated that it was useful to “explore the resistance” for a patient who
didn’t want to talk. With only weeks of experience under my belt, I had
no idea how to follow these recommendations.
To make matters worse, the patients in these texts were entirely too
well behaved. They came on time; they understood complex interpreta -
tions; and they talked openly about their transference to the therapist. I
x Prologue
didn’t feel I could apply the interventions created for such extraordi -
narily sophisticated exemplars to my practice of ordinary patients with -
out prior psychotherapy experience. Meanwhile, my clinic was growing,
and I found myself embroiled in many complex clinical situations. What
I needed were explicit directions telling me what to do, what to say, and
why.
The roots of Becoming a Therapist: What Do I Say, and Why? took
hold during an innocent conversation at the Massachusetts General
Hospital (MGH) cafeteria with Dr. Edward Messner, a primary mentor
and teacher at MGH with a special ability to explain arcane psychother-
apeutic concepts in a clear and concise manner. He has won numerous
Teacher of the Year awards, most recently in 1999. On a whim, I told
Dr. Messner of my hope to write a book someday that would explain
how to practice psychotherapy to the interested but confused beginner. I
figured I’d be able to advise others once I had more experience, maybe
when I was about 50. Instead of waiting 20 years, Dr. Messner proposed
we write the book together—now. For me, it was one of those “aha”
moments: Our collaboration was the perfect way to organize a book
geared for the novice psychotherapist. I am still in touch with all the
gnawing questions that bother a beginner, and Dr. Messner can explain
what to do clearly and concisely, based on more than 40 years of clinical
experience.
Although our original intention was to produce an instructive book
for clinicians only, I was delighted when a number of friends, ranging
from writers to lawyers, were intrigued by our project. It turns out that
psychotherapists aren’t the only ones with questions about psychothera-
py. People are curious about what goes on during talking treatment,
including how therapists think or feel, and what they say—and why. As
we revised our text, we have kept our nontherapist readers in mind. We
have included a glossary to define the technical terms that we could not
reasonably avoid. The book still “talks” directly to the beginning clini -
cian, but the information should be accessible to nontherapists as well.
The text before you represents our combined judgment. Common
predicaments faced by the beginning psychotherapist will be presented in
my voice while explanations and guidance will be presented in the plu -
ral, as our collaborative effort. Innumerable hours of supervision, with
colleagues and mentors, also helped me to formulate my questions and
to find my own answers. We gratefully recognize these clinicians in the
acknowledgments.
We don’t pretend to have the answers to every situation that you
will encounter with your patients; the process of psychotherapy is as
complex and variable as the patients and the therapists who engage in it.
Instead, we hope that the outlined concepts and approaches will guide
Prologue xi
you as you develop your own voice. This book will lead you through the
basics of psychotherapy: how to start seeing a patient, how to continue
through the inevitable difficulties inherent in the process, how to under -
stand what you are doing and why, and finally, how to terminate a treat-
ment. Our greatest hope is that this book will provide for you what I
was looking for just a few years ago.
xii Prologue
List of Dialogues
I. The Consultation
Chapter 1. First Contact
1.1. The therapist’s vague phone message in response to the patient’s
first call
1.2. The therapist’s clear phone message in response to the patient’s
first call
1.3. The first phone conversation: In her excitement, the therapist
agrees to meet at an inopportune time
1.4. The first phone conversation: The therapist sets up a viable
appointment time
Chapter 2. The First Moments
2.1. A method of introduction that preserves the patient’s
confidentiality
2.2. Starting the session with a statement that may set the stage for a
paternalistic relationship rather than a collaboration
2.3. Starting the session with a statement that may make the patient
defensive
2.4. Starting the session with a statement that may facilitate
discussion
2.5. Starting the session with a statement that should avoid
defensiveness
Chapter 3. Initiating an Alliance and Assessing Safety
3.1. Framing the first three visits
3.2. The therapist takes an overly passive stance during the first
interview
3.3. An overstructured approach for the first interview
xiii
3.4. Balancing the need for information and the need to create a
therapeutic alliance during the first consultation session
3.5. Collecting some basic information at the end of the first session
Chapter 4. Enhancing the Therapeutic Alliance and Eliciting History
4.1. Opening the second session
4.2. Clarifying the patient’s current psychiatric symptoms—a more
directive approach in the second consultation session
4.3. The therapist assumes incorrect information about the patient
4.4. Collecting a personal and family psychiatric history
4.5. Collecting a personal and family medical history
4.6. Closing the second session
Chapter 5. Collecting a Psychosocial History and Screening for
Common Psychological Disorders
5.1. Obtaining a developmental history by following the patient’s lead
5.2. Three strategies to assess substance abuse during the consultation
5.3. Assessing substance abuse using the CAGE questionnaire
5.4. Screening for anxiety disorders during the consultation
5.5. Screening for psychosis and mania during the consultation
interview
Chapter 6. Formulating a Treatment Plan
6.1. Explaining the process of psychotherapy to a new patient
6.2. The therapist sensitively refers the new patient to another
clinician early in the consultation
6.3. An excerpt from a session followed by a typical process note that
abbreviates the action and formulates the therapist’s questions
II. Frame and Variations
Chapter 7. The Frame
Chapter 8. Setting the Fee and Billing
8.1. The therapist does not review her fee with the private practice
patient early in treatment and then ends up accepting a much
lower fee
8.2. The therapist discusses her fee and insurance issues during the
first phone call
8.3. Discussing managed care as payment for psychotherapy and how
to set a reduced fee
8.4. The therapist confronts a private practice patient receiving a
reduced fee who has monetary resources that were kept
secret
8.5. Discussing payment with the patient who hasn’t paid
xiv List of Dialogues
8.6. How to react when a patient’s relative refuses to subsidize the
therapy as previously promised
Chapter 9. Telephone Calls: From Dependencies to Emergencies
9.1. The therapist sets herself up for abuse of her pager and of her
emergency services
9.2. The therapist allows and then encourages extended phone calls
outside the session
9.3. Assessment of a situation after a page followed by a quick but
empathic crisis intervention
9.4. Setting limits empathically for outside phone contact between
sessions
9.5. Emergency evaluation by phone
Chapter 10. No-Shows, Late Arrivals, and Late Departures
10.1. The therapist is overaccommodating and extends the session to
placate a late patient
10.2. The therapist does not extend a session to accommodate a
patient who was late
10.3. When a patient repeatedly brings up emotionally loaded topics at
the end of the session
10.4. Discussing repeated late attendance in a therapeutic manner
10.5. Responding to a patient who recurrently misses her appointments
10.6. The therapist is late to the session
Chapter 11. Confidentiality and Its Limits
11.1. The therapist-in-training informs the patient that a supervisor
will advise and guide the therapist
11.2. The therapist requests permission to consult a group of clinicians
at a case conference
11.3. The therapist tries to learn the meaning behind the patient’s
request to see her own psychotherapy records
11.4. The therapist protects the patient’s confidentiality in response to
an unexpected phone call
11.5. The patient recalls a history of physical abuse, expresses suicidal
and homicidal feelings, and the therapist panics
11.6. The therapist carefully assesses suicidality or homicidality in a
high-risk patient
III. Chemistry
Chapter 12. Substance Abuse
12.1. The therapist does not recognize that her new psychotherapy
patient is also an active substance abuser
List of Dialogues xv
12.2. The therapist identifies her new psychotherapy patient as an
active substance abuser
12.3. The therapist confronts her patient about his substance abuse in
an authoritative and ultimately nontherapeutic manner and then
colludes with the patient to ignore the mounting evidence that
the patient has a substance abuse problem
12.4. The therapist sensitively confronts a patient with an active
substance abuse problem who is in denial
12.5. Typical therapy session with a substance abuser in the very early
stages of recovery
12.6. Confronting an active substance abuser who has been lying
about his treatment compliance
Chapter 13. Integrating Psychopharmacology with Psychotherapy
13.1. The therapist does not complete a thorough
psychopharmacological evaluation for a psychotherapy patient
13.2. How to talk to a psychotherapy patient about starting
medications
13.3. The therapist becomes too medically oriented after the patient
starts taking a medication
13.4. When the psychotherapist incorporates both biological and
psychological perspectives
13.5. Discussing medication as an option for a patient who refuses
psychopharmacological treatment although she would clearly
benefit from it
IV. Therapeutic Dilemmas
Chapter 14. Management of Impasses
14.1. The therapist employs ineffective tactics to respond to an impasse
in the treatment
14.2. The therapist employs effective responses to the therapeutic
impasse
14.3. Premature and inaccurate clarifications
14.4. Using a dream to clarify the goals of therapy
14.5. The therapist interprets a patient’s recurring difficulty with her
friend
Chapter 15. Empathic Lapses
15.1. An empathic lapse occurs between the patient and her therapist;
the therapist responds by becoming defensive, focusing on the
patient’s past, and then trying to repair the misunderstanding too
quickly
xvi List of Dialogues
15.2. The more experienced therapist talks with a patient in detail
about a recent empathic lapse
15.3. The therapist’s countertransference reaction results in an
empathic lapse, and the therapist cannot immediately untangle
her own issues from those of the patient
15.4. The therapist realizes that her countertransference reaction
resulted in some unempathic responses and accepts responsibility
for her behavior
15.5. After responding unempathically to the patient in a previous
sesssion (Example 15.3), the therapist works through her own
countertransference reaction and, in the next session, talks with
the patient about the interaction
15.6. The patient alludes to an empathic lapse in the previous session,
and the therapist helps her talk about it directly
Chapter 16. Transference and Countertransference
16.1. The therapist responds appropriately to a patient with a strongly
aversive first impression
16.2. The therapist experiences a transference reaction as a personal
attack and responds countertherapeutically
16.3. The patient’s transference reaction is used to inform and to
advance the therapy
16.4. The therapist moves the focus away from the transference when
the patient becomes paranoid
16.5. The therapist notes her own increasing feeling of helplessness in
the session and uses the experience to shape her next
intervention
Chapter 17. Termination
17.1. The therapist is unable to maintain a focus on the patient and
steps out of her professional role after announcing that she will
be leaving the city in 6 months
17.2A and 17.2B. The therapist announces that she will be leaving
the city in 6 months and listens carefully to her patient’s
reactions (2A, the indifferent patient; 2B, the upset patient)
17.3. The patient decompensates after the therapist announces the date
that treatment will end
17.4. The patient announces her forthcoming move and then tries to
ignore the upcoming separation from the therapist
17.5. The patient expresses her gratitude toward her therapist, and the
therapist responds
List of Dialogues xvii
Contents
Introduction 1
I. THE CONSULTATION
CHAPTER 1. First Contact 9
CHAPTER 2. The First Moments 19
CHAPTER 3. Initiating an Alliance and Assessing Safety 26
CHAPTER 4. Enhancing the Therapeutic Alliance and
Eliciting History
40
CHAPTER 5. Collecting a Psychosocial History and
Screening for Common Psychological
Disorders
67
CHAPTER 6. Formulating a Treatment Plan 88
II. FRAME AND VARIATIONS
CHAPTER 7. The Frame 105
CHAPTER 8. Setting the Fee and Billing 109
xix
CHAPTER 9. Telephone Calls: From Dependencies
to Emergencies
134
CHAPTER 10. No-Shows, Late Arrivals, and
Late Departures
153
CHAPTER 11. Confidentiality and Its Limits 174
III. CHEMISTRY
CHAPTER 12. Substance Abuse 197
CHAPTER 13. Integrating Psychopharmacology
with Psychotherapy
216
IV. THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
CHAPTER 14. Management of Impasses 235
CHAPTER 15. Empathic Lapses 259
CHAPTER 16. Transference and Countertransference 277
CHAPTER 17. Termination 291
Epilogue 309
Glossary 311
Bibliography 319
Acknowledgments 323
Index 325
xx Contents
Introduction
Becoming a psychotherapist is an unusual experience. Some of my teach-
ers have compared psychotherapy to an impromptu dance between two
partners. You can plan the first “hello” and “thank you” at the end of
the set, but what happens between the greetings is unpredictable. How-
ever, if you are familiar with some basic and common dance steps, you
will have an easier time improvising with a new partner. Psychotherapy
is similar. Advanced therapists have an expansive repertoire of “steps” at
their disposal. They are comfortable dealing with the basics in psycho-
therapy, so they can tailor each treatment to meet the unique needs of a
patient.
This book’s purpose is to teach you the basic steps one needs to
know fluently to practice psychotherapy. It is not a cookbook of what to
say and when, but a guidebook to help the beginner understand and re -
solve common clinical dilemmas. We outline some common predica -
ments that emerge in many treatments and then evaluate a variety of re -
sponses.
As physicians, we refer to the person seeking therapy as a patient,
but some therapists may prefer mentally to substitute the term “client.”
Throughout the book, we have tried to avoid jargon so the text can be
understood by a wide range of readers, including clinicians, patients, po-
tential patients, and inquisitive laypersons.
THE BASICS
What is psychotherapy suppposed to do? Psychotherapy can help pa -
tients cope with traumas, crises, losses, and developmental changes. It
can enable people to bring out the best in themselves by recognizing and
1
then discarding ineffective approaches to life’s challenges and by discov-
ering talents, capacities, and strengths that were previously buried. The
psychotherapeutic relationship itself is involved in the healing process. It
can provide a model for mature and empathic interactions and can foster
the development of problem-solving skills in emotionally laden situa -
tions. By removing the obstacles to personal maturation, psychotherapy
can help a patient discover inner complexity, richness, beauty, and
worth.
For psychotherapy to occur, the patient must make it to the thera -
pist’s office. This is no little achievement. By calling for an appointment,
the patient is acknowledging that she has an emotional conflict or diffi -
culty that has not improved despite her best efforts. Often, the trip to the
therapist is the patient’s last resort. Since psychotherapy is poorly under-
stood by many people, it is often shunned and considered only after
other remedies (i.e., exercise, relaxation, friendly advice, vitamin supple-
ments, etc.) have failed.
Interestingly, as a treatment evolves, it may focus on a conflict very
different from the one that first brought the patient to the office. For ex-
ample, a patient may start therapy complaining about her self-centered
partner who is unresponsive to her many thoughtful gestures. Although
the beginning of treatment may concentrate on the patient’s relationship,
eventually the focus may shift. Why is the patient drawn to such an
unfulfilling partner in the first place? After some discussion of present
and past difficulties, it may become clear that the patient has a maladap-
tive behavior pattern, pulling her toward self-absorbed companions.
Here’s where the work in psychotherapy becomes difficult. If it
were easy to act differently or to feel better, the patient wouldn’t need
therapy in the first place. Underneath an emotional conflict that doesn’t
seem to make sense (e.g., why is this person always attracted to
unsupportive partners?) there may lurk multiple intrapsychic forces that
oppose more adaptive behaviors. These forces are powerful. They have
to be; they’ve repeatedly interfered with the patient’s ability to act in a
way that would promote her own happiness or productivity.
As therapists, it is our duty and responsibility to recognize these
forces, to respect them, and then to learn about them in careful detail. As
looking at one’s emotional blemishes isn’t easy, the treatment must ex -
plore the patient’s difficulties in a nonpejorative and compassionate
manner. The goal of therapy is to understand the powerful grip of these
patterns of belief and emotion. They wouldn’t exist unless they had been
useful once, but by the time a person finds her way to therapy, they tend
to be obsolete and harmful.
When the patient is able to understand and to integrate both the
thinking and feeling parts of her unconscious motivations, emotional
2 Introduction
growth and change is possible. Learning this information unaccompa -
nied by the emotions that travel with it or feeling hurt and angry with -
out grasping its source isn’t therapeutic. For emotional change to occur,
both the feelings and thoughts involved in a conflict need to be under -
stood. Only then can the patient recognize that she has choices; before
this realization, her maladaptive behavior had appeared to be automatic
and to be the only option available. As treatment progesses, the patient
can choose more adaptive courses, but she often needs additional help
with this aspect of her personal development.
Underlying any treatment strategy is our recognition that many in -
ner conflicts, fears, and motivations originate outside the conscious
awareness of the patient. The powerful influences of early experience
need to be understood for the patient to improve. An understanding of
psychodynamic therapy can inform any type of treatment, especially
when complications such as noncompliance or self-defeating behaviors
arise.
Specialized therapies also exist. Cognitive-behavioral therapy fo-
cuses predominately on beliefs, attitudes, and actions. Psychopharmaco-
logical treatment uses medication to change the patient’s neurochemical
milieu.
This book includes elements of all these approaches. We believe the
well-prepared therapist needs to have a variety of potential interventions
available in her repertoire. For this reason, our approach could be called
integrative.
We hope the reader will learn how to cultivate and to preserve a
therapeutic environment that will allow any appropriate type of therapy
to flourish. Our intention is to help the reader provide the treatment that
is most beneficial to the patient, one that is shaped to her specific needs.
In order to illustrate, word for word, how to approach many basic
issues that commonly emerge in a psychodynamic psychotherapy, Dr.
Messner and I invented our virtual patient, Sallie Gane, a 21-year-old
college junior. With Sallie Gane, it’s possible for the reader to be the fly
on the wall, listening in to Sallie’s psychotherapy with me, her hypotheti-
cal therapist. Her story will unfold over time, just as it would in a typical
treatment. Notations describing Sallie’s tone of voice, facial expressions,
gestures, and postures will describe some of her nonverbal communica -
tions. Similar notations for the therapist are also included, as a thera -
pist’s body language complements any spoken word and is a vital part of
any effective treatment.
As I experience typical psychotherapeutic dilemmas in my interac -
tions with Sallie, the book will illustrate a variety of possible responses.
The titles of the dialogues inform the reader whether the example is an
illustration of a clinically effective strategy or is one worth avoiding. The
Introduction 3
List of Dialogues in the front matter of the book shows the title of each
dialogue in this volume so that the inquiring psychotherapist can quickly
search for specific clinical guidance.
Sallie’s treatment illustrates the basics of therapy in a cohesive
framework, but her psychological conflicts are more simple than those
found in typical clinic patients. She is not struggling with economic
hardship; she doesn’t currently abuse substances; her health is intact;
and she is not a victim of physical, sexual, or emotional abuse. For
teaching purposes, the therapy centered on a key conflict with her
mother and her brother. While some treatments may spend more time
focusing on the relationship with one parent, it would be very unusual
for the focus to be this exclusive, as most patients have been influenced
by numerous people, including both parents. Still, we hope the strategies
and words we offer in response to Sallie’s difficulties will be transferable
to psychotherapies with your patients.
Since Sallie Gane, the patient we will discuss in most detail, is fe -
male, we have employed feminine pronouns for general usage. With few
exceptions, “she” should be read to mean “she or he” and “her” should
be read to mean “her or his.”
The first part of the book, titled The Consultation, outlines how to
approach the first few sessions with a new patient. It begins with the first
phone call to set up an appointment and ends with an explanation of
psychotherapy for a patient unfamiliar with the process.
The second part of the book, titled Frame and Variations, explains
how talking with a therapist is different from talking to a friend. This
section explains the importance of the ground rules of the therapy (such
as starting and ending at a particular time) that may seem especially ar -
bitrary or capricious to the beginning clinician. This section also illus -
trates how to handle situations in which the boundaries of treatment are
violated.
Part III, Chemistry, focuses on harmful and helpful drugs relevant to
psychotherapeutic practice. Chapter 12 presents ways to recognize and
to treat patients with substance abuse problems. Chapter 13 offers sug -
gestions how to coordinate psychotropic medication treatment with psy-
chotherapy.
The last part of the book, titled Therapeutic Dilemmas, discusses
how to approach more complex issues that may emerge within a ther -
apy, such as dreams, interpretations, and transference. Overall, this sec -
tion focuses on the intricate process of therapy, rather than the basic
rules that create the treatment’s foundation.
Throughout the book, additional ficitious patients are introduced to
discuss topics not included in Sallie’s treatment. Candice Jones, a patient
who has some trouble differentiating what is real from what is fantasy
4 Introduction
when she is under stress, appears intermittently in multiple chapters
(Chapters 5, 11, 16, and 17), illustrating a specialized treatment ap -
proach for patients with this type of difficulty. Anthony Lee in Chapter
12 struggles with alcohol abuse. His story describes how the therapist’s
strategy must change when dealing with a patient who is actively abus -
ing substances. Chapter 13 introduces another patient, Elaine Barber, to
highlight the therapeutic issues that emerge when treating a patient with
psychotherapy and psychotropic medications. We have also used refer -
ences to actual patients to supplement the dialogues. In these cases, mul-
tiple clinical details have been changed to make the patient unrecogniz -
able.
Sallie is only one person with one cultural history. Since cultures
and ethnic traditions vary widely within the United States (e.g., the cul -
tures of the Los Angeles African American, Asian, Latino, or Jewish
communities are much different from those of their counterparts in New
York City), there is no way to know the details of every potential subcul-
ture of every patient you will treat. Therefore, we advocate a sensitivity
and interest in cultural, religious, ethnic, socioeconomic, gender, and
sexuality issues that highlight the uniqueness of each patient’s experi-
ence.
In case you want to learn more about a particular topic, we have in-
cluded a list of key words and technical terminology at the end of each
chapter that can guide a literature search on the Internet. Psychological
terms used in the text are defined in the Glossary.
So there you have it. Read on, and the therapy with Sallie begins,
starting with her first message on my answering machine. How should I
respond to her phone call? This is the type of question that used to
plague me. Our hope is that this text will provide answers to these types
of basic questions, explaining the “what,” “why,” and, most crucial for
the beginner, the “how” of psychotherapy.
Introduction 5
Part I
The Consultation
1
First Contact
The patient’s initial phone call may be a challenge for the novice therapist. It is
the first opportunity to set the stage for future treatment. Answering this call
should be approached with the patient’s privacy and concerns in mind.
THE PHONE CALL
“Hi, my name is Sally Gane and my primary care doctor gave me your
number. I think I am interested in therapy. Could you call me back? My
number is 555-2121.”
Before I pick up the phone to return Sally’s call, I want to acknowl-
edge how anxious I felt with my first psychotherapy referral. It was diffi-
cult to embrace a professional identity that had been in place only 48
hours. I reacted with an acute bout of indigestion.
My friends with similar psychosomatic tendencies reported feeling
flushed and then concerned that they may have suddenly acquired high
blood pressure. Some colleagues coped by skimming large psychothera -
py texts during occasional spare moments between patient care and sem-
inars. One classmate seemed unnaturally calm and overconfident, and
spouted comments like “Psychotherapy is all intuition anyway. I trust
my instincts, so I know I am ready to treat just about anybody.”
Basically, all of these reactions demonstrate the varied ways of man-
aging the intense and normal anxiety that most psychotherapy trainees
experience. Your supervisors probably had similar worries when they
began training, but they may have successfully submerged these memo -
ries as they gained expertise. On the bright side, anxiety can be advanta-
geous when it’s motivating but not overwhelming. Our recommendation
9
is to acknowledge the fact that you are worried and to share your expe -
rience with sensitive colleagues for support. Anxiety usually increases if
you fight the fact that you have it in the first place.
A psychotherapy trainee who can acknowledge that she has a lot to
learn is in the best position to help her patients. The process of psycho -
therapy is all about “not knowing” and having the patient teach you
about her experience. Provided that you listen attentively to her replies,
the more questions you ask your patient, the more the two of you will
learn together. The more questions you ask your supervisor, the more
you will learn about the case you are discussing. A grandiose “I-know-
everything” or “Here’s-the-answer” approach does not serve your pa -
tients well, especially if you hesitate to seek the guidance you will
undoubtably need.
When I started learning psychotherapy, I felt guilty that my patients
would be stuck with me as their therapist, rather than a more experi -
enced clinician in the community. Many of my friends shared my con -
cern. As Dr. Messner taught us in the first days of residency, beginnning
therapists have something very special to offer. A quote: “The first pa-
tients of a psychotherapy trainee are lucky.” Yes, lucky.
Under a trainee’s care, patients will receive enthusiastic, caring, and
attentive treatment from an interested and compassionate psychothera-
pist. Via supervision, the patient will also benefit from clinical expertise.
This combination can provide for a thoughtful and helpful treatment
that may have advantages over a treatment received in the community
where energy, idealism, and optimism may have subsided. I’ve even
heard patients brag about being their therapist’s first patient and about
how proud they were to be in this unique position.
Although it may seem obvious to some, we want to share a com -
mon and effective coping mechanism that can alleviate first-session jit -
ters. Whatever your current state during the consultation with a new pa-
tient, the patient is bound to be the more anxious individual in the
room. She is the one who has decided to confide in a stranger because of
persistent emotional difficulties. Setting up the first appointment may
have been a formidable task that took weeks to months. Whenever a
psychotherapy becomes complicated or anxiety-provoking for the thera-
pist, it can revitalize compassion and calm to remember how the patient
must feel.
For the skeptics in the audience, we want to review why we are
spending a chapter discussing how to answer a phone message, a
seemingly uncomplicated event. A therapist’s response to a phone mes -
sage from a potential psychotherapy patient counts as the first clinical
interaction. It is the therapist’s first opportunity to demonstrate the
unique attributes of the therapeutic relationship. The therapist’s focus
is on the patient, but the interaction is professional with specific and
10 THE CONSULTATION
strict limitations. With this in mind, even the words the therapist
chooses to leave on Sally’s answering machine are relevant in setting
the stage and tone for a potential therapeutic relationship and for fu -
ture communications.
So, how to respond?
I don’t know the details of Sally’s living situation. She may live
alone, or she may share an answering machine with her best friend, a
houseful of people, or even her parents. I also don’t know whether Sally
has shared her decision to start psychotherapy with her roommates,
whoever they may be. These circumstances necessitate leaving a rela -
tively discreet message on her answering machine if she is not home.
To protect privacy, I use words that do not scream “psychotherapy”
when returning a message. The upcoming session can be referred to as
an “appointment” or “meeting.” Since I have not met Sally yet, I may
choose to address her in a more formal manner—“Sally Gane” or “Ms.
Sally Gane.”
I feel most comfortable referring to myself in a first phone message
as Suzanne Bender, not Dr. Suzanne Bender. Other clinicans disagree
with this approach, stating that it is important to use one’s professional
title consistently. There are pros and cons to both points of view. On the
one hand, if I address my future patient in a more formal manner on the
phone, it may be more consistent to use my title as well. Yet if I am leav-
ing a message, I have no way of knowing who might hear it. A phone
message from a doctor is bound to fuel questions from housemates. A
bland message from an unidentified person (Suzanne Bender, instead of
Dr. Suzanne Bender) is less likely to spur curiosity. Personally, I err on
the side of protecting the patient’s privacy until I know more about the
patient’s living situation.
While returning a message may seem like a simple communication,
some messages facilitate future interactions better than others. Here’s an
example of a message that could lead to a mishap:
EXAMPLE 1.1
The therapist’s vague phone message in response to the
patient’s first call
T
HERAPIST: Hello, this is Suzanne Bender returning a message from Ms.
Sally Gane. You can call me at my pager, 555-0001, or I’ll call back
tonight so we can set up a meeting time.
While this message seems relatively straightforward, its vague direc-
tions set the stage for future “phone tag.” First, I don’t clarify when I’ll
be available to answer pages (or when I will be in the office and able to
First Contact 11
answer the phone) without delay. The patient may page me while I’m
commuting home and therefore unable to return the call for many min -
utes. By the time I answer the call, I may have to continue my dialogue
with the answering machine. I’m then left in the uncomfortable position
of chasing my new patient to set up a meeting time.
Some possible solutions:
First, I try to answer initial phone calls in the early evening hours,
when I am more likely to contact the potential patient in person. If it is
still difficult to get in touch with the patient, the following message is an
effective option.
EXAMPLE 1.2
The therapist’s clear phone message in response to the
patient’s first call
T
HERAPIST: Hello, this is Suzanne Bender calling for Sally Gane. I re-
ceived your message. To reach me, you can page me tomorrow
between the hours of 9:00 and 1:00. My pager number is 555-0001.
At these times, I am able to answer fairly quickly. If we are unable
to connect today or tomorrow, please leave me a message with some
good times that I can reach you.
By stating the times I can promptly answer a page (or phone call), I
might avoid a call during off hours. Also, once I ask Sally to list times
she will be available, she becomes responsible for getting in touch with
me, rather than vice versa.
So, then, the first conversation occurs.
EXAMPLE 1.3
The first phone conversation: In her excitement, the therapist
agrees to meet at an inopportune time
T
HERAPIST: Hi, is this Ms. Sally Gane?
SALLY GANE: Yes.
THERAPIST: Hi, this is Dr. Suzanne Bender; I got your message.
SALLY: Oh, hi. I got your name from Dr. Newman, my doctor at school.
THERAPIST: You mentioned in your message that you might be interested
in therapy. Can you tell me a little bit about what you are looking
for?
S
ALLY: Umm, well, I don’t know. . . . Do you do therapy?
12 THE CONSULTATION
THERAPIST: I do. I have my schedule book open. Would you like to set
up a time to meet?
SALLY: Okay.
THERAPIST: What days are possible for you?
SALLY: Well, I am working part time and going to school, so my schedule
is a bit tight. But I could meet at Tuesday at 7:00 P.M. or Friday at
6:00 P.M.?
THERAPIST:( Feels stomach sink at thought of meeting so late in the day,
but doesn’t know what else to do but to agree.) Okay, I think Tues-
day at 7:00 would be fine.
SCHEDULING
With my first psychotherapy patients, I agreed to almost any meeting
time, no matter how awful, because I didn’t want to lose the potential
patient by being less accessible. With more experience, my strategy
changed. Now, before I return a call to set up a first appointment, I out-
line the hours I have available for new patients. During the initial phone
call, I only offer these session times, and avoid scheduling people during
protected times that feel too late or too early.
While the time of the first consultation does not commit the thera-
pist to that time for future therapy, the patient might develop that expec-
tation. If Friday evening at 6:00 is a one-time event, the therapist needs
to review her time restrictions when discussing future contacts.
During my first year as a therapist, I spent my Wednesday morn -
ings commuting at an ungodly hour to meet one patient at 6:30
A.M.
At first, I really didn’t mind. I was so excited to have any patient in -
terested in working with me. We started meeting during the summer
when the sun had already risen before my 30-minute commute. My
patient’s attendance was perfect; and the session with him was the
highlight of my day.
By December, I was no longer so excited by our arrangement. The
absurdity of the schedule hit home the day I spent 15 minutes inching
down an icy hill toward my subway stop before sunrise. Then my pa -
tient didn’t show up. When I called to find out what had happened, he
said it was too cold to come to such an early appointment.
This missed session was just the first of his many wintertime no-
shows. I tried to reschedule his weekly time, but he insisted that this was
the only hour he could meet with me during the entire week. I was
caught in a frequent beginner’s quandary: I was more invested in his
First Contact 13
therapy than he was, and I didn’t feel comfortable setting limits regard -
ing the meeting time. (Words I could have used: “Unfortunately, I can no
longer continue meeting at 6:30 A.M. Let’s look at our schedules together
and come up with a solution.”) Meanwhile, my patient continued to at -
tend only every second or third session and I continued to spend
Wednesday mornings in a fury. Ultimately, the therapy suffered. I was
not as sensitive or engaged as I might have been. How could I be when I
was fuming inside?
I hope to protect you from this type of mistake. Safeguarding your
own time is a crucial part of being an effective therapist. Meeting the pa-
tient’s needs with an awkward meeting time may eventually backfire
when the therapy suffers due to your increasing resentment.
Patients who work are ordinarily available mornings and evenings.
To make room for these patients and simultaneously to heed your own
needs, you can schedule patients with full work schedules at early or late
hours, depending on your own working style. Before I had my first child,
I preferred to start working early in the morning, but now, as a working
mother, I have one evening clinic a week for my hard-to-schedule pa-
tients.
When I end up in a scheduling nightmare that I didn’t anticipate
and don’t want to tolerate, I’ve tried to view the situation as an educa-
tional experience. I use supervision to examine what made it so difficult
to set limits. Once the dilemma is discussed and understood, my irate
feelings are dispelled, and I can consider how I can sensitively broach a
schedule change with the patient.
Let’s play back the first phone conversation, illustrating how I could
protect my schedule by offering a number of reasonable appointment
times.
EXAMPLE 1.4
The first phone conversation: The therapist sets up a viable
appointment time
T
HERAPIST: Hi, is this Ms. Sally Gane?
SALLY: Yes.
THERAPIST: Hi, this is Dr. Suzanne Bender; I got your message.
SALLY: Oh, hi. I got your name from Dr. Newman, my doctor at school.
THERAPIST: You mentioned in your message that you might be interested
in therapy. Can you tell me a little bit about what you are looking
for?
14 THE CONSULTATION
SALLY: Umm, well, I don’t know. . . . Do you do therapy?
THERAPIST: Yes. I would be glad to meet with you for a consultation. I
have my schedule book open. Would you like to set up a time to
meet?
S
ALLY: Okay.
THERAPIST: What days are possible for you?
SALLY: Well, I am working part-time and going to school, so my sched -
ule is a bit tight. But I could meet at Tuesday at 7:00 P.M. or Friday
at 6:00 P.M.?
THERAPIST: I don’t have either of those times available. My latest time
available during the week is 6:00 P.M. on Tuesday, but I have some
morning times available as well as some lunch hours. What about
8:00
A.M. on Thursday?
SALLY: Oh, I can’t do that. I do have Monday afternoons open.
THERAPIST: What about this Monday, July 6th, at 2:00 P.M.?
SALLY: Oh, I actually can do that.
THERAPIST: Good. I’m glad we found a time. Would you like to discuss
my fee now, or during the first visit?
SALLY: Um, can we discuss it during the meeting? Is that okay?
THERAPIST: Sure. Now let me give you directions to my office.
Example 1.4 also illustrates how I bring up my fee during the first
phone call. The question (“Would you like to discuss my fee now, or
during the first visit?”) broaches the topic of money in a respectful yet
open manner. An alternative approach would be to ask “Do you have
health insurance?” and then discuss whether the insurance covered your
services.
Since most novice psychotherapists train in a clinic where the ad -
ministrative staff handles the billing, I have not included an in-depth dis-
cussion of financial and insurance issues in this chapter. I did need to
know how to discuss fees and payments once I started to see private pa -
tients. We review how to set a fee and how to bill patients and/or insur -
ance companies in more detail in Chapter 8.
As my phone call with Sally draws to a close, it is useful to obtain
some basic information.
T
HERAPIST: Before we stop for now, for my records, may I have the cor-
rect spelling of your name and your address?
First Contact 15
SALLY: Oh, yes. I spell my first name with an “ie”—so it is “S-a-l-l-i-e.”
My last name is Gane, G-a-n-e. My address is 1111 Central Street
in Boston.
T
HERAPIST: What is the zip code?
SALLY: Um, it is 02114.
Spelling a patient’s name correctly conveys respect and consideration.
I ask for this information during the consultation because it may become
awkward to insert this simple question into an ongoing treatment. I try
never to assume how to spell a patient’s name since I’ve been wrong before.
Even simple names may have unusual spellings, as in this case, as Sallie
spells her name with an “ie” rather than the traditional “y.”
I never know when I might need a patient’s address during a ther -
apy, so I also collect this information in the first phone call or during the
first meeting. In a psychiatric emergency, an address can be life saving. If
Sallie leaves treatment abruptly, I might need to send her a letter or bill
by mail. Problems in confidentiality can also be avoided by having a pre-
cise address. My use of the phrase “for my records” emphasizes the pro-
fessional nature of the contract and reinforces the privacy that is pro-
tected in therapy.
Sallie may have some questions before the conversation ends.
S
ALLIE: Um, I was just wondering, before we meet, what is your psycho-
logical orientation?
THERAPIST: What do you mean?
SALLIE: Well, I am taking a psychology course and they are discussing
self psychology versus cognitive-behavioral psychology versus a
psychoanalytic approach to therapy. What’s your approach?
T
HERAPIST: Well, I use an eclectic approach that integrates teachings
from many of the schools but emphasizes psychodyamic psycho -
therapy.
SALLIE: What about cognitive-behavioral techniques?
THERAPIST: Can you tell me what you are looking for?
SALLIE: I don’t know really. I just want to know more about what to ex-
pect.
THERAPIST: I do incorporate some cognitive-behavioral therapy strate -
gies into treatment, but rather than discussing this now, I would like
to give these questions the time they deserve. I hope we can talk
more about them when we meet, and you can let me know your
concerns or preferences.
16 THE CONSULTATION
SALLIE: Okay, I’ll see you then.
THERAPIST: I look forward to meeting you on Monday, the 6th, at 2:00.
When setting up a first meeting, I try to keep the conversation sim -
ple and clear by validating the patient’s concerns but avoiding a lengthy
discussion that could be prone to misunderstandings.
It isn’t unusual for a patient to express concerns about the therapeu-
tic process as early as the first phone call. Sometimes these questions
may reflect the patient’s ambivalence regarding treatment. If she ex -
presses significant hesitation about psychodynamic psychotherapy or a
definite preference for another genre of treatment, I may provide alter -
native referral options. (Please see Chapter 6 for details on some of the
more common options that are available for psychological treatment.)
FRAMING THE FIRST VISITS AS A CONSULTATION
We view the first few sessions with a patient as a consultation, not the
beginning of treatment. The consultation consists of a few meetings dur-
ing which I will obtain a history, make a diagnosis, and recommend a
treatment plan. The package does not include a guarantee that I will be-
come the patient’s individual psychotherapist. In fact, until the consulta-
tion is complete, I cannot assume that individual psychotherapy is even
the treatment of choice.
Framing the meeting as the first session of a consultation has a
number of advantages. Before committing to treatment, the patient can
test whether she feels comfortable talking to me, and I can ascertain
whether I feel capable of treating her. Both of us are given the freedom to
view the first meeting as an introduction without an obligation to con -
tinue.
The consultation approach allows each person to see whether the
two individuals are a “good match,” a term commonly used in psycho -
logical circles. A “good match” means that the patient feels understood
and willing to work with the clinician, and the clinician feels hopeful
about her ability to work with the patient effectively.
Now and then, a patient may feel misunderstood by a therapist
from the moment she steps into the office. Sometimes the clinician can
turn this situation to therapeutic advantage by understanding why the
patient is so uncomfortable (see Chapter 16). However, bad matches
also exist. Sometimes the patient and therapist just don’t “click.” Cer -
tain people may work together more easily, depending on whether the
patient is searching for a therapist with a style similar to or different
First Contact 17
than her own. A shy, withdrawn woman may find a charismatic and in -
teractive male therapist either overwhelming or energizing. Alternatively,
a dramatic person may prefer a therapist with a similar disposition, or
one with a more low-key, soft-spoken approach.
I’ve found it’s best to explain the consultation process very early on
to reduce the likelihood of future misunderstanding. Some therapists
choose to review this information over the phone while setting up the
the first appointment so the arrangement is clear before the patient en -
ters the office. In Sallie’s treatment, I mention that the initial meeting is a
consultation during our phone conversation, and explain the process in
detail during our first session, in Chapters 2 and 3. As you meet many
different individuals and start many different therapies, it can be helpful
to try out multiple approaches in order to weigh the pros and cons of
each, first-hand.
Key words: confidentiality, consultation, evaluation, help seeking,
identifying information, privacy, psychiatric evaluation,
psychotherapy, psychotherapy scheduling
18 THE CONSULTATION
2
The First Moments
First impressions during the the initial visit of a psychotherapeutic consultation
are important. The therapist should greet the new patient in a manner that will
protect her confidentiality. The session begins with an open question that facili-
tates conversation.
INTRODUCTIONS
Sallie Gane checks herself into the clinic and sits down in the public
waiting area. She is 20 minutes early. She nervously picks up a news
magazine and flips through it quickly. I start my internal countdown:
10 minutes to 2:00 P.M., 5 minutes to 2:00. . . .
I felt more like a fraud than a clinician with my first patients. I ago-
nized over the fact that I couldn’t prepare beforehand for the first meet-
ings. I could orchestrate my greeting, but it was impossible to choreo -
graph the rest of the session before hearing what the patient had to say.
As a novice, I reviewed my first session plan with Dr. Messner.
To be honest, I hadn’t expected to have such a long discussion with
him about it. “Dr. Messner,” I’d started, “I’ll call out my patient’s name
in the waiting room, and we’ll walk into the office together, but then
what do I do?” He paused and didn’t answer my question right away. In-
stead, we discussed whether my current plan of action adequately pro -
tected my patient’s confidentiality. I hadn’t considered that privacy was a
therapeutic issue before the patient even entered the office.
As Dr. Messner explained, protecting a patient’s confidentiality
must be a priority. By calling my patient’s name in a common waiting
area, I would have failed to safeguard her identity. For psychotherapy to
19
be successful, the therapist must earn the patient’s trust by respecting
and protecting her privacy from the moment that the treatment begins.
Dr. Messner knew of a priest who had been struggling with his vow
of celibacy and had come to psychotherapy for help in clarifying his fu -
ture role in the church. The priest was wearing layman’s clothes and was
holding hands with a woman while he waited for his appointment. His
psychotherapist entered the public waiting room and greeted him with
“Hello, Father.” The low-level buzz in the waiting room ceased; people
stared and whispered. The therapist’s seemingly innocent greeting was
embarrassing at best, humiliating at worst: not the best way to instill
trust in a new relationship.
To avoid making a similar mistake when I met my patient, Dr.
Messner recommended that I identify myself without calling out her
name. With this strategy, I could protect her identity just in case she was
indirectly connected with someone in the waiting area. Her decision to
seek psychiatric consultation would remain private. (For more discus -
sion of confidentiality, please see Chapter 11.)
EXAMPLE 2.1
A method of introduction that preserves the patient’s
confidentiality
Sallie Gane now waits expectantly in the waiting room. There are
four other people waiting for other clinicians.
I ask the secretary who checked her in to point her out to me. I
approach her cautiously since I have not confirmed that she is my new
patient.
T
HERAPIST: Excuse me, who are you waiting to see?
SALLIE: Dr. Bender?
THERAPIST: Hello, I’m Dr. Bender. Let me show you to my office.
SALLIE: Thanks. I’m Sallie.
If Sallie didn’t offer her name spontaneously after my introduction,
I could confirm her identity in the office with a prompt: “And your
name is . . . ” or “I’m sorry, I didn’t catch your name. . . . ”
On first impression, I thought Example 2.1 seemed like introduc -
tion gymnastics. I didn’t feel grateful for Dr. Messner’s clear and sensi-
tive explanation. In fact, I felt resentful of the advice that felt too intri -
cate and restrictive. I checked with a few other supervisors to see
whether they agreed with his approach. Interestingly, they were all com-
pletely unanimous on this issue. Privacy first . . . and always, they said.
20 THE CONSULTATION
I still felt upset. With these new rules, I felt bound in a social strait -
jacket. I felt sure that Sallie would think my specially concocted intro -
duction was extremely strange. I also imagined many awkward moments
standing by a full waiting room, asking if anyone was here to see me and
getting no response. It didn’t feel natural to act in such a ritualistic man-
ner. One other worry: if I couldn’t even figure out how to say hello with-
out supervision, what damage might I do in an entire session? It took a
few deep breaths and some cathartic complaining sessions with my fel -
low trainees before I was ready to accept this unfamiliar approach.
It helped to think about learning psychotherapy as similar to learn -
ing a new sport. When you start to play a new game, such as basketball,
it initially feels very strange to dribble and shoot the ball. The moves
don’t feel natural, because they aren’t, but they are necessary in order to
play the game well. The moves in psychotherapy, such as the introduc -
tion to a patient, involve using everyday language in unique ways. Ini -
tially these procedures feel constraining and maybe even a bit bizarre,
but, within the realm of psychotherapy, they are appropriate.
I followed Dr. Messner’s advice and was surprised that my real pa-
tients didn’t react to my new greeting with raised eyebrows and “Who
are you?” looks. In fact, I have a definite sense that certain treatments
would have been in trouble if I hadn’t carefully protected patient confi-
dentiality from the first moment. Over time, what initally felt like an
odd greeting ritual began to feel natural and normal. Many interventions
in psychotherapy are like this, uncomfortable and stiff at first, but useful
and easier with time.
Sallie Gane stands up. I smile and she smiles back. She extends her
hand. Should I take it?
Some very traditional psychotherapists question whether even mini-
mal physical contact, such as an introductory handshake, is appropriate
between therapist and patient. Because a handshake is such an accepted
greeting in American culture, we think avoiding a handshake may feel
rejecting. The handshake will also give you nonverbal information. Does
the patient extend her hand comfortably, or is she more cautious? Is her
grip firm or loose? An interesting note: As therapy does try to minimize
all types of physical contact, this may be the last time you touch your pa-
tient, unless you shake her hand good-bye at the end of the treatment.
Would I extend my hand first? While I don’t think a correct answer
exists, I’ve personally decided not to initiate handshakes. During these
first moments, I don’t know anything about my new patient. She may be
avoiding a handshake because of underlying paranoia or a thought dis -
order. Setting the stage for future therapy interactions, I follow the pa -
tient’s lead, even with the basic hello.
The First Moments 21
I lead Sallie into my office. She moves toward the chair that I usu -
ally sit in; my bookbag clearly propped against the chair’s leg. What
should I do?
After I received detailed and unexpected advice about how to cho -
reograph introductions, I worried about other unanticipated clinical sit -
uations. Maybe there was a special rule that the patient sits in the office
chair she prefers no matter what the therapist’s previous plans. Luckily,
clinical situations that don’t involve confidentiality are best approached
with straightforward common sense. In this case, as the therapist, it is
important that you feel comfortable in your chair with easy access to
your desk, telephone, notepad, or other items. If I were stuck in the situ-
ation just outlined, I could point to the appropriate chair and redirect
Sallie with a quick comment: “Could you take this chair, please?” or
“Please sit here.”
SETTING UP THE OFFICE
Psychotherapists have minimal overhead. To practice this type of treat-
ment, all I really need is four walls, a couple of chairs, and a phone.
Therapists arrange the chairs in their office at various distances, de-
pending on their own culture and style. If the patient and I might kick
each other’s feet by accident, we’re too close. Depending on the popula-
tion I am working with, I might set up the room so that I am closer to
the door, allowing for a quick exit in case a patient becomes physically
threatening. I hope I never have to escape from my office, but in case of
an emergency, this setup would facilitate an easy departure.
Talking across a desk can be very formal and not conducive to inti-
mate conversation; my patient may feel like an employee reporting to
her superior. I can use the desk to my advantage if the patient sits at the
end of the desk, and I talk to her across the desk’s corner. This set up is
relaxed and may feel less threatening than sitting face to face across
open space.
In contrast to many other health professionals who display pictures
of their families at their desks, psychotherapists tend to avoid placing
personal photos in public view. Personal mementos draw attention away
from the patient’s intimate concerns and may make it more difficult for
the patient to focus on her own experience and to talk about issues that
may be shaming or painful. Family pictures also pique a patient’s curios-
ity, communicating an inconsistent message when the therapist refuses to
share further personal information.
Interestingly, many psychotherapists practice psychotherapy in a
22 THE CONSULTATION
home office, but do not decorate the professional space with personal
items. Nevertheless, interested patients will pay detailed attention to the
home environment, noting the type of cars in the driveway, the noises in
the other rooms, and any kitchen odors. Although an office at home
provides convenience and tax benefits, it is a challenge for a beginner.
How to decorate your office is your call. For obvious reasons, it’s
preferable to avoid pictures with violent, sexual, or distressing themes.
More neutral art is less distracting. My supervisors’ offices are all
unique. One is decorated in an English romantic design with intricate
needlepoint, overstuffed chairs, and fresh flowers. Another has abstract
modern art in neutral colors with a few enlarged photos of European
landmarks. To minimize distraction, a third does not decorate the wall
across from his patient’s chair. Clearly, there is more than one way to
create an office; and creating a space in which you feel comfortable is
important.
THE FIRST FEW MOMENTS OF THE INITIAL SESSION
Sallie Gane settles into her chair and sneezes. She looks expectantly at
me to start.
While later in therapy the patient will start talking about whatever
is on her mind, it is my responsibility to start the first session if the pa-
tient does not know how to begin. My opening question will set the tone
for the initial first meeting. While none of the beginnings that follow are
“bad,” some facilitate a discussion better than others.
EXAMPLE 2.2
Starting the session with a statement that may set the stage
for a paternalistic relationship rather than a collaboration
T
HERAPIST: How can I help you?
SALLIE: I don’t know actually. My friend told me I should be in therapy,
but nothing is really wrong, I guess.
THERAPIST: Oh, why are you here then?
At first glance, the introductory question “How can I help you?”
seems neutral and unassuming, but this opening may subtly promise
quick relief of long-standing symptoms, a service that the therapist may
not be able to provide. By suggesting a relationship based on dependence
The First Moments 23
or paternalism—or maternalism—the question may set the stage for an
undesirable regression if the patient expects a different type of process
than the one that will actually occur.
Psychotherapy is not effective because the clinician administers a
healing elixir to a passive patient. Instead, the power of the treatment
lies in the collaboration between therapist and patient, with the patient
acting as expert on the subject at hand, herself.
Unlike many other medical treatments, psychotherapy tends to be a
slow process that doesn’t follow a “Take two and call me in the morning”
model. There is no potion that will rapidly alleviate emotional pain, pro-
vide a stable romantic relationship, or supply career motivation. Even
most psychotropic medications, if indicated, do not work immediately.
Understandably, most patients hope for a quick cure, but since this is usu-
ally not possible, a more neutral opening may be more appropriate.
Here’s another opener that might lead to some trouble.
EXAMPLE 2.3
Starting the session with a statement that may make the
patient defensive
T
HERAPIST: Can you tell me what is troubling you?
SALLIE: Well, I don’t know. I feel okay. I’m not really that bad really. I’ve
had a bit of trouble at school lately, but maybe it isn’t even out of
the ordinary.
When asked “What is troubling you?” or its equivalent (“Can you
tell me what’s wrong?”), a patient is likely to respond by minimizing her
concerns. For patients sensitive to the stigma of mental health treatment,
this innocuous question may have a humiliating sting. An opening ques-
tion without an affective slant is preferable.
EXAMPLE 2.4
Starting the session with a statement that may facilitate
discussion
T
HERAPIST: Can you tell me what brings you in?
SALLIE: My mother! She just keeps bugging me to get some professional
help.
THERAPIST: That could be uncomfortable. What does she keep bugging
you about?
Although many patients will respond favorably when asked “What
24 THE CONSULTATION
brings you in?” some, like Sallie in Example 2.4, may use this query as
an opportunity to externalize, for example, “I don’t have a problem. I’m
here because my mother wants me to be in treatment.” For other pa -
tients, this opener may feel too threatening as it may suggest the thera -
pist’s need to get right down to business before even saying hello. In Ex-
ample 2.4, I respond empathically to Sallie’s statement, and follow her
lead. If it is easier for Sallie to talk about her mother’s concerns rather
than her own, this is also where I will initially focus.
Here’s a tried and true opener that should avoid defensiveness.
EXAMPLE 2.5
Starting the session with a statement that should avoid
defensiveness
T
HERAPIST: How would you like to start?
SALLIE: Umm, you mean, why am I here?
THERAPIST: Sure. What would you like to tell me?
SALLIE: Well, I don’t know. . . . I guess my life has been kind of a mess
lately.
THERAPIST:( concerned look) How so?
SALLIE: Well, this guy broke up with me 6 months ago, and instead of
feeling better, little by little, I just feel worse. I just can’t stop think-
ing about him. I thought the relationship was going really well
when he broke it off. I still don’t know what happened.
T
HERAPISTT: The breakup was unexpected?
SALLIE: Completely! There was no warning at all.
Example 2.5’s opener is the least directive of the outlined choices,
but, for a novice, it may also feel the most awkward. Like other
“moves” unique to psychotherapy, it is likely to feel more comfortable
after a little practice. It can also be used as a backup if “What brings you
in?” results in a defensive stance.
Congratulations! You are ready to meet your first patient and to
start the consultation process. Balancing the four goals of the next three
sessions—responding empathically, evaluating patient safety, obtaining
basic background information, and creating an alliance with the pa -
tient—is the focus of the next three chapters.
Key words: anonymity, confidentiality, distraction, intrusion, office
arrangement, office furnishing, psychotherapy, privacy, safety,
suicidality, therapeutic alliance, working alliance
The First Moments 25
3
Initiating an Alliance
and Assessing Safety
The goals of the first session are to respond empathically to the patient’s
distress, to initiate a therapeutic alliance, to assess the patient’s safety and to
explain the consultative procedure. Relevant information gathering can be
interwoven among these four processes.
THE PURPOSE AND PROCEDURE OF THE CONSULTATION
Sallie began the first session by telling me about her recent breakup with
her boyfriend, Charlie. Then she paused for a moment. “I’ve never felt
this bad before in my whole life. So what do you I think I should do?
Tell me how to handle this.”
I hate it when my patients ask me for advice. It’s too tempting to
take the bait and respond: “Well, Sallie, I think you should keep busy
and be nice to yourself.” It isn’t a bad answer. It’s certainly well mean-
ing. It’s just unlikely to help.
By the time a patient makes her way to your office, she has un -
doubtedly received loads of suggestions. She’s in your office because they
didn’t work. Psychodynamic psychotherapy is different because the
work attempts to help a person from the inside out rather than from the
outside in. The process is understandably slow, so now when a new pa -
tient asks me for a quick solution, I take the opportunity to discuss the
process of the next three or four sessions.
I use the first few sessions with a new patient to learn more about
her primary concern, to gather some history, and to organize a prelimary
26
treatment plan. Since I do not know what type of psychological treat -
ment is appropriate for a new patient, I consider these early sessions as
consultation visits, not the beginning of psychotherapy. I use the word
“consultation” to describe these meetings, rather than “evaluation,” be -
cause the former term sounds less judgmental and still implies that the
interaction is time-limited.
EXAMPLE 3.1
Framing the first three visits
S
ALLIE: I’ve never felt this bad before ever in my life. So what do you I
think I should do?
THERAPIST: I realize that you feel distressed, but at this point, I need to
know much more before I can offer a responsible recommendation.
For example, what have you already tried to help you feel better
during this difficult time?
S
ALLIE: I don’t know. I’ve tried a lot of things, but obviously they didn’t
work or I wouldn’t be here in the first place! I assumed you would
know how to make me feel better.
T
HERAPIST: Perhaps you feel disappointed that I need to understand you
better before we can find a course of action that will help.
SALLIE: I am disappointed. I am sick of feeling so terrible. Well, what-
ever. What do you want to know?
THERAPIST: Feeling terrible for a long time is very upsetting. At this
point, I think I can be most helpful to you if I hear more about your
experience with Charlie and also learn a bit about your back -
ground.
S
ALLIE: Then what?
THERAPIST: I usually view these first few meetings as a consultation. It is
an opportunity for me to learn more about you and to see if I can
help, and for you to see whether you feel comfortable working with
me. Together, by the end of the three or four visits, we should be
able to come up with a preliminary treatment plan for this difficult
situation. How does that sound to you?
S
ALLIE: Okay, I guess.
THERAPIST: Would it be okay if I jot down a few notes while you talk?
SALLIE: Sure. The last few months have been the worst of my life.
THERAPIST: If it isn’t too painful, could you tell more about how they
Initiating an Alliance and Assessing Safety 27
have been the worst in your life [using Sallie’s words to facilitate her
associations]?
SALLIE: Well, I haven’t been sleeping or eating very well. I just feel
mopey. I’m studying business at college; I’m a junior now. Usually I
can focus really well, but for weeks now, my concentration has been
shot.
Once the first few sessions are labeled as a consultation, they ac -
quire a structure and a purpose. Patients may also be reassured when
they learn that attendance at one therapy meeting does not commit them
to a lengthy treatment course.
Although I don’t take notes during an ongoing psychotherapy, I
write down some basic facts, names, and dates (rather than record what
the patient says verbatim) during the consultation. These pieces of infor-
mation help me organize the patient’s story int o a a cohesive written
summary. I will keep a copy for my records and, with permission, will
forward a copy at the end of the consultation if I refer Sallie to another
clinician.
The three- to four-visit consultation outlines an exit for both par-
ties in case the therapist and patient are a poor match. (See Chapter 1 for
a more detailed discussion of the patient–therapist match.) If the patient
feels seriously uncomfortable with the clinician, she is encouraged to
find another one, with the therapist’s blessing. While it is the consul-
tant’s responsibility to provide treatment recommendations and referrals
at the end of the consultation, she is not obligated to continue as a pa-
tient’s therapist once the consultation is completed.
As I mentioned earlier, although most patients cooperate with the
consultation format, many patients, like Sallie Gane, will request faster
relief than psychotherapy can promise. Psychotherapy can’t be rushed.
In response to patients’ impatience, I have learned innumerable ways to
say “It is hard to tolerate delay and to keep working on this problem,
but our ability to understand will help us come up with a reasonable
course of action.” (Please see Chapter 4 for another example.)
As a novice, I found it difficult to have confidence in my work and
to convince my patients of therapy’s efficacy when I hadn’t personally
experienced how psychotherapy could transform a person’s life. Even
with personal experience in one’s own treatment, it may feel difficult to
trust in one’s own ability as a clinician to heal.
With time, as I saw my patients improve, it became easier to feel
confident about my work. Skepticism was sometimes even advantageous
when I used it to guide my learning in supervision. We hope our readers
who are uncertain about the usefulness of psychotherapy can suspend
28 THE CONSULTATION
disbelief as they give the treatment time to take effect. Clinical research
and experience has shown that patients improve when therapy is prac -
ticed well. Just as patients need patience while they grapple with their
problems in therapy, it is equally important that trainees are patient with
themselves as they learn to practice this difficult but rewarding profes -
sion.
DIRECTING THE FIRST INTERVIEW
After mapping out the consultation process to a new patient, it is the
therapist’s responsibility to direct the first interview. After experimenting
with many approaches in the last few years, I think the first meeting
works best if my only goals are to establish a therapeutic alliance with
the patient and to complete a suicide assessment, if that seems necessary.
Experienced supervisors often say that a major point of a first session is
to set the stage for a second session. If my patient doesn’t feel under-
stood and heard in the first meeting, she might never return.
It is easy enough to state how important it is to establish a therapeu-
tic alliance during the beginning of a psychotherapy, but as a novice I
bristled at this sort of statement because it seemed too vague and theo-
retical. To avoid making this mistake, we will outline some specific strat-
egies later in this chapter that you can use to create a therapeutic alli-
ance. First, we’ll offer some examples of how the process can go awry.
To foster a therapeutic alliance, the therapist needs to be responsive
but not overbearing, although this is always easier said than done. As a
beginner, it is easy to under- or overdirect the first session. We’ll offer an
example of each.
EXAMPLE 3.2
The therapist takes an overly passive stance during the first
interview
S
ALLIE: Well, I haven’t been sleeping or eating very well. . . . My concen-
tration has been shot.
THERAPIST: So you haven’t been eating very well?
SALLIE: Yeah. I’m not hungry at all. I have to force myself to eat, but all
food tastes like sawdust to me. Half the time I just feel sick to my
stomach. The only thing that tastes good to me is ice cream.
T
HERAPIST: Hmm. . . .
SALLIE: Last night, I spent the evening watching TV for 3 hours, and eat-
Initiating an Alliance and Assessing Safety 29
ing a pint of chocolate chip cookie dough ice cream for dinner.
Gross, isn’t it? I just feel like crap most of the day.
THERAPIST: Yes. . . .
SALLIE: Last week, I sat at home and cried all day long. That’s been hap-
pening every now and then. I realized that I had to do something, so
I made this appointment.
Example 3.2 illustrates a very traditional psychoanalytic approach to
the first session. I avoid directing the interview in any way as I listen to Sal-
lie’s associations. Years ago, many first sessions were conducted with this
approach. While the psychotherapist may have asked a few questions of
the patient, in general, she would intrude as little as possible. The patient
would associate freely, saying whatever came to mind. According to the-
ory, the less the therapist hindered the patient’s train of thought, the more
likely the patient would reach important repressed material.
From this traditional perspective, questions by the psychoanalytic
psychotherapist were not seen as useful, but as unwanted influences that
would taint the psychotherapeutic process. The goal for the therapist was
to be as neutral as possible, and the metaphor of therapist as a blank slate
was introduced. As a result, in worst instances, a therapist could treat a pa-
tient for years and not know if she had experienced self-injurious impulses,
had a serious head injury, had recovered from leukemia as a child, and so
on, unless the patient chose to volunteer this information.
Spontaneous association continues to be a powerful source of infor-
mation that therapists should employ, especially after the consultation is
completed and the psychodynamic psychotherapy begins (please see
Chapters 6 and 14), but we do not recommend a pervasively non -
directive approach during diagnostic sessions. Moreover, the free associ-
ation strategy is also not as neutral as it may have once seemed. It is
impossible to attain a true “blank slate” status. In fact, a therapist who
does not ask questions or respond to her patient in a human way is often
perceived as odd or withholding rather than as neutrally listening.
In an attempt to avoid the “blank slate” approach, a beginner might
overorganize the first session around a list of predetermined questions. It
is understandably easy to overshoot and to become more directive than
necessary with this strategy.
EXAMPLE 3.3
An overstructured approach for the first interview
S
ALLIE: Well, I haven’t been sleeping or eating very well. . . . My concen-
tration has been shot.
30 THE CONSULTATION
THERAPIST: So, your eating, sleeping, and concentration have all been
affected? Is it sometimes hard to motivate as well?
SALLIE: Yes.
THERAPIST: It sounds as though this has been be a difficult time. Have
you been feeling hopeless at all?
SALLIE: Sometimes.
THERAPIST: Hmm ( sympathetically). Some people who feel hopeless
start thinking a lot about dying or wishing that they were dead?
Has this been part of your experience?
S
ALLIE: Oh, no. I’m Catholic. I could never do anything to hurt myself.
THERAPIST: So you haven’t thought of hurting yourself at all?
SALLIE: Nah.
THERAPIST: Have you ever felt this bad before?
In Example 3.3, the approach to the first psychotherapeutic inter-
view is modeled after a first visit with an internist or family physician.
Symptoms are identified, their severity is clarified, and data are gathered
with the intent of making a diagnosis. Many of the questions require
only short, one-word answers. The therapist is able to make a possible
diagnosis of a major depression by identifying five neurovegetative
symptoms in less than 5 minutes.
While this approach has a number of disadvantages for relatively
stable patients, for some individuals this interview style is the structure
of choice. If the patient lacks some internal structure due to psychosis,
mania, substance abuse, or comparable conditions, a structured inter -
view will compensate for the deficiency. The increased organization will
provide comfort for the out-of-control patient. By acting as a diagnosti -
cian, the therapist can effectively begin to clarify the problem and to
plan an emergency treatment strategy. In a sense, this interview follows
the format of an emergency room psychiatric interview or a psychophar-
macological consultation. (For more information on how to respond to
a psychiatric emergency, see Chapter 9.)
A more structured interviewing style may also come in handy if
your new patient becomes tongue-tied during the first interview. With an
empathic statement such as “Perhaps you find it hard to think of what to
say because it’s such a troubling and complicated topic. Let’s take a
breather and I’ll fill in some other information I need,” you can use the
first session to gather as much history as you would like.
We have included a sample questionnaire at the end of Chapter 4
that summarizes the information you’ll need by the end of the consulta-
tion. I have used the questionnaire in two ways. If my patient is at a loss
Initiating an Alliance and Assessing Safety 31
for words during the consultation, I may use the questionnaire to guide
my interview. I’ve also given a patient a copy of the questionnaire at the
end of the first session to fill out and to return to me at or before the sec-
ond session.
It is important to know how to employ a structured interview for
disorganized patients or for those who feel uncomfortable talking spon -
taneously during the first session, but for most new patients an intensive
history taking during the first session can hinder the development of a
therapeutic alliance. For the majority of people entering your office for
the first time, an interested approach that balances an ability to listen, a
capacity to follow the patient’s associations, and the foresight to assess
suicidality is most likely to preserve safety while also fostering a thera -
peutic alliance
EXAMPLE 3.4
Balancing the need for information and the need to create a
therapeutic alliance during the first consultation session
S
ALLIE: Well, I haven’t been sleeping or eating very well. . . . My concen-
tration has been shot.
THERAPIST: Can you tell me more about what has been going on?
SALLIE: Well, I usually am so full of energy. Now I just don’t care. This
Saturday, for instance, I just stayed in my room and listened to mu-
sic. I’m such a loser lately. I mean, the weather has been so perfect,
and I’m listening to love songs crying my eyes out. What a mess!
T
HERAPIST: A lot of sadness and distress. Do you have an understanding
of what has made it so hard?
SALLIE: For starters, I still can’t believe that Charlie broke up with me.
BOOM! It seemed out of nowhere. I didn’t anticipate it at all, and
he didn’t really give me a reason. Well, he did talk about one thing
that bothered him. . . .
T
HERAPIST: What was that?
SALLIE: I don’t know—maybe something about my tone of voice. Some -
times, he would complain that I was bossing him around when I
was just telling him my opinion. It just doesn’t make any sense to
me. I’m a very sensitive person, and with Charlie I was always on
my best behavior. And it’s the first time I’ve ever really liked a guy
this much. Usually, I am the one to break it off. ( Reaches for a
tissue.)
T
HERAPIST: When did this happen?
32 THE CONSULTATION
SALLIE: About 6 months ago.
THERAPIST: Six months of grief: I can see that Charlie really meant a lot
to you. Can you tell me more about the relationship and breakup?
SALLIE: I thought he was “it.” He seemed perfect from the first moment
I laid eyes on him. Our first 2 weeks together were perfect. He was
perfect—cute, smart, funny, nice. After the first few weeks though,
it was never the same. He is majoring in music, and there really isn’t
any future in that, so I tried to convince him to change to an eco -
nomics major, like me. He seemed interested at first, but then he
started to withdraw and not answer my phone calls. I don’t under-
stand it, because I was just trying to help him out, and he knew it. I
don’t know if that was the beginning of the end. I have no idea why
he was so sensitive about my suggestions. We were together a cou -
ple of months, and then he said he wasn’t interested anymore. It
was so cruel, because just weeks before he said he was in love with
me. I don’t know what I did wrong, but obviously, I’m a total fail-
ure.
T
HERAPIST: That sounds harsh. It is very painful when a relationship
that seems so promising doesn’t work out. Somehow it feels to you
that you are a failure because of the breakup? What do you mean?
S
ALLIE: If I were really capable, I could have made this work. And it feels
so strange to be the one who was rejected. See, like I said, I am the
person who ends relationships. I’ve had two serious relationships
before Charlie. They were nice guys, but maybe too nice. I don’t
know, they just seemed so young. They did whatever I wanted them
to do, then I’d get bored and break it off. Charlie was different; he
was independent. He had his own ideas, and somehow I messed it
up, and I don’t know how. I was just trying to help him when I gave
him career advice. I feel like I can’t do anything right. How did I
manage to ruin such a good thing?
T
HERAPIST: It feels to you that it is all your fault?
SALLIE: Yes, completely. Sometimes I just want to curl up and sleep all
day just to avoid the pain.
THERAPIST: It does sound as though you have been in a lot of pain.
Sometimes when a person feels so hopeless, she might think about
dying or wishing she were dead. Has that been a part of your expe -
rience?
S
ALLIE: Oh, I’m Catholic. I could never do anything to hurt myself.
THERAPIST: Had it crossed your mind?
Initiating an Alliance and Assessing Safety 33
SALLIE: A couple of times. Well, not exactly. I don’t care if my plane fly-
ing home from vacation drops from the sky or if I don’t wake up in
the morning, but I would never purposely hurt myself.
In Example 3.4, I use a balanced approach: following Sallie’s narra-
tive, empathizing with her situation, and inserting a suicide assessment
in response to Sallie’s hopelessness. Example 3.4 follows the patient’s
lead, in contrast to Example 3.3, which leads the patient. The question
regarding suicide fits easily within the context of the conversation,
rather than within a predetemined review of the neurovegetative signs
and symptoms of depression. With the approach used in Example 3.4, I
may not complete the full psychiatric review of systems within the first
session, but by helping Sallie describe her experience, I can empathize
with her most urgent concerns.
HELPFUL HINTS: HOW TO LISTEN AND HOW
TO CULTIVATE A THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Over time, I’ve learned a few specific techniques that help cultivate a
therapeutic alliance. First, I ask detailed questions about the patient’s
main concern. If the patient tells me a few facts and then stops short
(i.e., “I am upset about my breakup with my boyfriend”), I flesh out the
story with questions like “Could you tell me more?” or statements such
as “Please go on.”
Second, I ask every patient why she decided to come into treatment
at this particular time. In Sallie’s case, she has been suffering for 6
months. What led her to come in today, rather than last week or next
week? I am almost guaranteed to learn more about a patient’s present
conflicts and concerns with this inquiry.
Third, if it doesn’t feel right to follow a patient’s emotional state -
ment with a question, I respond with a validating comment that
reframes what the patient is sharing without diminishing its intensity.
For example, when Sallie says, “I don’t known what I did wrong. . . .
I’m a total failure!” I tune into her emotional state by naming it: “That
sounds harsh. It is very painful when a relationship that seems so prom -
ising doesn’t work out. Somehow it feels to you that you are a failure be-
cause of the breakup? What do you mean?”
The ability to listen empathically is one of the most powerful tools
of an effective therapist. Even so, I spent my training years missing
empathic opportunities and fighting against an internal pull toward
“fix-it” statements. Again and again I’d hear paragraphs flow out of my
mouth full of well-intentioned advice and cheerful pick-me-ups: “It
34 THE CONSULTATION
wasn’t your fault that it didn’t work out. Charlie didn’t sound that nice
anyway. I’m sure there are plenty more guys out there whom you could
date.”
I would have been the master if fix-it statements were helpful. They
aren’t. Minimizing emotional pain and distracting people from their dis-
comfort may actually exacerbate emotional distress. As a therapist, I am
most useful if I tune into my patient’s unique experience and don’t as -
sume I know how to fix her crisis. I now think of empathic listening that
avoids minimization as a genuine way to “fix it.” With this tool, my pa-
tient will feel understood, and emotional pain may slowly abate.
The therapeutic alliance is also nurtured by reminding the patient
that she and the therapist are working together toward a common goal:
the patient’s health, recovery, or resolution of problems. This is accom -
plished by using first person plural pronouns such as “we,” “us,” or
“our” when referring to the work, task, process, or goal of therapy. (Ex-
ample: Our work together is to find out what would be the best course
of action for you.)
This strategy is further reinforced by explaining my questions to the
patient. For example: “I’m asking these questions about your family his-
tory because it helps me put your current difficulties in context, and
because a vulnerability to depression may continue from generation to
generation.”
With these five tools in my back pocket—asking questions about
the material important to the patient; inquiring “why now?”; validating
affect; framing the consultation as “our task”; and explaining the con-
sultation procedure as it unfolds—I can cultivate a therapeutic alliance
within the first few sessions.
ASSESSING SUICIDALITY
Whatever style you choose to employ during the consultation, you must
complete a suicide assessment during the first interview if your patient
seems to be at any risk for self-harm. In Sallie’s case, I screen early for
suicidality because she has many symptoms of depression. Other risk
factors for self-harm include substance abuse, psychosis, bereavement,
HIV positive status or other illness, loss of employment, borderline per -
sonality disorder, mania, panic disorder with agoraphobia, perceived
abandonment, or divorce.
If a new patient doesn’t have any risk factors for self-harm and she
has a clear focus on her future, asking about suicidality may be in re -
sponse to the clinician’s needs rather than the patient’s. However, if I am
at all unsure about the patient’s self-destuctive impulses, I will ask.
Initiating an Alliance and Assessing Safety 35
Many suicidal patients will discuss their self-destructive impulses hon -
estly when asked directly, but few will spontaneously offer this informa-
tion. (For more detail on how to complete a suicide assessment for a pa-
tient who is currently at risk, please see Chapter 9.)
A suicide assessment is the only part of the psychiatric consultation
that should not be postponed to future meetings if the patient has any
risk factors. A large proportion of successful suicides are preceded by
contacts with the health system. Quiet calls for help are often not heard.
In addition, the diagnosis of depression, a major antecedent to suicide, is
frequently overlooked by many medical professionals who aren’t schooled
in mental health. Despite all these reasons supporting the inclusion of a
suicide assessment in the first meeting, it is easy for therapists to “for -
get” to complete this portion of the evaluation, because it is understand-
ably discomforting to ask about this topic. However, ignoring it may
prove fatal.
COLLECTING BASIC INFORMATION
AT THE END OF THE FIRST SESSION
About 20 minutes before my first consultation session with Sallie draws
to a close, I collect some administrative information and then shift the
subject back to Sallie’s main concern 10 minutes before the hour ends.
EXAMPLE 3.5
Collecting some basic information at the end of the first session
T
HERAPIST: The situation with Charlie has clearly been a tough one. We
will definitely talk about it more, but I need to take time now to col-
lect some information for my records.
SALLIE: Okay. What do you need to know?
THERAPIST: Well, for starters, what is your address? [ I need to collect
this information in the first session if it was not gathered during the
previous phone contacts .]
S
ALLIE: I live at 1111 Central Street in Boston.
THERAPIST: What is the zip code?
SALLIE: Oh, it is 02114.
THERAPIST: If I ever needed to call you about scheduling changes, should
I call the number you left on my machine last week?
SALLIE: Yeah. You can reach me easily there. I also do some work-study
at the library. I can give you that number as well if you’d like.
36 THE CONSULTATION
THERAPIST: If I call the home number, would it be better if I don’t iden-
tify myself as a doctor?
SALLIE: Actually, that’s a good point. It’s my private line, but sometimes
I listen to new messages with people around. If you don’t mind, it
would be easier if you didn’t identify yourself as a doctor. Is that
okay?
T
HERAPIST: Many people feel that way, which is why I ask. I also like to
have the phone number of someone to contact in case of an emer -
gency.
SALLIE: What do you mean?
THERAPIST: Well, overall, I take the confidentiality of my patients very
seriously. If anyone ever called me and asked if you were seeing
me, I wouldn’t divulge this information without your written per -
mission. But in case you are ever at very high risk of hurting
yourself or someone else, I would like to have an emergency con-
tact.
S
ALLIE: Oh, I don’t think you’ll ever need to call anyone, but I guess I
should give you my parents’ number. Their names are Jane and An-
thony Gane. They live in Framingham.
T
HERAPIST: I don’t expect emergencies either, but I want you to know
the procedures I follow if one should arise. Also, I want to tell you
about my training and my supervision.
As you know, this is a teaching hospital, and I’ll be in training
here for the next 2 years. One of the advantages of receiving your
care here is that trainees like me receive advice regularly from expe-
rienced, fully trained clinicians. To obtain that guidance, I’ll have to
give my supervisor information about you.
It’s not unusual to have some questions about this process.
How does it sound to you?
S
ALLIE: I don’t know. I don’t really want anyone else to know what we
talk about.
THERAPIST: Can you tell me what you are concerned about?
SALLIE: What will they think of me? I don’t want anyone to know my
business.
THERAPIST: I understand your wish for privacy. It’s important that you
know that my supervisors are required by law to keep the informa -
tion that I share with them confidential.
Their presence will benefit both of us. With their help, I will be
able to provide you with the most comprehensive treatment.
SALLIE: They don’t tell anyone else?
Initiating an Alliance and Assessing Safety 37
THERAPIST: That’s right. The discussions I have with my supervisor are
private.
SALLIE: I don’t know. I’ve never really heard of anything like this, but I
guess it makes sense if I think about it. Whatever. I don’t love it, but
I guess it’s okay.
T
HERAPIST: If you have any further questions about it, please don’t hesi-
tate to ask me.
Let’s see, I also want to let you know how to get in touch with
me if you need to contact me between sessions. I have a voicemail
answering system and a beeper. I check my messages many times a
day on weekdays and about once a day on weekends. During the
week, I’ll always try to answer a message within 24 hours. If you
need to contact me in an emergency, my pager is on 24 hours a day.
I can’t always answer right away, and there may even be a delay of
an hour or two, but I’ll answer as soon as I can. If the emergency
can’t wait that long, please don’t wait for my return call but go to
the nearest emergency room for treatment.
S
ALLIE: Oh, okay. But, like I said, I don’t expect any real emergencies.
THERAPIST: Let’s see if we can find a time to meet these next few weeks.
Are you free Wednesdays at 4:00?
SALLIE: Let me look at my schedule book. Yeah, I think I can do that.
THERAPIST: You may already know this, but therapy differs from other
medical visits because you can depend on it to start and end on
time. Each session will last 50 minutes.
S
ALLIE:( Nods.) Okay.
THERAPIST: Okay. I think that is all the administrative information I
need to cover. We need to stop in a few minutes, but I was wonder-
ing how has this meeting felt to you? What has it felt like to talk
about these concerns with me?
SALLIE: I don’t know really. It feels weird. I am more a listener than a
talker usually, and 50 minutes can seem a bit long.
THERAPIST: Do you feel uncomfortable?
SALLIE: A little.
THERAPIST: Enough to keep you from coming back?
SALLIE: I don’t think so. I really need help with this, and it hasn’t been
getting better on its own.
THERAPIST: I am glad you could share this with me. Consultation ses -
sions are different from a discussion with a concerned friend or rela-
38 THE CONSULTATION
tive because our goal is to focus completely on your concerns. It can
feel different at first. You may have more feelings about this session
before our next one, and I would be interested in hearing what your
thoughts are next time.
S
ALLIE: Okay.
THERAPIST: Before you leave, I want to give you a questionnaire to help
gather information rapidly. You can fill it out and mail it to me or
bring it to our next appointment. How does that sound to you?
S
ALLIE: That’s fine.
THERAPIST: I know that you’re more concerned about what happened
with Charlie than you are about any of these background matters.
Let’s use the remaining time to talk about him.
In this chapter, we present Sallie as a clinic patient to demonstrate
how to talk about supervision with a patient. As the clinic handles the fi-
nances, I do not need to discuss fees and payment. In Chapter 8, Sallie is
a private patient and we illustrate how to negotiate a fee and discuss in-
surance as part of the first session.
As shown in Example 3.5, I use this session to educate Sallie about
the 50-minute session. Some therapists work in 45-minute blocks, which
is an acceptable alternative. I’ve found it’s easiest to specify the session’s
length early in the process. Without this discussion, Sallie may not un-
derstand why I stop the session 10 minutes before the hour.
Near the end the session, I also check how Sallie has experienced
the meeting. Sometimes a new patient will use this opportunity to share
her ambivalence about therapy, as Sallie did. Interestingly enough, once
a patient has voiced her uncertainty, she may actually be more likely to
return for the second session. I praise Sallie’s ability to talk openly about
our interaction to encourage future discourse on the topic. She is likely
to experience more feelings about our meeting, and now she might feel
comfortable sharing them with me.
In summary, I try to accomplish four major tasks for a successful
first session. If I hear the patient’s distress empathically, explain the con-
sultation process, assess suicidality if necessary, and concentrate on
forming an alliance with the patient, the consultation is well on its way.
Key words: abandonment, data gathering, diagnosis, empathy,
interview, loss, psychiatric emergencies, psychotherapy evaluation,
rapport, rejection, risk assessment, safety, suicide, therapeutic
alliance
Initiating an Alliance and Assessing Safety 39
4
Enhancing the Therapeutic
Alliance and Eliciting History
By asking the patient how she is experiencing the process of the consultation,
and by explaining the relevance of psychiatric and medical history, the clinician
reinforces the therapeutic alliance. The second session is also the therapist’s
opportunity to collect some basic psychiatric and medical information. Time
must be reserved at the end of the session to talk about the patient’s primary
concern.
THE BEGINNING OF THE SECOND SESSION
When Sallie returns for her second session, I start to feel a little more
confident. With the knowledge that our therapeutic alliance is off to a
good start, it’s easier for me to be more directive during our second ses-
sion. I’ll use the time to outline Sallie’s medical and psychiatric history,
but before I start the data collection, I ask Sallie about her week and her
experience of our first meeting.
EXAMPLE 4.1
Opening the second session
Sallie walks briskly into the room and sits down. She looks at me
expectantly.
S
ALLIE: How are you, Dr. Bender?
THERAPIST: I’m all right, thanks. How are you doing?
40
SALLIE: Okay, I guess.
THERAPIST: Any thoughts about our last meeting? How did it feel to
you?
SALLIE: It was fine, I guess. Well, to be honest, I don’t love the idea of
coming in to talk to a stranger about my personal problems, but I
can’t stand to feel this way anymore, so I’m willing to try anything.
I did hear from Charlie this week—that was a highlight ( sarcasti-
cally). He needed a book that he’d left at my dorm. We talked for
about 30 seconds. Nothing about missing me or about wondering if
breaking up was the right decision. He’s doing fine, and I’m so
messed up that I need to see a shrink to get over him.
T
HERAPIST: It’s clear that the breakup with Charlie has been a very pain-
ful experience. Can you tell me more about how you feel “messed
up?”
SALLIE: I don’t know. At the beginning of last week, I actually felt a little
better. Maybe talking to you did help a tiny bit. But then, after his
call, I was back to square one. I didn’t sleep that night, and my
stomach was in knots all week. I’ve always looked down on women
who get all riled up about a relationship, and now look at me. I’m
so pathetic.
T
HERAPIST: Aren’t you overly harsh with yourself?
SALLIE: I don’t think so. I am pathetic.
THERAPIST: When you start feeling upset about Charlie, how do you
take the edge off the pain?
SALLIE: I call my friend Gwen a lot. She’s been helpful, mainly because
she keeps me busy. It helps a little bit, I guess. But, Dr. Bender (in a
slightly irritated tone), I’ve been trying to feel better for weeks, do-
ing a million different activities, and nothing really works. I’ve
taken aerobics, gone running, biking, hiking . . . you name it. Like I
said, I’m here because I don’t feel better, no matter what I do.
T
HERAPIST:( naming the emotion that Sallie is expressing ) Has it been a
frustrating experience—trying so hard to feel better but then contin -
uing to feel so upset?
SALLIE:( Relaxes into her seat .) EXACTLY!
THERAPIST: I think it’s a wise idea to consider therapy at this time to
understand more about the situation with Charlie and to under -
stand why it has been so hard to move on. In the next couple of
sessions, I’ll need to get to know you better in order to come up
with a treatment plan that feels reasonable to both of us. I’d like
Enhancing the Alliance and Eliciting History 41
to use part of this meeting to learn about your medical and psy -
chiatric history.
SALLIE:( aggravated) With all due respect, Dr. Bender, I need to get better
as fast as possible. Do we have to spend time talking about stuff
that isn’t bothering me right now?
T
HERAPIST: It makes sense that you want to get better as quickly as pos-
sible. I need to know your medical history because some medical
conditions intensify emotional distress and interfere with recovery.
SALLIE:( Interrupts.) Well, I’m not here to be analyzed. I just need to get
over this stupid guy. I don’t think it will be that helpful to talk
about my past and my first memory and all those Freudian things I
learned about in my freshman psych class.
T
HERAPIST: I’m sorry to be adding to your frustration, but in order to
come up with a useful treatment plan, I need to know a bit more
about you. To begin to understand your pain with Charlie, I need to
know more about you as an individual.
S
ALLIE: Okay, whatever ( sighs), how long do you think this will take?
THERAPIST: Let’s see how it goes, but the consultation usually takes
three or four sessions.
SALLIE: Well, what do you want to know?
THERAPIST: Well, for starters, I want to clarify how this breakup has af-
fected your ability to function in school. Have you been able to
keep up with your classwork despite feeling so poorly?
Before I focus on information collection during the second session, I
model and encourage direct and honest communication by asking Sallie
how she experienced our first meeting. The wording of my questions
(“Any thoughts about our last meeting? How did it feel to you?”) pur-
posely pulls for both cognition and affect. In general, it is less challeng -
ing to share one’s thoughts than one’s underlying emotions. As treatment
progresses, the focus on affect will become more intense, but early in the
consultation, my line of questioning offers Sallie a choice.
As Sallie starts to relate the events of her week, I strategically ask
specific details of her experience. Sometimes the questions themselves
use words from Sallie’s previous statements. For instance, when Sallie
mentions that she feels so “messed up,” I respond, “Can you tell me
more about how you feel ‘messed up’?”
Sallie becomes irritated when I focus, even for a moment, on her
coping mechanisms rather than her distress. Her response is a cue to
change tactics. When I validate how helpless she has felt, she visibly re -
laxes and becomes more agreeable.
42 THE CONSULTATION
Fortunately, most patients aren’t as ornery as Sallie so the second in-
terview is rarely this emotionally taxing. But, as a novice, I was most
worried about patients who would question my judgment and leave me
tongue-tied. Surprisingly, while Dr. Messner and I wrote this book and I
grappled with Sallie’s feisty nature, my confidence increased. Now, be -
cause of my experience with my virtual patient, I feel more competent
dealing with the flesh and blood variety. Basically, if you are ready for a
“Salliesque” patient, many other patients will feel easy by comparison.
A MORE DIRECTIVE APPROACH
In order to gather the necessary medical and psychiatric information for
a comprehensive consultation, I am more directive during the second
session. Nowadays I don’t have trouble switching gears (following the
patient’s lead in Session 1 and leading the patient in Session 2), but this
change in approach was not easy for me to master. Early on, I worried
that I was squelching the patient’s self-expression every time I directed
the questioning away from the present complaint and toward pertinent
history. In my attempt to be the ultimate empathic therapist, I often
completed the consultation without obtaining essential historical data.
My inability to redirect also led to a few embarrassing moments in
supervision when I didn’t know fundamental facts about patients I had
seen for months. Supervisors would encourage me to acquire this infor-
mation as soon as possible, but if I was bad at interrupting a new patient
during the first few visits, I was even worse at interrupting a patient in
ongoing therapy. It took time to experience the treatment benefit of a
comprehensive consultation, and only then did I feel empowered to di -
rect the interview during the first few sessions.
To formulate the most informed treatment plan, a clinician needs to
obtain a medical and psychiatric history from every new patientwhether
or not the therapist has medical training . Unrecognized physical disease
may first present as psychological distress, and physical illness can have
a profound emotional effect on a patient’s life.
For medical questions about the patient’s current symptoms, I refer
the patient to an internist. Dr. Messner once treated a 45-year-old law -
yer, whom we will call Mr. Harper, who started psychotherapy because
of generalized anxiety with intermittent panic attacks following an unex-
pected promotion. As psychotherapists, it’s easy to formulate a whole
bunch of different hypotheses as to why success might feel overwhelm -
ing to a man in his 40s, but during the consultation interview, Dr.
Messner also learned that the patient had a family history of heart dis -
ease. The patient’s father had died of a heart attack at 46. While this fact
may have psychodynamic importance in the treatment of a 45-year-old
Enhancing the Alliance and Eliciting History 43
man, the medical implications are more urgent. Had Mr. Harper seen his
internist in the last year? No. Did his panic attacks include symptoms of
chest pain and shortness of breath? Yes. A possibly life-saving interven -
tion at the beginning of psychiatric treatment was a referral to an inter -
nist for a physical exam and cardiac workup. Happily, Mr. Harper’s car-
diac condition was deemed non-life-threatening. However, especially in
light of his family history, it was reassuring that a cardiologist would
continue to follow him as needed. If Dr. Messner had taken a “free-float-
ing” approach to the consultation sessions, the necessary medical inter -
vention would not have occurred. While physicians will be understand -
ably more comfortable talking to their patients about health issues,
nonphysicians can be very effective if they refer psychotherapy patients
for a medical consultation whenever a patient is suffering from a bother-
some physical symptom that hasn’t been evaluated by a medical doctor.
Our consultation questionnaire at the end of this chapter screens for
medical symptoms that may require follow-up. For positive answers
noted in the “Brief Review of Symptoms” section, the therapist should
refer the patient to her primary care physician for further investigation.
STRATEGY FOR THE SECOND SESSION
During the second session, I focus on the details of the psychiatric and
medical history and only ask about other historical information if extra
time is available. I use the consultation questionnaire at the end of this
chapter to guide my interview by using it as a cribsheet during the ses-
sions or by asking my patient to fill it out between sessions. (You have
permission to reproduce this form.)
Every now and then, a new patient feels that her current concerns
are so urgent that she is unable to focus exclusively on her history during
the second session. When this occurs, I quickly scan the completed ques-
tionnaire during our meeting, and then review the answers in more detail
during the third and fourth session. Or, if I plan to continue to work
with the patient after the consultation, I may use 15–20 minutes of sev -
eral sessions to collect the necessary historical information.
EXAMPLE 4.2
Clarifying the patient’s current psychiatric symptoms—a more
directive approach in the second consultation session
T
HERAPIST: Well, for starters, I wanted to clarify how this breakup has
affected your ability to function in school. Have you been able to
keep up with your classwork despite feeling so poorly?
44 THE CONSULTATION
SALLIE: Well, even though I have felt crappy most of the time, I haven’t
fallen behind in my classes. School is the only thing I am successful
at nowadays.
T
HERAPIST: It is impressive that despite your distress you have been able
to continue your work. Have you been able to spend time with
friends as well? You mentioned a friend, Gwen. . . .
S
ALLIE: Yes, Gwen has been great. She calls me every day to check on me,
and we go see a lot of movies together. It gets my mind off things.
THERAPIST: She has been a help to you?
SALLIE: Yes.
THERAPIST: Has anyone else been helpful during this difficult time?
SALLIE: My family, I guess. They are supportive of me, but I don’t usu -
ally tell them details about my love life, you know.
THERAPIST: I want to get a good sense of how the breakup has affected
your life in many areas. Last week we talked briefly about your
sleep and appetite, but I wanted to touch base on this again. How
well have you slept the last few weeks?
S
ALLIE: It’s erratic. Sometimes I have a lot of trouble getting to bed, but I
would say that most nights I probably get about 8 hours of sleep.
THERAPIST: And your appetite?
SALLIE: It’s bad. I just don’t feel like eating most of the time.
THERAPIST: Have you lost any weight?
SALLIE: No, I haven’t actually. Too bad . . . it would be a little bonus.
You know, get dumped and get skinny. ( Grins.)
THERAPIST:[ I note that Sallie is apparently normal in weight for her
height. My next questions screen for an eating disorder. ]D oy o u
have any worries about eating?
SALLIE: Maybe a little. I’d like to be one size smaller at least.
THERAPIST: Have you ever put yourself on a very strict diet and tried to
lose a lot of weight, although everyone else thought you looked
okay?
S
ALLIE: Nah. I’ve never been that disciplined. I had a friend in high
school who got obsessed with her weight and became way too
skinny, but I could never do that. I’d get too hungry.
T
HERAPIST: Some students your age will eat a lot of food when they are
very upset, but then they’ll regret it afterwards and make themselves
vomit. Sometimes they use a dangerous medication called ipecac.
Have you ever struggled with bingeing or purging?
Enhancing the Alliance and Eliciting History 45
SALLIE: No, I never did that, but I don’t really like to talk to people
about this stuff.
THERAPIST:( wondering if there is more to learn because of Sallie’s reluc-
tance to talk about this particular topic ) You’d be surprised how
many people have trouble with food.
SALLIE: Well, I did take laxatives for about a week in high school be -
cause I felt really bloated.
THERAPIST: What else was going on then?
SALLIE: Nothing really important. I was applying to college and stressed
about that, but mainly I felt fat and wanted to fit into this slinky
dress for the prom.
T
HERAPIST: Sometimes people find it hard to stop taking laxatives once
they start. How was it for you?
SALLIE: I don’t think it was that big a deal. I did it for a little while—
maybe a few weeks—but then I stopped.
THERAPIST: How did you manage to stop?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I got weak, and then I stopped, okay? (defensively)
THERAPIST: I imagine it may have been a difficult time for you if you
were using laxatives. All medications for weight loss can be addict-
ing, so it takes a lot of internal motivation to be able to stop.
S
ALLIE:( slightly calmer) Yeah, it did.
THERAPIST: Because these products can affect a person’s health, I do
need to know about them. Have you ever used diet pills or diuretics
to lose weight?
S
ALLIE: What are diuretics?
THERAPIST: Good question. They are medications that make a person
urinate a lot and are used to treat high blood pressure, but some -
times people use them secretly to try to lose weight.
SALLIE: No, I never did that. I thought about taking diet pills, but I never
did.
THERAPIST: What protected you?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I am sensitive to caffeine. I knew these medications
were related to speed, and I didn’t want to feel all wound up. So, I
avoided them.
T
HERAPIST: I ask these questions because a lot of women your age have
some difficulty with eating. It sounds like you have struggled with
this some in the past. How about now?
46 THE CONSULTATION
SALLIE: I’m better now, I think. Even though I have felt sort of sick to my
stomach lately because I’ve been so upset, I’m not doing anything
unhealthy to lose weight.
T
HERAPIST: Has your energy been affected as well?
SALLIE: Oh, I don’t have much energy, especially when I don’t eat much
that day.
THERAPIST: These last few months certainly sound tough. Have you ever
felt this bad before?
SALLIE: No, this is the worst I have ever felt.
THERAPIST: Overall, there are some symptoms that are making it diffi -
cult to function day to day, but somehow you have managed to
keep up with school and friends?
SALLIE: Yes, I guess that is right.
THERAPIST: Can you correct me? What part doesn’t feel right?
SALLIE: Well, even though I can still be sociable and still do well in
school, I’m not doing well at all.
THERAPIST: Tell me if this is right. Even though you have been able to
maintain your schoolwork and friendships, you still don’t feel at all
like yourself.
S
ALLIE: Yeah, that fits.
When a new patient reports significant dysphoria, I determine early
on whether her current symptoms are consistent with a diagnosis of ma-
jor depressive disorder, as outlined in DSM-IV. A useful mnemonic can
organize your review: SIGECAPS. (This abbreviation could either stand
for the name Sigmund E Caps or the abbreviated prescription for E cap -
sules. It was devised by Cary Gross, MD.) Each letter stands for a
neurovegetative symptom of depression: S, a change in sleep; I, a de -
crease in interest and pleasure; G, an increase in guilt and hopelessness;
E, a decrease in energy; C, a decrease in concentration; A, a change in
appetite; P,psychomotor retardation or agitation; and S,suicidal thoughts,
intentions, plans or actions. A person has major depressive disorder if
she experiences five of the preceding symptoms for longer than 2 weeks
in addition to a sad or irritable mood. Sallie has some symptoms of de -
pression, although her interest, concentration, and sleep are basically in-
tact.
For Sallie, a trial of psychotherapy without medications is reason -
able, but if her symptoms worsen with treatment, a medication evalua -
tion might be indicated. In general, if my new patient has any psychiatric
Enhancing the Alliance and Eliciting History 47
symptom that significantly affects her daily functioning, I include a psy -
chopharmacological evaluation as part of her consultation. Although it
is beyond the scope of this book to review how to complete a psycho -
pharmacological evaluation, we have listed a number of good references
in the bibliography.
In Example 4.2, I also fold a number of questions about eating dis -
orders into my SIGECAPS review. Eating disorders are especially preva -
lent in young women, but patients rarely offer information about food
restriction or bulimia spontaneously. These disorders also deserve some
special attention because they place a patient at medical risk. Among
many other complications, anorexia nervosa can lead to osteoporosis
and bone fractures, and bulimia nervosa can lead to cardiac dys -
rhythmias. Both conditions have significant mortality rates when they
are untreated. If a patient is restricting food intake and appears signifi -
cantly below a normal body weight or is actively bingeing or purging,
she is best served by a treatment team that includes a therapist, internist,
and nutritionist. For my complicated eating-disordered patients, I also
intermittently review their treatment with an expert experienced in this
specialty.
Ultimately, there is no way to be ready for every clinical situation.
Over time, I’ve come to the conclusion that, even as a seasoned clinician,
I will never know everything. No practioner does. However, if I recog-
nize what I don’t know and when I need consultation, I will be able to
provide excellent, ethical care.
As I continue to ask questions about Sallie’s psychiatric history, I
might fall for Sallie’s nonchalant and somewhat defensive attitude and
make some erroneous nonempathic assumptions about her past.
EXAMPLE 4.3
The therapist assumes incorrect information about the patient
T
HERAPIST: So, let me review some past psychiatric history. You proba -
bly haven’t seen a psychiatrist before, have you?
SALLIE: Actually, I have.
THERAPIST: As a child?
SALLIE: No, actually it was just a few years ago, but I didn’t want to go.
When faced with a question that assumes a particular response—
such as “You probably haven’t seen a psychiatrist before, have you?”—a
self-conscious patient may minimize or edit her history in order to pres -
ent a good impression. For the patient to feel safe sharing private and
48 THE CONSULTATION
potentially shaming information, the clinician needs to create a non -
judgmental atmosphere and avoid “leading the witness.”
Clinical experience with a wide range of patients has helped me
avoid erroneous clinical assumptions. When I started residency, I mini -
mized the psychopathology in college students like Sallie Gane. After a
few years, my assessments became more accurate, but I proceeded to
make the same mistakes all over again in my private practice. If the pa -
tient was the least bit intimidating (a lawyer, another mental health pro-
fessional, a wealthy and/or attractive patient), I was at risk for “leading
the witness,” as I did in Example 4.3. Again, clinical experience de -
creased my anxiety, and my clinical acumen improved.
Here’s Take 2 with an approach that helps Sallie share her experi -
ence.
EXAMPLE 4.4
Collecting a personal and family psychiatric history
T
HERAPIST: So, have you ever seen a therapist before?
SALLIE: Well, when I was in high school, I saw someone for about a year.
THERAPIST: How did you experience the treatment?
SALLIE: Actually, even though I didn’t want to go at first, I ended up lik-
ing Dr. Anders. He was a nice guy, and I always felt better after talk-
ing to him. It was a good experience.
T
HERAPIST: Can you tell me why you started seeing Dr. Anders?
SALLIE: Well, actually, it was around the time that I was using the laxa -
tives.
THERAPIST: What was going on?
SALLIE: Well, I was really stressed out. I was trying to decide which col -
lege to go to, and my parents were totally invested in my attending
the state university. I don’t know. I just got overwhelmed with the
whole idea, so I started to focus on the prom to keep my mind off of
graduation, and moving on. You know, the whole growing-up
thing. Dr. Anders helped me figure this out.
I had this great black dress to wear to the prom, but it was a lit-
tle too tight when I bought it. Then my friend Mara offered me lax-
atives so I could lose a couple of pounds really quickly, and I hate to
admit it, but I jumped at the chance.
I know I shouldn’t say this, but the laxatives were amazing, at
least at first. I never felt bloated any more, and the dress fit perfectly
at the prom. I just got hooked kind of fast. I’d take the stuff before I
Enhancing the Alliance and Eliciting History 49
went to bed, and I’d only feel uncomfortable for a short time each
morning. I felt great all day. And totally skinny.
After a few weeks, my parents found about five boxes of laxa -
tive tablets in my room, and they had a fit. First, I had to see my pe-
diatrician, and then she recommended this guy, Dr. Anders.
THERAPIST: Was the therapy helpful?
SALLIE: Overall, it was okay, I guess. We talked a lot about college and
the end of high school. I did feel better having someone to talk to.
THERAPIST: How did the therapy end?
SALLIE: After a while, I just felt better, and then we met a few more times
before we stopped. Dr. Anders said I could always call him in the fu-
ture if I wanted to talk. I didn’t need to . . . until now, I guess.
THERAPIST: Did you think about calling him after the breakup with
Charlie?
SALLIE: I did talk to him twice a couple of weeks ago. He was the one
who recommended that I find a person to see up here. After we
talked a few times and I wasn’t feeling better, he thought it would
be better to see someone face to face. I was crying so hard on the
phone, I think I freaked him out a little bit.
T
HERAPIST: Hmm, how did you feel when he recommended you find a
therapist locally?
SALLIE:( Becomes tearful.) I felt pretty upset. I know it is hard to get a
good sense of what is going on over the phone, but I was surprised
when he thought I was so messed up that I needed to see someone
else. I mean, he really knows me!
T
HERAPIST: Do you miss him?
SALLIE: I really do. No offense, Dr. Bender, but I don’t know you at all. I
have to tell you all this history that he is already familiar with.
THERAPIST: It is doubly hard to start with someone new and to miss Dr.
Anders at the same time [ validating Sallie’s experience rather than
taking offense].
SALLIE: Yep . . . it is. Whatever . . . what other questions do you need to ask?
THERAPIST: Let’s see . . . well, have you ever been on any psychiatric
medications?
SALLIE: No. Talking alone did the trick, at least in high school. Like I
said, until now I’ve been doing really well. My eating habits have
been really healthy for years now. The idea of taking laxatives again
is repulsive. At least, that’s progress.
50 THE CONSULTATION
Even though I was scared of leaving home at first, I think it’s
been helpful to go to school away from home. I’m the oldest, so
maybe it was extra hard to leave, but I think becoming more inde -
pendent has been good for me.
T
HERAPIST: It is important progress that your eating has improved and
that you no longer take laxatives.
You mentioned you are the oldest. How many siblngs do you
have?
SALLIE: Just one. Tom is 6 years younger than me. He’s 15.
THERAPIST: What is your relationship with him like?
SALLIE: Oh, good I guess. It’s really fine.
THERAPIST: I definitely want to know more about Tom and your family,
but I want to make sure that I get a chance to ask about your psy -
chiatric and medical history. Have you ever been in a psychiatric
hospital?
SALLIE: Actually, yes. Umm, I guess I forgot to mention that.
THERAPIST: When was that?
SALLIE: Well, after the prom when my parents found the laxatives, my
pediatrician said that my lab data were dangerous, and she didn’t
trust me to stop the laxatives on my own. She sent me to the emer-
gency room to get IV’s and stuff, and the shrink that saw me at the
hospital sent me to a psychiatric hospital. I’ll never forgive him. It
was the worst 10 days of my life.
Well, maybe it helped a tiny bit because I didn’t use the laxa-
tives ever again when I got out, but it’s totally humiliating that I had
to be locked up in a loony bin when I was in high school. I don’t tell
many people.
T
HERAPIST: Humiliated is how you feel, but it isn’t the word that comes
to mind for me. It sounds as though you were really struggling.
What was the hospital’s name?
S
ALLIE: Something-or-other Lodge.
THERAPIST: Were you in the hospital any other times?
SALLIE: No, just that once. I am not that much of a kook.
THERAPIST: Is it uncomfortable to talk about this sensitive time?
SALLIE: Sort of. I mean it’s not something that I’m proud of.
THERAPIST: I am glad you felt comfortable enough to tell me about it. It
sounds as though it was a difficult time, but you were able to take
advantage of the help from the hospital and from Dr. Anders.
Enhancing the Alliance and Eliciting History 51
You overcame the crisis in high school. There’s a good chance
that the resilience you showed then will help you now, but we need
to know more. [Offering justifiable hope can be highly beneficial.]
During this time in high school, did you have any thoughts of
harming yourself?
S
ALLIE: Now and then . . .
THERAPIST: Were they passing thoughts or did you think of doing some-
thing?
SALLIE: Umm, mainly passing thoughts.
THERAPIST: What did you think about?
SALLIE: I just thought about what my funeral would be like . . . how
many people would come. Actually, I would get depressed thinking
about it because I didn’t think any of my high school friends would
even show up. I knew I would never do anything, though. My par -
ents would have been too devastated.
T
HERAPIST: Did you ever think about how you might hurt yourself?
SALLIE: No, not specifically.
THERAPIST: Is there any other time in your life when you thought about
suicide?
SALLIE: No, suicide has never really been an issue for me. Nowadays, I
sometimes feel I just don’t care about a lot of things, but I don’t
think I would go that far.
T
HERAPIST: Some people, under stressful circumstances, will attempt to
relieve the emotional pain by cutting or burning themselves. Have
you ever done this?
S
ALLIE: Oh, I just read an article about that for psych class. Nah, I’d
never do that. Well, once I was sort of curious and I pricked myself
once with a knife when I felt really angry, but it hurt, so I stopped.
T
HERAPIST: What stopped you?
SALLIE: I just imagined my parents finding out and shipping me off to
the Lodge again. Plus, I don’t like pain. I think I was just curious.
THERAPIST: How does it feel talking about this?
SALLIE: Okay, I guess. It was a long time ago. I’ve grown up a lot since
then.
THERAPIST: You are doing a good job helping me get a sense of what this
time was like for you. Has anyone else in your family ever been in a
psychiatric hospital?
52 THE CONSULTATION
SALLIE: No.
THERAPIST: Does anyone in your family struggle with psychiatric diffi -
culties, like anxiety, depression, or alcohol and substance abuse?
SALLIE: My mother’s brother used to have a problem with alcohol, but
he is okay now. He’s been sober a number of years. My mother
sometimes says she had the “baby blues” with me, but I don’t really
know what that means. She never went to a psychiatrist.
T
HERAPIST: Anyone in the family try to hurt himself in any way?
SALLIE: No, not as far as I know.
It’s easy to swerve off course during the second session while you
collect the past medical and psychiatric history. During Example 4.4,
Sallie introduces a number of new topics that pique my interest (moving
away to college, her brother Tom), but I stay focused, concentrating on
Sallie’s past outpatient and inpatient treatment, past trials of psycho-
pharmacological medications, past suicidal behavior, and her family’s
psychiatric history. I “bookmark” the other topics for future discusssion.
For patients with prior therapy experience, I learn how long the
prior treatment lasted and what the patient found helpful or not helpful.
I try to pay special attention to how my new patient terminated with her
previous therapist. Was she able to tolerate a planned good-bye, or did
she disengage abruptly and without warning? People tend to replay their
past. How my patient dealt with a former therapist may provide a clue
for our future together.
If the previous therapy was a good experience, I acknowledge how
difficult it is to start with someone new. Polite patients are unlikely to
tell me this directly, but they may feel relieved and understood when I
mention that switching therapists may be a difficult process.
As a psychiatrist, I collect a psychopharmacological history during
this part of the consultation. In addition to learning which medications
have been tried in the past, I ask how long each trial occurred, what was
the maximum dose reached for each medication, which medications
worked, and which side effects were experienced.
Even for therapists who do not prescribe medication, it is important
to know whether your patient has ever taken any psychotropic drugs,
such as antidepressants, lithium, benzodiazepines, or others. Learn
which drugs have been tried and which were successful. Is she taking any
now? Who prescribes them? Do not assume she isn’t taking psychotropic
medications if she isn’t seeing a psychiatrist. Many primary care doctors
will prescribe antidepressants, such as fluoxetine, or antianxiety medica-
tions, such as clonazepam or alprazolam.
Enhancing the Alliance and Eliciting History 53
For past psychiatric hospitalizations, I learn the basic details about
the admissions (when and where they occurred, how long they lasted,
whether any medications were tried during the admissions, and the de -
tails of the postinpatient followup). At this time, Sallie remains very
vague about the details of her psychiatric admission during high school.
As we continue to work together and Sallie begins to trust me, I hope to
learn more about this stressful time. I could also obtain her inpatient
psychiatric records for my files. This early in the consultation it is nor -
mal to have only an outline of the patient’s history, like a coloring book
that hasn’t been filled in yet.
As prior suicidal behavior is one of the strongest predictors of fu -
ture attempts, it is essential to clarify past suicidal history, including spe-
cific thoughts and actions the patient has had about self-harm through -
out her life. For any suicidal thoughts, I ask for a detailed account of any
actions that occurred as well. For instance, if she had a fleeting plan of
overdosing when she was a teenager, did she just think about it, or did
she collect pills, count them out, and hold them in her hand?
Questions about self-mutilatory behavior can follow the questions
about suicide. For any repetitive self-injurious act, it is important to
elicit details about the symptom. For example: For cutting, I ask where
and how deeply the patient cuts herself, how often she does it, and what
triggers the activity. For medical reasons, it is useful to know what in-
strument she uses to hurt herself, and if she has ever required medical at-
tention for this behavior. If the patient is using unclean implements, I ask
about her most recent tetanus booster, as it needs to be updated every 10
years. (For more help on how to respond to self-destructive behavior
and to an actively suicidal patient, please see Chapter 9.)
I also gather information on medical history, medications, and aller-
gies during this second session.
EXAMPLE 4.5
Collecting a personal and family medical history
T
HERAPIST: We need to review your medical history. Do you have any
major medical problems?
SALLIE: No.
THERAPIST: Have you ever been in a medical hospital overnight for any
reason?
SALLIE: Oh, yeah, when I was 10 I had an infection in my hand, and I
needed to be hospitalized for IV antibiotics.
54 THE CONSULTATION
THERAPIST: How did it feel to be hospitalized overnight at such a young
age?
SALLIE: It was scary, but it was only a few days, so it wasn’t too horrible.
THERAPIST: Do you have any residual problems with your hand?
SALLIE: No, it is okay, luckily.
THERAPIST: Any other medical problems as a child? Any other major in-
fections, surgeries, broken bones?
SALLIE: Let me think. No other infections. No surgeries. Only a bro -
ken wrist once. Oh, yes, I had tubes in my ear when I was baby
because I had so many ear infections, but I don’t remember
much about that, obviously. I do remember my mother saying
that I was a trouper and never complained about all my doctor’s
visits. [ Sallie is beginning to follow the therapist’s lead, not only
stating the facts, but also trying to remember how the incident
affected her.]
T
HERAPIST: Any other recurrent chronic medical problems with any part
of your body? Any problems with asthma? Any stomach problems?
SALLIE: No. No.
THERAPIST: Have you ever had head trauma where you lost conscious-
ness?
SALLIE: I don’t think so, but I fainted once when I was really tired and
standing up too long on a really hot day.
THERAPIST: Did you hit your head?
SALLIE: No. My dad caught me as I went down.
THERAPIST: Ever have any seizures?
SALLIE: Umm, I don’t think so, I’d know if I had that, right?
THERAPIST:( Nods.) When is the last time you had a physical exam? Do
you have any current physical symptoms that are bothering you?
SALLIE: Oh, I had a physical about 6 months ago. Everything was fine.
THERAPIST: Who is your primary care physician?
SALLIE: Well, I got my physical at school from a doctor at the student
health services. Her name was Dr. Newman, but at home my doctor
is Dr. Karen.
T
HERAPIST: Do you have any current physical symptoms that are both -
ering you? ( repeating the question because Sallie did not answer it
the first time around )
Enhancing the Alliance and Eliciting History 55
SALLIE: I have been feeling very tired lately. But I figured that it was just
because I am overwhelmed with this whole Charlie incident.
THERAPIST: Did the tiredness start before or after you had your physical
6 months ago?
SALLIE: Oh, it’s relatively recent; I’ve only had it about 2 months now.
THERAPIST: The tiredness may be related to the breakup with Charlie,
but there are also a number of medical conditions that can cause fa-
tigue. It may be worth making an appointment with Dr. Newman to
make sure that you don’t have any other medical reason to be so
tired.
S
ALLIE: Okay.
THERAPIST: Have you been taking any medications, prescribed or over-
the-counter?
SALLIE: I take ibuprofen every month with my period, and vitamins, but
that’s it.
THERAPIST: Which vitamins?
SALLIE: Umm, I take a vitamin C supplement and a multivitamin.
THERAPIST: Are you allergic to any medicines?
SALLIE: Maybe penicillin. I think I get a rash from that.
THERAPIST: Are you currently sexually active?
SALLIE: Umm, yes . . . at least I was before Charlie and I broke up.
THERAPIST: What did you use for contraception?
SALLIE: Oh, yeah, I’m also on the pill.
THERAPIST: Oh, okay. Did you know Charlie’s HIV status?
SALLIE: Umm, no. But I’m sure he’s fine.
THERAPIST: Hmmm . . . I wouldn’t be doing my job if I didn’t ask how
you were protecting yourself from sexually transmitted diseases
with the pill.
S
ALLIE: Oh, I think Charlie was safe. He didn’t sleep around a lot.
THERAPIST: You know, it really is a very difficult situation nowadays to
have to be so careful during sex, but the safest approach is for you
to be medically checked for HIV or other sexually transmitted dis -
eases.
S
ALLIE: Oh, I don’t think that’s necessary. I knew Charlie for a while be-
fore we went out. He’s clean.
THERAPIST: I am glad you did think about it. I feel a bit in a bind, be -
56 THE CONSULTATION
cause I think your health is awfully important, but I also don’t think
it is my role as your therapist to act as the sex police. [ I make a
mental note to bring this up again if the opportunity presents itself,
for instance, if Sallie starts a new relationship .]
S
ALLIE: Yeah, I hear your point, but I really think I was safe enough
here.
THERAPIST: Do your parents have any medical problems?
SALLIE: No. They are pretty healthy overall. My dad has some arthritis
from some old sports injuries, but otherwise they’re doing pretty
well. They like sports and do a lot of outdoor activities together.
T
HERAPIST: And your brother?
SALLIE: He has a history of stomach problems, but he’s better now.
THERAPIST: What kind of stomach problems?
SALLIE: He used to have a lot of trouble with chronic stomach pain and
diarrhea, but he’s recovered now.
THERAPIST: I’ve asked you a lot of questions today, and I am beginning
to get a good overview. How has it felt for you?
SALLIE: It is weird to think about the psych hospitalization during high
school. I don’t usually talk about that, but the rest was okay.
THERAPIST: Well, I appreciate you being so open with me about your ex-
perience. Next week, we’ll cover some more of my questions, and
we’ll be closer to making a treatment plan.
S
ALLIE: Oh, good. I really want to get back to talking about Charlie.
THERAPIST: We still have about 10 minutes today. Could you fill me in?
What would you like to tell me?
A thorough medical history should cover Sallie’s current physical
health as well as her personal and family medical history. During this
part of the consultation, I always ask specifically about a history of sig -
nificant or repeated head trauma with loss of consciousness. With signif-
icant head injury, a patient is at risk for cognitive impairment, seizures,
and emotional lability. A history of such events added to current neuro -
logical impairment may warrant further evaluation by a neurologist or
by a psychiatrist who is familiar with the behavioral manifestations of
brain damage.
It’s often not easy to gather a sexual history. First, I may not know
whether my new patient is straight, gay, or bisexual, and to be an effec -
tive therapist I have to be ready to accept any of these orientations. Dur-
ing medical school at the University of California, San Francisco, I was
Enhancing the Alliance and Eliciting History 57
taught to ask about sexuality with two questions: “Are you sexually ac -
tive?” followed by “With men, women, or both?” While this approach is
helpful for the gay or bisexual patient, it is often embarrassing for the
straight, conservative patient. Nowadays, I use the first part of the ques-
tion and then follow the patient’s lead. I try not to assume that the pa -
tient’s partner will be of the opposite sex until I hear this fact explicitly. I
think this more cautious approach is more sensitive than the medical
school method, although it may not be as absolutely politically correct.
A therapist is often in the unenviable position of hearing about a
patient’s poor judgment that puts her at physical or emotional risk. In
Sallie’s case, she had put herself at risk with her unsafe sex with Charlie.
As a health practioner, it is not responsible to ignore your patient’s risky
behavior, but a righteous directive stance is unlikely to promote change.
During my first months as a psychotherapist, I didn’t know how to ap -
proach these sensitive issues in a therapeutic way. I spent many uncom -
fortable sessions inwardly screaming “STOP IT!” while I listened to pa -
tients describe their numerous sexual escapades without a condom, their
experimentation with powerful hallucinogens, or their driving recklessly
60 miles an hour down a side street without a seatbelt.
If preaching worked, I’d use it, but the last thing any patient needs
is another directive, unempathic person in her life. While it can be terri-
fying to worry about your patients’ safety, the only way she will ulti-
mately change her behavior is by overcoming her inner resistance to pro-
tecting herself. Usually, this process takes time and occurs as the therapy
slowly evolves. Meanwhile, your job is to acknowledge that the behavior
is dangerous but to avoid becoming a nag. The strategy outlined in Ex-
ample 4.5 is balanced, because it provides education and understanding
without a domineering attitude. Our goal as therapists is to guide deftly
but not to pretend that we have control.
Even if the patient doesn’t protest about spending the majority of
the session relating her medical and psychiatric history, I leave about 10–
15 minutes at the end of the session to talk about the primary difficulty
that brought her to treatment. The patient will appreciate that I haven’t
forgotten her main concerns, and this will also be my opportunity to ar-
range for the third session.
EXAMPLE 4.6
Closing the second session
T
HERAPIST: Well, I appreciate your being so open with me about your
experience. Next week we’ll cover some more questions, and we’ll
be closer to making a treatment plan.
58 THE CONSULTATION
SALLIE: Oh, good. I really want to get back to talking about Charlie.
THERAPIST: We still have about 10 minutes today. Could you fill me in?
What would you like to tell me?
SALLIE: Umm, I don’t know. What should I do this week to get through
it? When do you think I’ll feel better?
THERAPIST: What has helped you get through it so far?
SALLIE: Distraction works the best, I guess. But, how long will this ther -
apy take to work? Last time with Dr. Anders I was a little upset but
nothing like this. How long do you think it will take for me to feel
better?
T
HERAPIST: I can understand it might be difficult to be patient because
you have been feeling bad for so long. I wish I could say some
words that could take all your pain away, but unfortunately it isn’t
that simple. If it were easy to fix, you wouldn’t even be seeing me in
the first place. You would have figured this thing out by yourself
long ago. I think we both need to keep working on this together.
S
ALLIE: Oh, okay. I wish it could be faster too, but if this is the way it
has to be, I’ll just manage as best I can.
THERAPIST: Which distractions work best?
SALLIE: Movies, running—even studying sometimes. ( Laughs.)
THERAPIST: Sounds good. Until next week . . .
SALLIE: Yeah, I’ll see you then.
The consultation is well on its way. Sallie is beginning to trust me,
and I am slowly getting an outline of her story, both present and past.
Review of mnemonic for depression: SIGECAPS—sleep, interest,
guilt, energy, concentration, appetite, psychomotor, suicide
Key words: anorexia nervosa, bulimia, diagnosis, dysphoria, eating
disorders, evaluation, family history, major depression, medical
history, neurovegetative symptoms, psychiatric history,
psychotherapy, safety, safe sex, self-harm, sexually transmitted
diseases, suicide, therapeutic alliance
Enhancing the Alliance and Eliciting History 59
SAMPLE CONSULTATION QUESTIONNAIRE
To the patient:
The information in this questionnaire will help me understand your situation. When
added to our meetings together, it will help us find an effective approach to the
problems that we shall be considering together. Y our replies will be held in
confidence as required by law.
Please add any information that you believe might be relevant, using the reverse
sides of pages if necessary.
Name
Date
Date of birth
Address
Telephone numbers: Home
Work
Occupation
Social Security Number
Who referred you to me?
Health insurance Group
Policy
Emergency contact information:
Name
Address
Phone number
What is the main concern that led you to consult me?
MEDICAL HISTORY
Allergies
Are you allergic to any medicines? Y es
No
If yes, please list:
Are you allergic to other substances? Y es
No
If yes, which ones?
What types of allergic reactions have you had?
60
Medical Illnesses
Have you had any illnesses in the past? Y es No
If yes, which ones?
Do you have any illnesses at present? Y es No
If yes, which are they?
Date of your most recent physical examination
Name of your physician
Address
Telephone number
Do you authorize me to communicate with your physician? Y es No
Surgical Conditions
Have you had surgical operations or injuries? Y es No
If yes, what were they and when did you have them?
Date of your most recent tetanus booster
Have you ever had a head injury? Y es No
Did you lose consciousness? Y es No
When did this happen?
How did it occur?
Have you ever had seizures? Y es
No
If so, what are they like?
PSYCHIATRIC HISTORY
Hospitalizations
Have you ever been hospitalized for a psychiatric disorder? Y es
No
If yes, what was the disorder, which hospital(s), and what were the dates?
Outpatient Psychiatric Treatment
Have you ever had out-of-hospital treatment for a psychiatric disorder?
Ye s
No
If yes, what was the disorder?
When and where did you receive the treatment?
What type of treatment was it (e.g., psychotherapy, medication, behavior therapy,
others)?
Name of your former therapist
Address
Telephone number
Do you authorize me to communicate with him/her? Y es No
MEDICATION HISTORY
Which medications are you taking now (medical or psychiatric)?
Drug Dose Frequency Prescribing physician
Which medications have you taken in the past?
Drug Date Reason for discontinuing
Do you use nonprescription medications? Y es No
If yes, which ones?
Do you or have you used recreational or illegal drugs? Y es No
If yes, which drugs and how much?
Do you drink alcohol? Y es No
Have you ever tried to cut down on how much you drink? Y es No
Are you annoyed at comments about your drinking? Y es No
Have you felt guilty about anything resulting from your drinking? Y es No
Do you feel better if you have a drink early in the day? Y es No
Do you smoke? Y es No
If yes, what and how much?
Any uses of nonsmoking forms of tobacco? Y es No
If yes, which?
Beverages with caffeine:
(Circle those that apply)
Coffee or tea
cups per day
Colas cans per day
62 THE CONSULTATION
FAMILY PSYCHIATRIC HISTORY
Has anyone in your family ever had a psychiatric disorder? Y es No
Have any of the following family members had psychiatric disorders (including
depression, mania, schizophrenia, drug or alcohol abuse, obsessive–compulsive
disorder, panic disorder, phobias, suicide)? Please indicate diagnosis and the name
of the individual.
Y our sons or daughters
Father
Mother
Brothers
Sisters
Maternal grandparents
Paternal grandparents
Uncles/aunts/cousins
Marital Status
Single
Married Widowed Divorced
If married, date of wedding
Husband’s/wife’s date of birth
Occupation of husband/wife
If widowed, date of spouse’s death
Cause of death
If separated/divorced, date
Reason
Children
Name Date of birth
Do you engage in safe sex? Always Sometimes Never
Do you have any sexual concerns? Y es
No
Which form(s) of birth control do you use?
Others currently living in your household and their relationship to you
Name RelationshipFAMILY MEDICAL HISTORY
Mother’s name
Age
If deceased, date and cause of death
Serious illnesses
Father’s name Age
If deceased, date and cause of death
Serious illnesses
Enhancing the Alliance and Eliciting History 63
Brothers and sisters
Name Serious Illnesses
BRIEF REVIEW OF SYSTEMS
SYMPTOM OR PROBLEM—Circle all that apply. If circled, please describe in more
detail and make a note of the date it began.
 Decreased vision/eye pain
 Wear eyeglasses/contacts
 Dizziness/vertigo
 Earaches/buzzing or other sounds
 Decreased hearing
 Difficulty swallowing
 Chest pain
 Shortness of breath
 Decreased energy
 Difficulty concentrating/distractibility
 Difficulties with organization
 Impulsivity
 Cough/asthma
 Abdominal pain
 Menstrual/reproductive problems or infections
 Eating problems
 Decreased appetite
 Using laxatives, diuretics, or diet pills to lose weight
 Nausea/vomiting/diarrhea
 Weight loss/gain
 Bloody or black stools
 Blood in urine
 Frequent or severe headaches
 Convulsions or seizures
 Self-induced vomiting with or without ipecac
 Depression
 Anxiety/panic attacks
 Avoidance of public places in order to avoid panic attacks
 Sleep difficulty
 Decreased motivation
 Racing thoughts
 Suicidal thoughts/fears
 Suicidal wishes/plans/attempts
 Homicidal thoughts/wishes
 Homicidal plans/violent acts
 Seeing things that other people don’t see
 Hearing things that other people don’t hear
 Legal history—trouble with the law
 Loneliness/isolation
64 THE CONSULTATION
 Repetitive unwanted thoughts or actions
 Hopelessness/guilt
 Checking things multiple times to make sure they are in place
 Washing things multiple times to make sure they are clean
 Nightmares
 Flashbacks
Does your primary care physician know about the symptoms you have circled?
Ye s
No
Have you ever been exposed to abuse? Y es No
Physical
Sexual
Emotional
Who was involved?
Are you distressed about any aspect of your appearance? Y es No
Have you ever donated blood? Y es No
If you have, when was the most recent donation?
EDUCATIONAL HISTORY
Name of School/Location Dates
Elementary
Secondary
College
Postgraduate
Have you had any history of difficulties at school? Y es No
If yes, please describe:
OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY
Dates Job Titles Exposure to Dangerous Substances
Military Service
Have you had any history of difficulties at work? Y es No
If yes, please explain.
Have you had any problems with the law? Y es No
If yes, please explain.
Enhancing the Alliance and Eliciting History 65
DEVELOPMENTAL HISTORY
Was your mother exposed to stresses, drugs, or dangerous substances while
pregnant with you? Y es
No
If yes, what were they?
Were there any difficulties with your birth? Y es No
If yes, what were they?
Did you have any difficulties in your physical development? Y es
No
If yes, what were they?
Have you had any recent stresses or relevant stresses in the past?
Ye s
No
If yes, please list them.
ADAPTIVE HISTORY
Which stresses have you overcome in the past?
How did you do it?
What was the best period of your life?
What are your personal strengths?
Please sign this questionnaire.
66 THE CONSULTATION
5
Collecting a Psychosocial History
and Screening for Common
Psychological Disorders
To facilitate arrival at an accurate diagnosis and to formulate an effective treat-
ment plan, it is important to collect relevant history concerning the patient’s
childhood and later development as well as information about substance
abuse, anxiety disorders, psychosis, mania, and self-injurious behavior.
THE BEGINNING OF THE THIRD SESSION
I don’t especially like psychiatric consultations. Ongoing treatment is a
different story. It’s a special privilege to work over time with a patient on
her most pressing and private concerns. Consultations, in contrast, are a
bit of a slog because I need to collect so much information in a short
amount of time. Part of me has always wanted to skip the consultation
process altogether, but I’m now resigned that a thorough evaluation is
actually the best way to start an effective psychotherapy. Thankfully,
once I’ve finished asking the questions reviewed in this chapter, I’m more
than halfway done.
A quick review of Sallie’s first and second visits: During Session 1, I
focused on Sallie’s main concern and only directed the interview to as -
sess suicidality and safety, the most urgent parts of the mental status ex-
amination—unless the patient is homicidal or is openly psychotic. (For
an example of a more complete mental status examination, see the sam -
ple consultation summary at the end of this chapter.) During Session 2, I
used a more structured approach and asked Sallie about her current de -
67
pressive symptoms and her past psychiatric and medical history. While
I’ve tried many different ways to organize the first two sessions, I like
this approach the best. It balances the need to establish a therapeutic al -
liance with the need to gather pertinent clinical information.
During Session 3, my first round of questions will focus on Sallie’s
developmental history. Before the meeting, I review the information I al-
ready have and make a special notation of the questions I still need to
cover. Using the strategy outlined in Example 4.1, I gently interrupt Sal -
lie after she talks freely for the first 10 minutes of the session, leading
with an empathic statement as I redirect the conversation. (For example:
“This has really been a tough time. While I also want to hear how you
have been feeling during the last week, I would like to use this session
and the next one if necessary to finish collecting the information I need
to plan an effective treatment.”)
COLLECTING A DEVELOPMENTAL HISTORY
When eliciting a developmental history, I am guided by Freud’s basic ad-
age that a person is emotionally stable when she has succeeded in both
love and work. For a child, immediate family and school serve as the
first love and the first work experiences. Over time, I’ll learn about each
member of the Gane family and paint a mental picture of Sallie interact-
ing with her parents and brother. As children mature, they form signifi-
cant relationships with their peers, so I’ll also focus on Sallie’s past and
current friendships and romantic relationships. As the ability to make
and keep friends is an important developmental step, the lack of friends
during latency can be a clue to a profound sense of isolation.
For a school history, I’ll eventually want to know about Sallie’s
school experience at different ages, including preschool, latency (elemen-
tary school), adolescence, and beyond. Persistent profound difficulties in
school may signal an unrecognized diagnosis of attention-deficit/
hyper activity disorder or a learning disability.
As I construct an impression of Sallie’s life, I’ll listen for significant
childhood life events, especially those that can have a profound impact
on a child: a relative’s or friend’s death, a mother’s miscarriage, a move
across the country or even to another school district, a divorce, or an ill-
ness suffered either by the patient or by someone close to her. The
patient’s age at the time of the event is important. A 4-year-old, for
instance, will process a family crisis very differently than will a 10-year-
old.
Positive memories are equally important. To have a clear picture of
Sallie’s development, I’ll eventually want to know some of her favorite
68 THE CONSULTATION
activities as a child, her natural talents, and what she wanted to be when
she grew up.
As I gather all of this information, I’ll be trying to understand why
Sallie is currently having trouble finding contentment in her life. Interest-
ingly enough, difficulties in work and love are often intertwined.
There are two main strategies a therapist can use to collect a devel -
opmental history, each with its own set of pros and cons. With a sequen-
tial approach, the therapist asks about the patient’s past very slowly,
starting with her birth and then gradually advancing up the developmen-
tal ladder until the present.
With the sequential approach, my knowledge of Sallie’s upbringing
would be extraordinarily detailed, but there may be a therapeutic cost.
In order to gather so much information, I’ll have to be fairly directive,
and I may miss opportunities to discuss any emotionally pertinent topics
in more detail. If the process becomes prolonged, Sallie may feel frus -
trated that her primary concern, Charlie, is not being addressed.
I prefer to collect a developmental history by asking questions
about the patient’s past that specifically relate to her present concern.
This method is illustrated in Example 5.1.
EXAMPLE 5.1
Obtaining a developmental history by following the patient’s
lead
S
ALLIE: I just feel so punk about Charlie and the breakup. ( Sniffles.)
THERAPIST:( Waits in silence for Sallie to continue .)
SALLIE: I don’t even know what to say anymore.
THERAPIST: You have mentioned before that the relationship with Char-
lie felt very different from your relationships with other boyfriends.
Could you tell me more about that?
SALLIE: Yeah, sure. Well, my first boyfriend’s name was Larry. We went
out for 3 months during my freshman year of college. He was very
sweet, just very boring.
T
HERAPIST: What made him boring?
SALLIE: It’s weird. The features that attracted me to him in the first place
were also the reasons I couldn’t stand him by the end.
THERAPIST: What were those features?
SALLIE: Well, at first I just thought he was the best. He brought me flow-
ers all the time. I think he looked up to me. I mean, he had me on—
Psychosocial History and Screenings for Disorders 69
What do you call it?—oh, yeah, a pedestal. Basically, Larry thought
I was perfect, and who was I to disagree? (Grins.) But he let me boss
him around. That wasn’t so good, I think.
THERAPIST: Can you give me some examples?
SALLIE: I don’t know. . . .
THERAPIST:( Waits quietly with an interested look .)
SALLIE: Well, for instance, if I wanted to go out to dinner, we went out to
dinner. If I wanted to go shopping, we went shopping. At first, I
loved the fact that I always got my way, but then (I hate to say this,
but I think it’s true) . . . I started taking advantage. I think I was sort
of pushy, and he never stood up for himself. This sounds horrible,
but I think I got bored.
T
HERAPIST: How did the relationship end?
SALLIE: Umm, well, I sort of lied to break it off. I told Larry that I
needed to devote time to my studies, and I couldn’t afford to be dis-
tracted with a boyfriend. Then, I stopped answering his calls. Even-
tually, he got the message.
T
HERAPIST: What was that like for you?
SALLIE: I feel guilty that I didn’t feel more upset. Maybe I am a hard-
hearted person, I don’t know. But, after I broke it off, I felt 10
pounds lighter. Even though Larry was so nice to me, he made me
feel squished.
T
HERAPIST: And the second boyfriend?
SALLIE: Oh, Alec . . . well, he was a premed student. When we first met,
he was majoring in biochemistry. It looked like he had goals other
than focusing on me, and I liked that.
But the strangest thing happened. After we went out for a few
months, he started acting just like Larry. It was bizarre. He had
been so independent, and then, all of a sudden, he was constantly
catering to me. I don’t really know how it happened, but once I
knew I had the upper hand, I lost interest again.
See, this is why Charlie is such a find. He’s interesting and al -
ways has an opinion that he is willing to defend, even if I disagree
with it. Life with him was never boring. I sometimes fantasized
about marrying him. . . . ( Looks down abruptly and eyes well up
with tears.)
T
HERAPIST: This breakup was so painful because you felt that you had
found someone very special?
SALLIE: That’s true.
70 THE CONSULTATION
THERAPIST: How did you imagine marriage to Charlie would be?
SALLIE: Fun. New adventures together all the time. Taking chances. Not
like my parents’ marriage.
THERAPIST: Could you tell me more about your parents’ relationship?
SALLIE: Why? There is nothing wrong with them. ( Looks annoyed.)
THERAPIST:[ I reword the question to correct Sallie’s impression that I
was criticizing her parents’ relationship.] Well, when searching for a
partner, it is impossible not to be affected by your experience of
your parent’s relationship. What is their marriage like?
S
ALLIE: Oh, it’s fine.
THERAPIST: What is fine about it? How do they interact?
SALLIE: Well, they basically get along. But they are very different.
THERAPIST: How are they different?
SALLIE: Well, my mom has always reminded me of a hummingbird. She
never stops moving; she has so much energy. When I was growing
up, all my friends would always want to come over to my house be-
cause my mom was the most fun. She’s very cutting edge. We used
to read the fashion magazines together when I was in high school.
Did I tell you? I even won “best dressed” in high school, but she
was the one that really deserved the award.
T
HERAPIST: Does she work outside of the home as well?
SALLIE: She’s a real estate agent part time. She likes it, but it isn’t her
dream job. She talks a lot about starting her own business, but she
wants to wait until my brother is more healthy and in college.
She is really supportive of me though. She loves that I’m study-
ing economics. She always says it will prepare me to do whatever I
want when I graduate.
T
HERAPIST: You mentioned that she is very different from your dad. Can
you tell me more?
SALLIE: Well, my dad is sort of quiet. He makes a lot of jokes, but he was
always the calm influence at home. My mom flits around nonstop,
and my dad is happy to sit in one place and read or watch TV. I
think they are good for each other in this way, but they are very dif-
ferent.
T
HERAPIST: What does your dad do for a living?
SALLIE: He’s a manager of an electronics store. He likes gadgets, and he’s
good with people, but once he’s home he just wants to be with us.
Psychosocial History and Screenings for Disorders 71
He’s my reading buddy, because we’ll read the same stuff and then
talk it over. I love that.
THERAPIST: What are your parents like together?
SALLIE: Cute, I guess. But they bicker a lot, too. My Mom always wants
things a certain way, so they tend to get into arguments.
THERAPIST: What happens during a typical argument? [ I use the word
argument to describe the interaction, as Sallie did .]
SALLIE: If my mother wants to have a dinner party and my dad just
wants a quiet evening at home, they yell about it for at least half an
hour, sometimes longer. It’s amazing how these little disagreements
can blow out of proportion.
T
HERAPIST: How do you feel when you listen to it?
SALLIE: Annoyed. It’s stupid, but it’s just the way they do things.
THERAPIST: How does it usually end?
SALLIE: Oh, it usually ends the same way. My dad gets sick of arguing
and my mom gets her way. I think it’s strange that he doesn’t get re-
sentful. I would if I were giving in as much as he does, but he tells
us, “I didn’t realize how important this was to your mother, so we
will do it her way.” Then, they are all lovey-dovey—until the next
fight, that is.
T
HERAPIST: How long has this type of fighting been part of their rela-
tionship?
SALLIE: Umm, as long as I can remember, but maybe it has gotten more
frequent over the last few years.
When I follow Sallie’s associations and ask detailed questions, our
discussion about her submissive former boyfriends leads naturally into a
conversation about her parents. She describes situations and scenes with
specifics and emotions, and her stories are inherently interesting.
Example 5.1 also illustrates some techniques that help Sallie talk
more specifically when she starts speaking in generalities and vague
statements. When Sallie worries that my interest in her parent’s marriage
is a surreptitious dig for psychopathology, I openly describe the intent
behind my line of questioning: “When searching for a partner, it is im -
possible not to be affected by your experience of your parents’ relation-
ship. What is their marriage like?” When she describes her parents’ mar-
riage as “fine,” I ask for more details: “What is fine about it?”
In this interview, I use the question “What was that like for you?”
after Sallie describes her breakup with Larry. For a patient who has a
72 THE CONSULTATION
difficult time describing her emotions, this query is less threatening than
the ubiquitous “How did that feel”? With “What was that like for
you?” the patient can choose to answer with either cognition or emo -
tion, whichever feels more accessible. As the therapy progresses and the
patient is more comfortable expressing her emotions, I might focus more
exclusively on affect, but at this point my main goal is to facilitate the
conversation and the therapeutic alliance.
Since this second history-taking approach requires that I follow the
patient’s associations, rather than direct the collection of data, it takes
more time to learn about Sallie’s early childhood. Some topics (grade
school, best friend, puberty) may not be covered until the therapy is well
underway, so I keep a running mental list of the subjects I’ll ask about
when the appropriate time presents itself. Another option is to present
Sallie with our questionnaire (at the end of Chapter 4) at the end of the
first session to obtain some background, and then use Example 5.1’s
method to fill in the details over time.
FILLING IN THE GAPS:
COMPLETING A REVIEW OF SYSTEMS
Before the consultation concludes, I need to make sure that I have a
comprehensive understanding of Sallie’s difficulties. In medicine, an in-
ternist runs through a list of questions related to the main physiological
systems in the body (such as cardiovascular and gastrointestinal) to see if
her patient has any symptoms that she did not mention spontaneously.
This is called a review of systems. In psychotherapy, a clinician needs to
complete an analagous review to uncover pertinent psychological symp -
toms.
SCREENING FOR SUBSTANCE ABUSE
When considering a patient for psychotherapy, ruling out active addic -
tive behavior is a crucial part of the consultation process, especially as
most substance abusers rarely disclose their addictive behavior sponta -
neously during the first few interviews. If my new patient is actively
abusing alcohol or drugs, my treatment approach needs to be modified,
as outlined in Chapter 12, or the therapy has the potential to be destruc-
tive.
Unless a psychotherapy patient with an active drug problem is also
in concurrent intensive substance abuse treatment, psychodynamic treat-
ment may actually exacerbate the patient’s substance abuse. The normal
Psychosocial History and Screenings for Disorders 73
process of insight-oriented dynamic psychotherapy, uncovering and dis -
cussing emotionally laden topics, may be unbearable to a substance
abuser unless she uses her drug of choice to numb herself against over -
whelming affect. With this knowledge, some therapists won’t even treat
a substance abuser with psychotherapy until they have a number of
months of sobriety under their belt.
For these reasons, I start my psychological review of systems by
screening for substance abuse. Of course, how I ask these sensitive ques-
tions will affect the truthfulness of my patient’s responses. Some possible
approaches follow.
EXAMPLE 5.2
Three strategies to assess substance abuse during the
consultation
T
HERAPIST: Now, as part of your medical history, when you drink so-
cially, what is your drink of choice?
SALLIE: Beer mainly. Just on weekends.
THERAPIST: How many can you hold down? Can you hold down a six-
pack?
SALLIE: At the very end of high school, around the time I was using the
laxatives, I liked to drink, but everybody was doing it. By senior
year, I could drink as much as my guy friends without passing out!
T
HERAPIST: Could you hold down more than a six-pack?
SALLIE: Nah, but almost. Nowadays, I feel dizzy after just one beer. I
guess I’ve turned into a lightweight. ( Chuckles.)
THERAPIST: Have you ever experimented with any other drugs?
SALLIE: Just marijuana.
THERAPIST: When is the last time you used it?
SALLIE: Oh, maybe 2 months ago. I only use it at parties. I don’t buy it.
THERAPIST: How often do you tend to use it?
SALLIE: Oh, not often. Maybe every few months or so. I’m not into that
stuff.
THERAPIST: I have a list of drugs I review with every patient. Bear with
me as I go through it with you, but, as all of these drugs can affect
mood, I need to know if you have ever tried them. Have you ever
used cocaine or heroin?
74 THE CONSULTATION
SALLIE: No, I never tried those.
THERAPIST: Have you ever used antianxiety medications—either by pre -
scription by a doctor or by buying them on the street, medications
like Valium, Xanax, or Klonopin?
SALLIE: Actually, my roommate takes Klonopin for panic attacks and
she gave me one last week when I couldn’t sleep, but I didn’t like the
way it made me feel.
T
HERAPIST: Have you ever used uppers or downers?
SALLIE: No, no way.
THERAPIST: Sometimes people in college try hallucinogens like LSD or
mushrooms. Have you?
SALLIE: I almost did it once at a party, but then I got scared. I’m pretty
conservative actually, compared to some people I know. I’m not
into drugs.
T
HERAPIST: I’m not asking these questions because I think you are into
drugs, but a lot of people your age use substances to drown their
sorrows when they are having a tough time. Has that been part of
your experience?
S
ALLIE: No, I’m more of an ice cream-oholic. Give me a pint of cookies
and cream anytime. If I’m really upset, I’ll eat the whole carton.
Taking an accurate substance abuse history requires some clinical
finesse because a patient is likely to report minimal use no matter
what her actual intake. For this reason, we recommend asking about
alcohol and drug use in three different ways, as illustrated in Example
5.2.
First, I assume that my patient does drink socially, as most people
do, and I ask about her “drink of choice.” Patients who drink heavily
may minimize their use, but they are unlikely to deny all intake. With
this question, I also identify the true teetotalers who avoid any alcohol
intake no matter what the occasion. While patients who abstain from al-
cohol completely are unlikely to have a current substance abuse prob -
lem, further questioning may reveal either a past personal or family his -
tory of substance abuse.
Second, after asking about the drink of choice, I learn about my pa-
tient’s alcohol tolerance. When talking with Sallie, my first guesstimate
of her alcohol use (“a six-pack?”) is purposely high; she’s more likely to
confess her actual intake if it’s lower than my questioned estimate. While
Sallie’s current alcohol intake is moderate, her drinking in high school
Psychosocial History and Screenings for Disorders 75
did sound worrisome. Any woman of average height and weight who
can manage more than two or three beers at a sitting has a higher than
normal tolerance, which often reflects a sign of more frequent alcohol
intake. While tolerance is not synonymous with addiction, it is a poten -
tial clue.
I use my questions about alcohol to transition to a substance abuse
history. Even if my patient has only experimented with marijuana, I’ll
ask briefly about all other drugs as well. If she has ever tried a particular
substance, I’ll learn how long she has been using it, how much, and how
often. For certain drugs such as cocaine and heroin, the method of use
(snorted, smoked, or injected) is also relevant.
As a third strategy to unmask surreptitious addiction, I refer to sub-
stance use as a coping mechanism for emotional pain: “Have you ever
tried to drown your sorrows or to comfort yourself with alcohol or
drugs?” Understanding that substance use may be my patient’s last-ditch
effort to cope with a difficult situation might facilitate a more honest in-
take report.
Finally, it can be useful to finish this part of the interview with the
CAGE questionnaire, a short, valid, reliable, and nonconfrontational
survey that screens for addiction. The CAGE questionnaire allows any
health practioner to screen for substance abuse during a brief office visit.
It’s easy to learn and easy to remember.
Each letter in the acronym stands for a question about substance
use. While the CAGE questionnaire was originally created to study alco-
hol use, to maximize the bang for my buck I ask about all possible ad-
dictive substances simultaneously. The questions are as follows:C : Have
you ever in your life tried to CUT DOWN on your drinking (or drug
use?) If so, when? A: Have people ever ANNOYED you by criticizing
your drinking (or drug use)? (A useful additional question: Has anyone
ever been ANNOYED at you because of your alcohol or drug use?) G:
Have you ever felt bad or GUILTY about your drinking (or drug use)?
What have you done under the influence? E: Have you ever had a drink
(or drug) first thing in the morning to steady your nerves or to get rid of
a hangover? (EYE-OPENER) Research has shown that two positive an -
swers to the CAGE questionnaire will identify 90% of substance abus -
ers, regardless of the patient’s reported use.
For simplicity’s sake, we’ve spared Sallie a current substance abuse
problem. Her therapy won’t need the specialized addiction approach. To
illustrate the use of the CAGE with an active substance abuser, we’ll in-
troduce a second fictional patient, Anthony Lee, in Example 5.3. Mr. Lee
is a 35-year-old business consultant who will reappear in Chapter 12 to
help us demonstrate the special clinical issues involved in psychotherapy
with a substance abuser.
76 THE CONSULTATION
EXAMPLE 5.3
Assessing substance abuse using the CAGE questionnaire
Midway into the third session of the consultation with Anthony, I
start to ask my questions about substance abuse. After Anthony admits
to social use of alcohol and denies all drug use, I move on to the CAGE
questionnaire.
T
HERAPIST: I have four questions about substance use that I ask every
new patient during a consultation. It may feel a bit strange to hear
these questions since you have just told me you only drink on week-
ends, but I do think they are important to review. First, have you
ever in your life tried to cut down on your alcohol or drug use?
A
NTHONY: Well, not really. Nowadays, I make sure I only drink a few
beers a night at most. Maybe a little more on the weekends. [ This
counts as a YES = C+ ]
THERAPIST: Have you ever been annoyed by other people criticizing
your drinking or drug use?
ANTHONY: Dr. Bender, I don’t use any drugs. A couple of girlfriends
have nagged me about my drinking, but that is because they come
from such a puritanical background. My family has a high tolerance
for alcohol, and my work has never suffered from my socializing on
the weekend. [ This also counts as a YES = C+ A+ ]
T
HERAPIST: Have you ever felt guilty about your drinking or any past
drug use?
ANTHONY: Not really . . .
THERAPIST:( Quietly waits.)
ANTHONY: Well, maybe just a tad, but not really. Even if I feel guilty
easily, I don’t think my drinking is anything to worry about. [C+ A+
G+]
THERAPIST: Have you ever used any drug or alcohol in the morning to
help you steady your nerves or to alleviate a hangover?
ANTHONY: Never. I don’t drink in the mornings. Ever. [This counts as a
N O=E ]
With three positive responses on the CAGE questionnaire, Anthony
qualifies as an active substance abuser. In Chapter 12, we review how to
start treatment with Anthony even though he currently denies that his al-
cohol intake is a problem.
Psychosocial History and Screenings for Disorders 77
SCREENING FOR ANXIETY DISORDERS
Returning to my consultation with Sallie, I still need to screen for anxi -
ety disorders before deciding on a treatment recommendation.
EXAMPLE 5.4
Screening for anxiety disorders during the consultation
THERAPIST: I have a few more questions to go. Have you ever had a
panic attack? [ screening for panic attacks and panic disorder ]
SALLIE: I think so. You mean, those times when a person feels really pan-
icky?
THERAPIST: During a panic attack, a person may definitely feel panicky
but may also feel some physical symptoms, such as shortness of
breath, chest pain, or dizziness. Have you felt any symptoms like
these?
S
ALLIE: Yes, I did have a panic attack like that about a month ago before
an economics test. It was horrible.
THERAPIST: They are horrible. Can you tell me what yours was like?
SALLIE: Well, the professor was passing out the test, and all of a sudden,
I felt light-headed and couldn’t really breathe. I had no idea what
was going on. Then, my hands started to tingle, and I was con-
vinced I was going to pass out. Until I settled down because I real-
ized I actually knew the answers, I felt like I was working through a
fog. Honestly though, it was one of the scariest things I have ever
experienced. Is this what you are asking about?
T
HERAPIST: Yes, it is. Panic attacks, by definition, are very scary. Some -
times, during an attack, a person may not know it is a panic attack
and might worry that she is dying or going crazy. Did that happen
to you?
S
ALLIE: Umm, yeah. I wasn’t going to mention that part because it’s sort
of embarassing. I thought maybe I had some kind of mini heart at -
tack, but at the student health center they said I was completely
fine.
THERAPIST: While panic attacks are unlikely to be due to a medical con-
dition, I’m glad to hear that you already it had it checked out by an
internist.
[screening for agoraphobia] Sometimes, the panic attack can be
so bad that a person might avoid the places that remind her of the
78 THE CONSULTATION
attack in order to try to prevent another one. Have you avoided the
area where you took the economics test?
SALLIE: No, thank goodness, because most of my tests are in that build -
ing!
THERAPIST:[ screening for anxiety symptoms, obsessive–compulsive
character traits, and obsessive–compulsive disorder] Also, in my list
of questions: Do you ever notice that you have a thought in your
head that really bothers you, so you perform an activity to try to
make it go away?
S
ALLIE: What do you mean?
THERAPIST: Well, some people check things over and over again in their
home in order to make sure everything is secure, such as checking to
make sure that the door is locked at night or that the stove is turned
off.
S
ALLIE: Oh, I check my front door to make sure it is locked before I go
to bed at night.
THERAPIST: How many times do you check it?
SALLIE: Just once.
THERAPIST: Have you ever checked something so many times that you
are late to an appointment or has your checking interfered with
your daily routine because you are busy making absolutely sure that
the object is secure?
S
ALLIE: Umm, no. I don’t think so.
THERAPIST: Have you ever felt compelled to wash or clean anything, in -
cluding yourself, multiple times to make sure that it is clean?
SALLIE: Well, I am a neat person. I like to make sure that my apartment
is clean.
THERAPIST: What I am asking about is a symptom that is beyond ba -
sic cleanliness. Have you ever felt convinced that something is
dirty and needs recleaning even if you have just finished washing
it?
S
ALLIE: Nope, I am not that obsessive.
THERAPIST:[ screening for posttraumatic stress disorder ] Have you ever
had frequent nightmares?
SALLIE: I had a bunch around the time I saw Dr. Anders. I kept dreaming
I was locked up in a burning house and couldn’t get out. I haven’t
had one of those dreams for a while, though.
Psychosocial History and Screenings for Disorders 79
THERAPIST: Have you ever had any flashbacks of traumatic events in
your life?
SALLIE: What do you mean . . . flashbacks? Like in the movies when a
character remembers the past?
THERAPIST: Yes, that is a good example. When flashbacks happen in real
life, the person having them might also reexperience the feelings she
had during the original episode.
S
ALLIE: No, I’ve never had that.
THERAPIST: Have you ever avoided any place because it reminds you of
painful memories?
SALLIE: I don’t think so.
THERAPIST: And one more question: Do you startle easily? If a bird flies
by you unexpectedly, do you flinch more easily than most other
people?
S
ALLIE: No, I don’t do that either. I don’t think I really have any of these
things.
Example 5.3 screens quickly for common anxiety disorders: panic
disorder, agoraphobia, obsessive–compulsive disorder, and posttraumat-
ic stress disorder (PTSD), respectively, based on the symptom criteria
presented in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
fourth edition (DSM-IV), the diagnostic manual for psychiatric disor-
ders. Many times, an anxious patient may be bothered by a few of the
preceding symptoms without an impairment in daily functioning. In
such a case, therapy alone may be sufficient treatment. For more severe
symptoms, such as recurrent panic attacks, obsessions or compulsions
that interfere with her daily activities for hours at a time, or frightening
symptoms consistent with active PTSD (nightmares, flashbacks, avoid -
ance, or an increased startle reflex), a patient deserves psychopharmaco-
logical and cognitive-behavioral therapy consultations.
While some clinicians include questions about past physical, emo -
tional, or sexual trauma in the psychological review of systems, others
believe that this information is so emotionally charged that the patient
should be the first to bring up the topic. One moderate approach would
be to ask “Would you feel comfortable telling me about the trauma that
caused these symptoms?” for patients reporting a number of PTSD
symptoms without a specified cause. Another effective and relatively
nonintrusive approach would be to ask about categories of abuse in a
questionnaire, as illustrated in our sample at the end of Chapter 4. If the
patient is ready and willing to share the details of the trauma, she can
document her history in writing. If she is not interested in sharing the in-
80 THE CONSULTATION
formation with a relative stranger, it is easier to avoid answering a writ -
ten question than an oral one.
SCREENING FOR LEARNING DIFFICULTIES
Learning difficulties add persistent stress to everyday life and may in -
crease an individual’s risk for an anxiety or mood disorder. For simplic-
ity’s sake, we’ve spared Sallie, but during a review of systems, a clinician
can review for signs and symptoms of a profound learning disability.
If a patient describes a persistent history of distractibility, poor
grades, and disorganization, she deserves a more thorough neuro -
cognitive evaluation by a clinician knowledgeable in learning disabilities
and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. When these diagnoses go
unrecognized, they can continue to wreak emotional havoc into adult -
hood. With the right medication and/or learning support, a patient’s per-
formance at school and at work may improve tremendously. Relation-
ships may also benefit as the patient’s focus and self-esteem improves.
SCREENING FOR PSYCHOSIS OR BIPOLAR ILLNESS
At this point, I am nearly finished with Sallie’s review of systems because
her psychiatric history is not very extensive. For patients who seem par-
ticularly depressed, withdrawn, hard to talk to, or unusual in a way that
is hard to pinpoint, I also screen for psychosis and bipolar illness during
the consultation interview. To illustrate how to ask this delicate set of
questions, we’ll introduce our third fictional patient, Candice Jones.
Candice is a depressed, single 45-year-old paralegal who presents with a
2-month history of neurovegetative symptoms so debilitating that she
had missed many days of work by the time of our consultation. Before
this depression, she had a long history of unstable relationships and
some self-injurious behavior during her 20s and 30s. When she is under
stress, she has difficulty distinguishing between fantasy and reality. Here
is how I would screen for psychosis or mania in her consultation inter -
view.
EXAMPLE 5.5
Screening for psychosis and mania during the consultation
interview
I learn about Candice’s current depression during the first session.
She talks extensively and coherently about all her stressors at work. She
Psychosocial History and Screenings for Disorders 81
is not currently suicidal. At the beginning of the second session, she
seems much worse. She is easily agitated, and has poor eye contact. We
start the example after the first 10 minutes of the session.
C
ANDICE:( slumping in chair with eyes focused past me and on a paint -
ing on the wall behind me ) I don’t know what else to say, Dr.
Bender. . . . (Eyes dart around the room )
THERAPIST: I hear from what you have been telling me that this last
month has felt unbearable to you. Sometimes when a person has
such a severe depression, as you have, her mind plays tricks on her,
but it is too scary to tell anyone because it is so unusual. I don’t
know if this has happened to you.
C
ANDICE:( suspiciously) What do you mean . . . exactly?
THERAPIST: Well, during a severe depression some people hear voices
that only they can hear. Others see things that only they can see. . . .
CANDICE: I do hear voices sometimes. I don’t see anything unusual.
(Voice trails off.)
THERAPIST: What kind of voices do you hear? ( curious, calm tone )
CANDICE: Well, I hear two actually. These two men yelling at me . . .
telling me that I am nothing, that I am useless . . . ( Starts to cry.)
THERAPIST: It sounds very scary.
CANDICE: It is. ( Crying increases in intensity .)
THERAPIST:( Waits quietly. After a minute or so) Do you want to take a
break or may I ask more questions?
CANDICE:( Wipes her eyes and nose with tissues and takes a few deep
breaths.) It’s okay. What else?
THERAPIST: During this very difficult time, have you ever felt that you
are receiving any special messages from the TV, radio, or anything
else?
C
ANDICE: No, I don’t think so. Well, maybe once. . . . I felt like the
newscaster on the 7 o’clock news was mocking me. Is that what you
mean?
T
HERAPIST: Yes, it is. Can you tell me more about what you experi -
enced?
CANDICE: Well, it was last week. I was watching the news, and worried
that I might get fired if I don’t feel better soon, and then I could see
the anchorman looking right at me. When he said, “We’ll be right
back . . . ” I knew he was referring to my voices . . . and then, just
82 THE CONSULTATION
as he had predicted, they started screaming at me. ( Looks at me
worriedly.)
THERAPIST: What a day that must have been.
CANDICE: It was one of the worst days of my life.
THERAPIST: Have you ever felt that you have any special powers?
CANDICE: Like ESP? Sometimes I feel I might have a little bit of that.
THERAPIST: Can you tell me more?
CANDICE: Sometimes I think I can tell what people are thinking about
me.
THERAPIST: What are they thinking?
CANDICE: Well, they are wondering what’s changed about me. I have a
very good reputation at the law firm, Dr. Bender. You see, I’ve
worked there for almost 10 years. They must notice that I’m differ-
ent. I don’t even wash my hair anymore.
T
HERAPIST: Do you ever feel as though they are watching you or follow-
ing you?
CANDICE: I do think I must be the current subject of most of the office
gossip. I just know it.
THERAPIST: What do you think they are saying?
CANDICE: I don’t really know, but people seem to be staying away from
me at work, or they treat me so gingerly. They know something is
up, and something is different.
T
HERAPIST: Do you ever feel that you could control other people’s
thoughts or that they could be exerting power over yours?
CANDICE: Not my coworkers, of course, but these two men I hear yell -
ing at me are torturing me. They want me to lose it.
THERAPIST: Does anyone else know about them?
CANDICE: No, of course I haven’t told anyone about this. I don’t want
people to think I am crazy. I know this sounds strange, Dr. Bender,
but this is truly happening to me. . . .
T
HERAPIST: How does it feel to tell me these things?
CANDICE: I’m not sure . . . strange. Maybe . . . maybe a little bit better.
THERAPIST: I can understand why it has been so hard to go to work. In
order to recommend the best treatment plan, I also need to know if
you have ever experienced what we, as therapists, call mania. In
some ways, mania is the opposite of depression. It is an unusual
Psychosocial History and Screenings for Disorders 83
state that lasts more than a few days during which a person doesn’t
need to sleep, has tons of energy, is able to complete loads of work,
and feels incredible, even euphoric.
C
ANDICE: Well, I felt really happy last year for a few days. I felt wonder-
ful, on top of the world.
THERAPIST: What was happening at that time?
CANDICE: Last May, I met a man named Eric, and in the first weeks of
our romance, I felt incredible.
THERAPIST: What was your sleep pattern at that time?
CANDICE: Oh, fine.
THERAPIST: How many hours were you sleeping a night?
CANDICE: Maybe 6 or 7.
THERAPIST: Has there ever been a time in your life when you felt this
good, and you had so much energy that, for consecutive days, you
only required minimal sleep—maybe just 1–2 hours a night—all
without the help of drugs or medications?
C
ANDICE: Oh, no. I couldn’t do that.
When Candice’s affect becomes more withdrawn at the beginning
of Session 2, I screen for common psychotic symptoms, including, in
this order, auditory and visual hallucinations, ideas of reference (re-
ceiving special messages), paranoia, thought insertion, and thought
broadcasting (the patient experiences that her thoughts are being con-
trolled, or that she can broadcast her thoughts to others, respectively).
If Candice’s decompensation had emerged during our first session, I
wouldn’t hesitate to screen for psychosis even earlier in the consulta -
tion process.
During this interview, it becomes clear that Candice has auditory
hallucinations with hostile content. Her delusion that the TV anchor -
man was addressing her personally is an example of an idea of reference,
a psychotic perspective in which the patient believes general experiences
also contain unique meaning intended for her. At first blush, her clinical
presentation, including the affectively laden psychotic symptoms, is most
consistent with a mood disorder, such as depression with psychotic fea -
tures. Whatever the final diagnosis, Candice’s distress is severe, and she
deserves a psychopharmacological consultation as soon as possible.
Candice does not have true paranoia. Her perception of her co -
workers is not unreasonable considering the circumstances. Her “special
powers” may be intuition about her professional colleagues’ reactions to
her illness.
84 THE CONSULTATION
Any patient with a severe depression, with or without concurrent
psychosis, should be asked about a history of mania. As a psycho -
pharmacologist, I also complete this screening any time I am starting a
patient on an antidepressant for the first time. Since antidepressants
alone can flip a bipolar patient from depression to mania, they are not
recommmended in patients with histories of mania unless they receive a
mood stabilizer concurrently.
Candice misunderstands my question about mania when she identi-
fies a very happy time in her life as a manic episode. If she had experi -
enced a true manic episode, the specific symptoms could be delineated,
according to DSM-IV criteria, by using the mnemonic DIGFAST (de -
vised by William Falk, MD): D, distractability, I, injudicious behavior
and/or impulsivity, G, grandiosity, F,flight of ideas, A, increased activity,
S, sleep loss, and T, increased talkativeness. We include further informa-
tion on the identification and treatment of bipolar illness in the bibliog -
raphy.
As a beginner, I was worried that my new patients would be of-
fended if I included questions about psychosis in my review of sys-
tems. While I do skip the review of systems for psychosis if a patient is
high-functioning and without any current risk factors, if I have any
concern that a patient might have some psychotic symptoms lurking
behind her chief complaint, I bite the bullet and ask away. Interest-
ingly enough, the majority of patients, whether or not they are cur-
rently psychotic, are relieved that I can talk openly about such fright-
ening symptoms.
As I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, gathering the devel-
opmental history and completing a review of systems has never been my
favorite part of this work. However, it is information I need to obtain to
make educated treatment recommendations, as I do for Sallie in Chapter
6.
Review of mnemonic for alcohol abuse: CAGE—cut down, annoyed,
guilty, eye-opener.
Review of mnemonic for mania: DIGFAST—distractibility,
injudicious behavior and/or impulsivity, grandiosity, flight of ideas,
increased activity, sleep loss, increased talkativeness
Key words: anxiety disorders, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder,
auditory processing disorder, bereavement, bipolar disorder,
cognitive-behavioral therapy, developmental history, diagnosis,
dyslexia, learning disability, mania, mood disorders, obsessive–
compulsive disorder (OCD), psychiatric disorders, psychosis,
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), rejection, review of systems,
substance abuse, symptom history, symptom review, treatment plan
Psychosocial History and Screenings for Disorders 85
Consultation Summary for the Medical Record
Chief complaint (CC):
Sallie Gane is a 21-year-old single white female college student whose chief
complaint is “My life has been kind of a mess.”
Referral source:
The patient’s primary care physician at college:
Miranda Newman, MD
617-111-3333
Informant:
The patient: reliable
History of present illness (HPI):
About 6 months prior to her first visit (PTV), the patient was rejected by her boyfriend.
Since then, she has felt “mopey,” her appetite has declined, and her ability to concentrate
has decreased. Gradually her symptoms worsened despite her efforts at exercise, social-
izing, and study.
One week PTV, she had an “all-day” crying spell and decided she needed professional
help.
Past psychiatric history (PPsiH):
During her final months in high school (about 3 years PTV), she purged with and became
dependent upon laxatives. She was hospitalized for 10 days at a psychiatric facility near
her home. Following that, she had a few months of outpatient psychotherapy with Dr. An-
ders prior to starting college. She reported no other psychiatric treatment.
Substance use:
In addition to laxative abuse, as reported above, she had relatively high alcohol tolerance
during high school. She reports occasional use of marijuana but denies use of any other
recreational substance.
Past medical history (PMH):
Ear infections bilaterally in childhood.
Hand infection at age 10 with one night hospitalization for IV antibiotics.
No head injuries and no loss of consciousness or seizures.
Current medical condition:
A complete physical examination 6 months ago was entirely within normal limits, per pa-
tient report.
Primary care physician at college: Miranda Newman, MD
Primary care physician at home: Rutta Karen, MD
Current medications:
Ibuprofen for menstrual discomfort
Daily multivitamins
Oral contraceptives
Allergies:
Rash associated with penicillin
Family history (FH):
Psychiatric:
Sallie’s mother experienced “blues” following her birth.
A maternal uncle had alcohol problems but is now sober.
86 THE CONSULTATION
Medical:
Sallie’s brother has suffered from gastrointestional pain and diarrhea.
Social history (SH):
The patient’s mother is a real estate agent, and her father manages an electronics store.
Her only sibling, Tom, is 6 years younger and is currently in high school.
Mental status examination (MSE):
Sallie Gane is a neatly and casually dressed young woman who appears her stated age
and seems to be of roughly normal weight for her height. She is cooperative and
engageable throughout the interview, although at times she seems tense and nervous.
She has good eye contact. Her speech is normal rate, tone, and volume without any
pressure. A review of the neurovegetative symptoms of depression finds that her sleep is
normal (7–8 hours nightly), but her interest, motivation, energy, concentration, and appe-
tite are decreased. Her feelings of guilt and self-blame are high; her self-esteem is low.
She has no psychomotor agitation or retardation. She occasionally wishes that she
would die in an airplane crash, but she has no current suicidal intention, plan, or action.
Her thought content is appropriate. She shows no evidence of delusions or hallucina -
tions. Her thought form is well-ordered and logical. Her cognition is grossly intact. Her in-
sight and judgment are fair.
Assessment and plan:
Sallie Gane is a 21-year-old single female college student referred to me by Dr. Newman
in primary care for evaluation of Sallie’s ongoing symptoms of depression.
Ms. Gane meets the criteria for major depressive disorder, but she has been able to
function well in her college studies and does not pose a suicidal threat at this time. Her
present concerns revolve around her relationship with her former boyfriend.
At this time, I recommend a trial of psychotherapy to alleviate her distress. If symp-
toms and functioning worsen, antidepressant medication can be considered. As her
psychotherapist, I will remain alert for possible recurrences of her eating disorder or for
substance abuse.
Diagnoses:
Axis I:
Major depressive disorder, single episode, mild. (DSM-IV: 296.21)
Eating disorder in remission. (DSM-IV: 307.00)
Axis II:
No diagnosis on Axis II. (DSM-IV: V71.09)
Axis III:
No diagnosis on Axis III.
Axis IV:
Problems related to the patient’s social environment.
Axis V:
Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) Score of 65.
Psychosocial History and Screenings for Disorders 87
6
Formulating a Treatment Plan
After collecting an adequate history, the therapist needs to formulate a treat -
ment plan that responds to the patient’s specific needs. The clinican must de-
cide which type or combination of therapy (psychodynamic therapy, cognitive
behavioral therapy, group therapy, or psychopharmaocologic treatment) would
be most beneficial for the patient. An overview explaining the process of psy-
chotherapy can reinforce the therapeutic alliance.
In the days of yesteryear, long before the DSMs (Diagnostic and Statisti-
cal Manuals of Mental Disorders), symptom-based diagnoses, and many
different types of therapies, intensive psychoanalytic psychotherapy was
often the recommended treatment for patients with psychological suffer-
ing. Sometimes it worked wonders. Sometimes it didn’t work at all.
Even though I understood that psychoanalytic treatment wasn’t for
everybody, as a beginner I liked the idea of “one-size-fits-all” treatment.
The multiple therapeutic options available to my generation (individual
psychodynamic psychotherapy, group psychotherapy, psychopharmacol-
ogy, and cognitive-behavioral treatment, to name a few) felt intimidating
rather than liberating.
It took time and clinical experience to change my limited perspec -
tive. As I slowly learned to match each disorder to its most effective
treatment, my appreciation for the available wealth of information
evolved.
I now try to model myself after my supervisors who stay curious
and critical about innovative psychotherapeutic possibilities no matter
how long they have been in practice. Dr. Messner is a prime example. He
is a trained psychoanalyst, but he is also adept at psychopharmacology
and familiar with the basics of cognitive-behavioral and group psycho -
88
therapy. He isn’t reluctant to refer to these specialized treatments when
there is a reason to do so. Similarly, in this book, we will shape each
treatment to meet each patient’s unique clinical needs.
DECIDING ON A DIAGNOSIS
Before I can recommend a treatment plan for a new patient, I complete a
diagnostic formulation using the DSM-IV, the current manual that lists
the diagnostic criteria for mental disorders. While overlap can occur, I
organize psychiatric disorders into two categories: (1) disorders with
targetable symptoms that meet DSM-IV diagnostic criteria (such as
mood disorders, thought disorders, anxiety disorders, eating disorders,
and substance abuse), and (2) those conditions that are more closely
linked to ongoing life stressors (relational problems, occupational prob -
lems, adjustment disorders, personality disorders, and the like).
TREATMENT OF DISORDERS
WITH TARGETABLE SYMPTOMS
For the first category of diagnoses, the patient arrives at my office com-
plaining of specific symptoms, such as depressed mood with suicidality
and loss of sleep or disabling panic attacks that are disrupting everyday
activities. At the very least, psychodynamic psychotherapy can help this
group of patients cope with their illnesses and their effect on their work
and relationships. Sometimes, with intensive psychotherapy alone, the
disabling symptom may also slowly improve.
Understandably, many patients cannot or do not want to wait
months (or years) before psychodynamic psychotherapy alone might re -
lieve their debilitating condition. To help the patient return to healthy
functioning as soon as possible, I may recommend treatment with medi -
cation and/or cognitive-behavioral therapy as well.
A medication evaluation is mandatory in a few instances: (1) when
a patient’s symptoms of depression and/or anxiety are significantly inter-
fering with her daily functioning, (2) when the patient has a history of
mania or psychosis, and (3) when the patient has current manic symp -
toms, significant agitation, or psychosis.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) also focuses on acute symptom
alleviation for some anxiety and mood disorders. By identifying underly-
ing irrational beliefs and automatic thoughts, and by teaching cognitive
restructuring and behavioral techniques, CBT can provide a skill set that
may help alleviate acute emotional distress. For example, a patient who
Formulating a Treatment Plan 89
panics in elevators will learn that irrational concern about the physical
risk of panic attacks (“If I have another one, I think I might die”) may
exacerbate baseline nervousness and lead to an avoidance of elevators.
After teaching techniques to diminish the power of the irrational belief,
the CBT therapist may assign homework so the patient can practice the
new skills independently. The therapist might also use behavioral ther -
apy techniques, such as a gradual reexposure to elevators, as part of the
treatment plan. As a detailed review of CBT is beyond the scope of this
book, our bibliography includes some helpful CBT references.
SPECIALIZED TREATMENT OF SPECIFIC DISORDERS
Patients with eating disorders have targetable symptoms that revolve
around diet and exercise, and they often benefit from a multidisciplinary
treatment approach. A nutritionist and an internist may be required to
assure medical safety. Depending on the specific clinical scenario, the pa-
tient may benefit from individual and/or family psychodynamic therapy,
medications, and a cognitive-behavioral component. Because these pa-
tients are so complicated, I often consult with supervisors experienced
with these conditions when I’m unsure how to approach a specific clini-
cal scenario.
As we noted in Chapter 5, the treatment of active substance abusers
also requires a unique psychotherapeutic strategy, including a psycho-
pharmacological evaluation. We outline more details of this approach in
Chapter 12.
DIAGNOSES THAT PREFERENTIALLY
RESPOND TO PSYCHODYNAMIC PSYCHOTHERAPY
Psychodynamic psychotherapy is the preferred treatment if a patient’s
difficulties revolve around relationships or involve problems of self-es -
teem. Some of the other common diagnoses that also respond well to
psychodynamic psychotherapy include disorders of sexual identity, ad -
justment disorders, personality disorders, problems related to trauma,
abuse or neglect, and maturational crises and associated problems.
DSM-IV also lists a number of V codes (conditions that are not consid -
ered to be mental illnesses but may be a focus of clinical attention) that
often respond to psychotherapy, such as bereavement (V62.82), aca -
demic problems (V62.3), occupational problems (V62.2), identity prob -
lems (313.82), religious or spiritual problems (V62.89), acculturation
problems (V62.4), or phase of life problems (V62.89).
90 THE CONSULTATION
In some cases, group psychotherapy is a useful treatment concurrent
with or instead of individual psychotherapy. There are many types of
group psychotherapy, including short-term cognitive-behavioral groups
that focus on a specific problem (such as panic attacks), theme groups
such as those for eating-disordered patients or medically ill patients, and
long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy groups that concentrate on in -
terpersonal issues. For patients with recurrent relationship difficulties, a
long-term psychodynamic group may be especially useful as the therapy
will teach the patient how she is perceived by others. (Please see the bib-
liography for some recommended texts on group psychotherapy.)
SALLIE’S DIAGNOSIS
AND TREATMENT RECOMMENDATION
Sallie meets the criteria for a mild case of major depressive disorder
(DSM-IV: 296.21). She also has an eating disorder, not otherwise speci-
fied, in remission (DSM-IV: 307.00). By translating Sallie’s difficulties
into DSM-IVese, I can summarize her condition in supervision and im-
mediately be understood. If she uses her insurance to pay for treatment,
these are the diagnoses that I will note on the claim form. (Please see the
consultation summary at the end of Chapter 5 for a concise review of
Sallie’s assessment.)
After summarizing Sallie’s condition with a few numbers, we feel
the need to add a disclaimer. While a diagnosis is a necessary part of
her treatment, it doesn’t even start to capture the complexity of her
situation. DSM-IV is always a simplification. The truth is that every
patient is a complex human being with unique strengths, traits, and
yearnings.
I will recommend to Sallie that she start weekly individual psycho -
therapy because she is intensely distressed, is grieving a loss, and has a
history of interpersonal problems. Based on the information I’ve gath -
ered during the consultation, Sallie’s problems are best served by a more
traditional psychodynamic treatment, rather than by a symptom-based
intervention such as cognitive-behavioral therapy. While she is in crisis,
we also think she would benefit most from the one-on-one attention of
individual psychotherapy. Over time, if individual psychotherapy does
not provide enough emotional support, or if Sallie wishes to understand
more how she interacts with others in a therapeutic environment, I
might consider an additional referral to a long-term psychotherapy
group that focuses on relationship issues.
Currently, I’m not recommending cognitive-behavioral treatment or
medication. If Sallie started to have panic attacks (or some other
Formulating a Treatment Plan 91
targetable symptom) within the context of her many stressors, I would
reconsider adjunctive CBT with a therapist specially trained in this mo -
dality. Medication isn’t currently indicated because Sallie’s daily func -
tioning is not severely impaired, and she is not at risk for suicide.
As I make my treatment recommendation, I explain the process of
therapy to Sallie.
EXAMPLE 6.1
Explaining the process of psychotherapy to a new patient
THERAPIST: How has it felt talking to me over these last few meet -
ings?
SALLIE: It has been okay, I guess.
THERAPIST: As I think about what we have talked about, I believe psy -
chotherapy will be able to help you. I think the distress that you are
feeling about Charlie would improve through talking to me weekly
about your concerns.
S
ALLIE: You really think so?
THERAPIST: Yes, but there are also alternatives: cognitive-behavioral
treatment, group therapy, and medications, to name a few. You
could even consider no treatment at all. I’ll be glad to explain the
other treatments if you wish.
S
ALLIE: But you think psychotherapy would be the best type of treat-
ment for me?
THERAPIST: Yes, as I see it, if you could have figured out this situation
with Charlie intellectually, you would have by now. I think the way
for you to feel better is to learn more about your inner experience,
learning with your heart, not only with your head. Psychotherapy
can help you do this.
S
ALLIE: You’re right that it has been a problem of the heart. I feel like my
heart was broken. But I don’t really understand what I have to do to
feel better.
T
HERAPIST: Psychotherapy will allow you to get closer to inner feelings
by using a format similar to what we have been using, but with
some differences. First, I think it would be good to continue to meet
once a week for 50 minutes, but I won’t be directing the meeting
with a list of questions as I have done during the consultation, and I
won’t be taking as many notes. Instead, I’ll want to hear about your
current concerns. When I think it will help, I’ll try to add my obser-
vations and will probably ask an occasional question. Your task
92 THE CONSULTATION
will be to talk about whatever is on your mind, trying not to edit. [I
introduce the concept of free association .]
SALLIE: Yeah, but what good is that going to do?
THERAPIST: It can be helpful to confide in someone in detail about your
experience with Charlie. You may also start to feel better as you
gain some perspective and learn from what happened.
S
ALLIE: But, I talk to my friend, Gwen, about Charlie all the time. No of-
fense, Dr. Bender, but I don’t really understand how this is supposed
to be different.
THERAPIST: No offense taken. I’m glad you feel comfortable asking these
questions.
A psychotherapist can provide more objectivity than a friend as
well as specific knowledge and training for healing the wounds of
difficult life events like yours. When Gwen hears about the situation
with Charlie, she might relate it to her own dating experiences, and
her input will be influenced by her personal relationship with you.
As a therapist, I can be more objective, and my training has cen-
tered on helping people with relationship difficulties.
S
ALLIE: Yeah, but all that training won’t bring Charlie back!
THERAPIST: Well, that’s true, but it might help you to discover ways to
calm and to soothe your feelings and to prevent a tormenting
breakup like this from happening again.
S
ALLIE: Oh. . . .
THERAPIST: During our work together, you might have feelings about
things I say, including a feeling that I may not have understood
something. If this happens, I hope that you will tell me.
S
ALLIE: How will that help?
THERAPIST: Together we can learn a lot if we are open to talking about
our relationship. Psychotherapy is a process that deals with three
sets of relationships: present, past, and the one between you and
me. By sharing with me any feelings you have about our relation -
ship, we might learn more about the other relationships in your life.
Any feelings about what goes on in this room can be an important
part of our work together. [This is an adapted explanation of trans-
ference.]
S
ALLIE: I can try, but I am pretty shy about being direct about things like
that.
THERAPIST: That’s natural. I’ll try to help. This is why I am telling you
now that I welcome more openness. Other paths to learn about
Formulating a Treatment Plan 93
one’s inner life are through mental images, daydreams, and night
dreams. If any occur to you, feel free to bring them in.
SALLIE: You have got to be kidding! This is starting to feel a little like
psychobabble.
THERAPIST:( calmly, and not defensively ) Dreams and other forms of
imagination can sometimes be very helpful in learning about inner
parts of life that are difficult to think about otherwise. The ideas
and feelings they bring up can be useful in psychotherapy. I just
wanted you to know they are welcome here.
S
ALLIE: So, how long does this take? When will I feel better?
THERAPIST: It’s difficult to predict. One of our goals is to enable you to
feel better as soon as possible. How are you feeling now compared
to when we first met?
S
ALLIE: About the same. It’s just hard being patient. I want to feel better
immediately.
THERAPIST: I can understand that. Usually, it takes a little time to feel
better, and it is hard to be patient.
In about 10 minutes or less, and without using any psychological
jargon, I’ve taught Sallie Gane about free association, transference, and
the usefulness of dreams in psychotherapy. Because I described the dif-
ference between the consultation process and ongoing psychotherapy,
the apparent lack of structure in the sessions that follow will be viewed,
appropriately, as deliberate, with a specific purpose. My change in style
from the last session of the consultation to the first session of the psy -
chotherapy will now be understood and expected.
Sallie also requests immediate relief, a common request from a new
patient in crisis. Although I can’t promise rapid improvement, cognitive
or behavioral interventions that maximize coping skills can be integrated
within the psychodynamic treatment to provide a measure of early relief.
Some examples of these techniques are outlined in Chapter 9, which fo -
cuses on crisis intervention. There is also great comforting power in feel-
ing understood. Often, with an empathic therapist who listens carefully,
the patient will start to feel a little better after the first few meetings.
IF YOU DON’T WANT TO TREAT THE PATIENT
AFTER YOU HAVE COMPLETED THE CONSULTATION
As a trainee, my superviors recommended that I work with numerous
patients with a range of psychiatric disorders in order to gain experi -
94 THE CONSULTATION
ence. With this advice in mind, I sometimes hesitated to continue treat -
ing a patient after the consultation was completed. For instance, I might
want to hold my open session slot for a male psychotherapy patient if
my entire caseload were female.
Early on, I also referred some patients who were too frightening to
other providers. During my first year as a therapist, I refused to treat any
actively suicidal outpatient because I was scared that my inexperience
would be fatal. Experience has helped me feel more and more comfort -
able treating a wide range of patients, but in the beginning, I was more
fearful.
Rarely, the reason I didn’t want to treat a patient was much more
personal and much more embarrassing. What if I had an aversion to
talking to Sallie and felt little empathy for her troubles? What if she
reminded me of a bully from grade school or a snotty girl from junior
high dance class? My first stop would be supervision to try to under -
stand and to work through my difficulty. But sometimes, even with the
best of intentions, I wasn’t able to shake the “emotional block.” (For
more discussion of how a therapist’s reaction to a patient can affect
the treatment, please see Chapter 16 on transference and countertrans-
ference.)
If I had persistent or profound trouble connecting with a patient
from the get-go, it wasn’t in anyone’s best interest for me to continue as
the therapist after the consultation was completed. I would try to learn
from the experience, but I would need to trust my instincts. If I didn’t
feel able to treat the patient, I’d refer the person to a clinician who could
be an eager and engaged collaborator.
Unfortunately, while it is often easy for a therapist to refer a patient
to another clinician, it can be very upsetting to be on the receiving end of
a transfer. As a guilt-ridden beginning therapist, it’s easy to complicate
the already loaded situation by minimizing or denying the patient’s hurt
feelings to alleviate one’s own distress (“I know you expected to work
with me, but I think you’ll like Dr. Smith even better anyway”) or by de-
laying the news until the consultation’s final session.
In general, patients are rarely delighted to learn that they will be
passed off to another clinician after the consultation is completed. They
digest the information more easily if they learn about the transfer during
the first or second consultation meeting and have time to process their
disappointment.
EXAMPLE 6.2
The therapist sensitively refers the new patient to another
clinician early in the consultation
Formulating a Treatment Plan 95
At the Beginning of the Second Session
THERAPIST: Before we start the second session today, I wanted to know
if you had any thoughts about our last session.
SALLIE: No, not really.
THERAPIST: I learned enough in our first session to recognize that I don’t
feel qualified to be your therapist but can complete the consultation
if you are willing. At the end of the consultation, when we decide
on a treatment plan, I’ll be able to refer you to a clinician I know
who would be most appropriate to take over your treatment.
S
ALLIE: Why can’t you see me?
THERAPIST: It is a matter of professional judgment about what’s best for
you. [I am deliberately vague to avoid an in-depth discussion about
this issue.]
SALLIE: Oh, I was hoping I could continue with you.
THERAPIST: I appreciate your saying that. How do you feel hearing this
news?
SALLIE: Crappy, and bummed. I must be hitting a new low to be rejected
by a therapist!
THERAPIST: In view of your experience with Charlie, I can understand
how this can feel like a rejection to you. It is hard to complete a
consultation and then switch treaters, but with the information we
review together in the next few meetings, I will be able to match you
up with one of my colleagues.
S
ALLIE: Someone you know?
THERAPIST: Yes, I will try to refer you to someone whose work I know
well.
As I’ve gained experience as a psychiatrist, referrals to other thera -
pists have become a relatively easy process. I refer to my professional
network. During 6 years of post–medical school training, I’ve logged
hundreds of hours of supervision with very experienced clinicians and
with peer supervision groups. If I cannot take on a new patient, I refer
with confidence to my colleagues, because I know their work well and
trust their abilities.
NOTE TAKING
I always regret when I don’t tell new patients that I usually don’t take
notes in the sessions that follow the consultation. When I’m writing,
96 THE CONSULTATION
the patient may feel her story is noteworthy (excuse the pun). When I
don’t explain my abrupt decrease in note taking, she may easily misin -
terpret the change as a reduction in my attention and a waning of in -
terest.
Some therapists have an uncanny ability to listen, to maintain eye
contact, and to jot legible words simultaneously, and they may continue
to take notes as a therapy progresses. Even if you are one of these tal -
ented few, this procedure also travels with its own potential difficulties.
A former patient of mine, whom I’ll call Anne, once described how she
scrutinized her previous therapist’s note taking. She watched her thera -
pist’s hands carefully, noticing when she picked up her pen or put it
down. Over time, Anne began to feel upset when the therapist didn’t
take notes after she had related an especially sensitive story. A simple ac-
tion had become replete with emotional meaning. It was unfortunate
that Anne never shared her feelings about this issue with her therapist.
The therapy would have benefitted from an open discussion of her con -
cerns.
PROCESS NOTES
Before I begin to work with Sallie in an ongoing therapy (because I’ve
created her to be a patient I am interested in and able to work with), let’s
touch base about process notes.
My future therapy sessions with Sallie won’t have a predictable pat-
tern. The content of each session will depend on Sallie’s current con-
cerns. After each therapy hour is completed, I’ll write some “process
notes” that will allow me to re-create the therapeutic process for my su -
pervisor or for my own future reference.
During my first months of training, it took a full hour to record the
content from a 50-minute session. Luckily, with more practice, the pro -
cess of writing process notes became more expeditious. Now I don’t try
to record the session verbatim, but only note the key moments of the ses-
sion, so I’ll remember them later on. I complete my process notes in the
10 minutes between patients when my recall for a session’s material is
most vivid.
To organize the notes, I divide a plain sheet of paper in half with a
vertical line (or fold) down the center. On the left side of the paper, I
write down as much as I can remember of the session’s most meaningful
moments (including names of important people in the patient’s life so I’ll
have them for future reference). Then, on the right side of the paper, I
write any questions, ideas, or feelings I may have had during the hour.
During supervision, I’ll use my notes to formulate my questions and
guide the discussion.
Formulating a Treatment Plan 97
EXAMPLE 6.3
An excerpt from a session followed by a typical process note
that abbreviates the action and formulates the therapist’s
questions
Sallie rushes in 15 minutes late.
S
ALLIE: I am so, so sorry. Traffic was terrible. I don’t know why it is so
hard to get here. My new job makes it hard to get here on time. Did
I tell you? I got a work-study position at the library. I am REALLY
sorry. I just can’t leave early to make it on time.
T
HERAPIST: It was difficult to leave enough time to get here?
SALLIE: Yes. My new boss is difficult, and I want to make a good impres-
sion. Maybe I could have made it if I had left the library 10 minutes
earlier, but I didn’t want to ask for any special favors. Not during
my first week anyway.
T
HERAPIST: So leaving 10 minutes early one afternoon a week doesn’t
feel right?
SALLIE: It might be okay once I get settled in the job. My new boss is
tough, but she also seems fair. She said that she would be flexible
with our schedules because she knows that we have other commit-
ments. I just don’t want to push it.
T
HERAPIST: It feels difficult to ask for the favor. Can you tell me why?
SALLIE: I just don’t want to jeopardize anything.
THERAPIST: I can understand why you might be careful asking for favors
during your first week on the job, but it also sounds like your rela -
tionship with her feels somewhat fragile—that one minor wrong
step might jeopardize your position at work?
SALLIE: Yes, that’s it.
THERAPIST: Can you tell me more about how that feels?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I just get so scared. People can like you one minute
and ignore you the next for no apparent reason.
THERAPIST: Have you had other experiences in which people liked you 1
minute but ignored you the next?
SALLIE: Well, didn’t that happen with Charlie? It seemed to be going
great from my point of view, but then we broke up and I still don’t
totally get it.
T
HERAPIST: The breakup with Charlie was so upsetting because you had
98 THE CONSULTATION
invested so much in the relationship, and it was unclear, at least at
first, why it didn’t work out.
SALLIE: I still don’t get it. Do you?
THERAPIST: I don’t, but I think we will learn more as we continue to
work together. Had you ever experienced such an unanticipated
change in a relationship before Charlie?
S
ALLIE: I guess it has happened before, but usually with girlfriends.
Amanda, my best friend in elementary school, moved away when I
was in 9th grade. Even though we promised to write every day, we
stopped almost immediately. I felt so upset because she was my
number one best friend, and then she basically disappeared from my
life after she moved.
In 10th grade, I became very good friends with a girl named
Dawn, and the same sort of thing happened when we went to differ-
ent colleges. This time it didn’t hurt as much because I sort of ex -
pected it. But I still don’t get it. Other people manage to keep their
friends even if they switch schools. (Sniffles, and looks very upset.)
T
HERAPIST: Some of the important female relationships in your life have
not worked out the way you hoped.
SALLIE: That’s true, I guess.
THERAPIST: It would make sense that you might also have some con-
cerns about our relationship, and whether I will be stable or leave
you as the others have.
S
ALLIE: I don’t know. It’s scary to talk about it.
THERAPIST: It might feel scary the first time we talk openly about our re-
lationship, but I hope over time that we can learn more about it to -
gether.
PROCESS NOTE FOR SALLIE GANE, JANUARY 2
SALLIE: Sorry. Traffic. work study position. 15 minutes late.
Couldn’t leave early
SB [my initials]: Difficult to get here? (Is there any other reason
she can’t get here on time?
When should I bring this
up?)
S
ALLIE: Can’t ask boss to leave early. I feel nervous. Will Sallie
quit treatment?
Formulating a Treatment Plan 99
SB: So even leaving 10 minutes early Ask supervisor what she/he
once a week feels wrong? would have said here. My
comment didn’t seem like
the best choice.
S
ALLIE: Don’t want to jeopardize the Does Sallie worry that if
relationship. she takes one misstep, that
our relationship would
also suffer? When should I
bring this up directly?
SB: Relationships are fragile?
S
ALLIE: Can’t depend on good relationships.
SB: Ever happened before?
S
ALLIE: Charlie.
SB: Ever happened before? Did I move off of Charlie
too quickly?
SALLIE: Friend Sarah—up til 9th Sallie looked very upset.
grade—lost touch; Dawn—high Should I push for more
school, same story. information? What would
be the right thing to say
here?
SB: Female relationships don’t work out Should I have asked more
as you would hope. about her mom instead?
Is it too early and/or too
intense to talk about the
therapeutic relationship so
directly? Asked about her
relationship with me.
S
ALLIE: Too scary to talk about it. I finish my training in 3
years. Already I feel guilty
about leaving Sallie.
My prowess as a psychotherapist improved dramatically when I
started taking process notes on a regular basis for my own benefit and
for supervision. I still write process notes for each session with every pa-
tient. In intermittent supervision, the reconstructions of the sessions help
my supervisors critique my work constructively, and the overview often
inspires a deeper understanding of the patient’s struggles.
Process notes also helped me identify the clinical situations I was
most nervous about as a beginning psychotherapist. What should I do if
a patient is late? How do I talk to a patient about vacations? A list of
Formulating a Treatment Plan 100
complicated, interesting, and anxiety-provoking clinical scenariosemerged.
We developed the next several chapters in response to this list. By focus-
ing on common clinical predicaments and providing some strategies for
the clinician, they might provide a useful review even for experienced
therapists.
Key words: adjustment disorder, anxiety disorders, bereavement,
bipolar disorder, cognitive-behavioral therapy, developmental
history, diagnosis, DSM-IV, grief, group psychotherapy,
interpersonal problems, loss, personality traits, process notes,
psychiatric disorders, psychopharmacology, psychosis, rejection,
substance abuse, symptom history, symptom review, treatment plan
Formulating a Treatment Plan 101
Part II
Frame and Variations
7
The Frame
Psychotherapy can seethe with emotional intensity. Therapists follow practice
guidelines collectively known as “the frame” to create a safe environment that
maintains the therapist’s relative objectivity and contains the patient’s emo-
tional overflows. While at first the novice patient and therapist may find these
standards of practice random and unnecessary, they are indispensable because
they protect the integrity of the therapeutic relationship. Limits around sched-
uling, the beginning and ending of sessions, personal self-disclosures by the
therapist, and outside contacts need to be explained clearly and sensitively.
The “frame” refers to a set of behavioral guidelines that define the
patient’s and the therapist’s roles within the confidential therapeutic
environment. The term “the frame” is shorthand for “the frame of refer-
ence” that defines the differences between a psychotherapeutic relation -
ship and a personal relationship.
From the first meeting, features of “the frame” pervade a psycho -
therapy. A stable meeting time is established as soon as possible. The
session begins and ends at predetermined times. Fees are negotiated as
necessary. Any changes in these arrangements that affect the treatment,
such as a vacation, are discussed ahead of time. The therapist divulges
relatively little personal information about herself, and the patient and
the therapist do not interact socially. With a few exceptions defined by
law, information about the treatment is never divulged to anyone with -
out express permission unless the patient’s safety or the safety of another
individual is at risk.
Some rules provided by the frame make obvious sense. It’s clear to
most why a romantic relationship between a patient and her therapist is
unethical and emotionally harmful. Other guidelines may seem more ob-
scure, and many beginning therapists harbor some covert questions
105
about these aspects of the frame. For instance, while many new thera -
pists secretly wonder why a therapist and a patient can’t be friends,
many trainees are too embarassed to ask a teacher why this rule exists.
Let’s consider the possible ramifications of a social relationship be-
tween a therapist and her patient. I’ll make myself the fall guy with a
new hypothetical patient we’ll call Zoe. To complicate matters, let’s
make Zoe a reasonably stable person. She starts psychotherapy seeking
help with career issues. She is also an avid tennis player. In our virtual
scenario, I’m a tennis player also, and both Zoe and I are in need of a
tennis partner. This information “slips” out during a therapy session,
and Zoe asks me if I would like to play tennis with her this weekend.
Against my better judgment, I agree. How will the psychotherapy be af -
fected?
From the moment I play tennis with Zoe, our relationship’s dy -
namic is irrevocably altered. As a friendship naturally moves toward the
social norm of give and take, it cannot coexist with the previous one-
sided therapeutic relationship that focused primarily on Zoe.
To play devil’s advocate, it’s always possible that our tennis game
will be the beginning of a great unambivalent, uncomplicated friendship
that lasts a lifetime. Meanwhile, Zoe will have to find a new therapist,
but it’s worth it because our friendship is so lasting and enriching.
Actually, this lovely outcome is about as likely as winning a lottery.
A relationship born out of a betrayal (in this case, my betrayal of my
professional role) will rarely flourish. As patient and therapist, Zoe and I
had agreed on a set of goals for her treatment. Losing me as a therapist
but gaining me as a friend may seem like a plum opportunity from afar,
but, by losing me as an objective listener, Zoe has just sustained an emo-
tional loss.
I also shouldn’t assume that Zoe doesn’t really need or want ther -
apy. While “career concerns” may seem like a vanilla topic, discussions
in therapy about her dreams for her future may be complicated by a host
of complex emotions—emotions she might confide in a therapist but
never tell a new friend.
Zoe may also be using “career concerns” as a ticket to enter treat -
ment and to talk about a number of relationship difficulties that are
troubling her. What if my friendship with Zoe runs into the same com -
plicated problems that she has experienced in other close relationships?
Once again, Zoe gets hurt, but since I’m involved, I’m no longer avail -
able as an objective listener. Due to an understandable mistrust of the
profession, she may avoid seeking out future therapists to process her
experience with me.
It would be very different if Zoe ever felt rejected by me within the
confines of our professional relationship. Within a therapeutic relation -
106 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
ship, I can be relatively objective. We could talk about her experience
and attain a deeper emotional understanding of the process. (For more
about this sort of event, please see Chapter 15.) But, as a tennis partner,
I’ve lost my unique perspective and my credibility in relation to Zoe. She
doesn’t get help with her relationship problems, and the friendship
fails—not a good treatment outcome.
Many patients are tempted to draw their therapist into personal re -
lationships to satisfy unfulfilled needs in their own lives. If the therapist
tries to fulfill the patient’s wishes rather than to help the patient under -
stand her yearnings for closeness, her good intentions lead her onto a
slippery slope. Any decrease in boundaries tends to accelerate once it
starts, to the detriment of all involved. Ultimately, my role as a therapist
is not to become the friend or partner that is missing but to help the pa -
tient develop the internal capacity to enrich her own life.
The structure of the therapeutic relationship enables the therapist to
maintain adequate objectivity. The patient also benefits by the predict -
able beginning and end of each meeting. The clearly defined session exit
may help the patient to bear the expression of painful and upsetting feel-
ings. The scheduled future session can pick up any matters not fully set-
tled.
MINOR FRAME ALTERATIONS WITHIN A THERAPY
If both the therapist and the patient know the specific rules that define
the psychotherapeutic relationship, it is meaningful when the patient (or
therapist!) bends or breaks the frame. For instance, the frame is affected
when a patient is repeatedly 10–15 minutes late to her session. Even if
she repeatedly blames traffic for her tardiness, I’d wonder (silently at
first and then aloud) what prevents her from attending a session in its
entirety.
If psychotherapy didn’t follow clearly outlined starting and stop -
ping times, I might never notice that a patient repeatedly misses the first
third of her session. It wouldn’t be reasonable or even fair to wonder
whether the recurrent tardiness was some kind of emotional indicator.
On the other hand, if both my patient and I know that the session starts
and ends at predetermined times, itis meaningful if she repeatedly misses
a significant chunk of our time together. In psychotherapy, we often dis-
cover that recurrent events, such as these repeated late arrivals, are
rarely random. Over time, the patient and I may learn that there is an
underlying, maybe unconscious, reason for the pattern of tardiness. (In
Chapter 10 we will discuss how to address a patient’s recurrent late ar -
rivals.)
The Frame 107
In therapy, every attempt needs to be made to translate action into
spoken feelings and thoughts. If a patient is recurrently late, eventually
I’ll try to discuss this with her in a noncritical and open manner. If a pa-
tient wants to change the parameters of our meetings by having a 30- or
90- minute session or by seeing me twice a week, we will talk about the
issue thoughtfully and deliberately before doing anything that changes
our initial therapeutic contract. Talking after a change has been actual -
ized isn’t nearly as effective. Once a treatment’s structure is modified to
suit my patient’s desires, she might lack sufficient internal motivation to
delve into the emotional meaning behind her request.
Beginning therapists may be tempted to alter the frame in subtle
ways as “errors of kindness,” but frame violations may increase the risk
of a poor treatment outcome. For instance, a beginning therapist may be
tempted to shield a needy patient from treatment fees by “forgetting” to
fill out the appropriate clinic paperwork. While this action may seem al-
truistic, ultimately, this type of frame violation might impair the thera -
peutic process. When the patient realizes that she isn’t being billed, she
may feel thrilled at first, but feelings of obligation toward the therapist,
doubts about the therapist’s honesty and loyalty to her clinic or institu-
tion, and even concerns about the therapist’s passive–aggressive behav-
ior may follow. A seemingly benevolent procedure can become counter-
therapeutic.
This section of the book will illustrate how a therapist can use alter-
ations in the frame as opportunities for exploration and discussion. The
topics covered reflect the ones that gave me the most anxiety: how to set
the fee and to bill, handle telephone calls and crises, respond to patients
who arrive late, and manage confidentiality. Since most people don’t talk
about these issues outside of psychotherapy, it is easy for a novice thera-
pist to become wordless when faced with a frame issue that requires
frank discussion. We hope to provide you with some guidance that can
help you broach these topics with your patients. Then an open, thought-
ful, and therapeutically beneficial dialogue can follow.
Key words: appointments, boundaries, contract violations, fiduciary
duty, fees, frame, frequency of sessions, intensive psychotherapy,
interview structure, objectivity, patient’s questions, perspective,
termination of interview, therapeutic alliance, therapeutic contract,
therapeutic frame, therapeutic relationship
108 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
8
Setting the Fee and Billing
The exchange of money for services is an intrinsic part of every psychotherapy.
At first, many altruistic therapists are uncomfortable accepting money for their
services. Even some experienced therapists may have difficulty talking to pa-
tients directly about money.
We provide some guidelines to help you to set a fee and to bill patients,
whether they are paying out-of-pocket, their insurance company is footing the
bill, or their care is subsidized by a clinic. The therapist’s goal is to provide a
clear expectation regarding payment and then to talk sensitively with the pa-
tient about her reactions to the guidelines.
As a novice therapist, talking to patients about money was more uncom-
fortable for me than talking to them about sex. While I felt a little ner -
vous the first time I listened to a patient’s intimate sexual concerns, I
considered it a privilege when a patient could trust me enough to share
such sensitive information. In contrast, discussions about fees and pay -
ment felt self-serving in a treatment that deals in the currency of empa -
thy and emotions. Monetary discussions in a psychotherapy are unique
because the focus is on the therapist’s agenda rather than the patient’s
needs.
As a novice, I wished there was a way I could practice therapy with-
out having to discuss payment with my patients. A generation ago, my
wish would have been fulfilled—at least sometimes. Generous insurance
companies often provided years of psychotherapy reimbursement with -
out requiring the disclosure of confidential patient information. With
today’s health care management, these types of insurance plans are prac-
tically nonexistent. Instead, basic mental health insurance coverage gen -
erally provides a limited number of psychotherapy sessions. For any
109
additional treatment, the patient and the therapist independently negoti-
ate a fee and payment method.
During my first 2 years as a trainee, I treated only clinic patients,
and the MGH department of financial services took care of most mone -
tary issues, including the setting of the fee and collecting payment.
In Massachusetts, as in many other places, every hospital provides a
certain percentage of completely free health care, including psychothera-
py. As a trainee, these recipients comprised the most desirable patients. I
didn’t have to report confidential information about these patients to an
insurance company. The therapy was completely subsidized as long as
the patient’s financial situation didn’t improve substantially. Patients re-
ceived therapy, I received my paycheck for working with clinic patients,
and money was never an issue. What could be better?
Then a few unexpected treatment issues emerged. Some of my free-
care patients had a difficult time taking advantage of the therapy when
they felt constantly guilty about getting something for nothing. Others
would treat the free service as expendable by forgetting to show or arriv-
ing late for scheduled appointments. When I finished my adult psychia-
try residency and offered to continue privately with some of these pa-
tients for a very reduced fee, many of them declined. Despite the fact
that they were satisfied with my care, they chose to receive therapy for
no charge with a new clinic provider than to pay for treatment with me.
Slowly, I began to understand the clinical advantages of paying for
psychotherapy. As my experience with the free-care patients demon-
strated, it’s easy to devalue a process that is free. In addition, the fee is a
useful tool that defines the limitations and possibilities of the therapeutic
relationship. While the collaboration between a therapist and a patient is
one of mutual regard and respect, with the focus exclusively on a pa -
tient’s private emotional concerns, it is still a fee-for-service enterprise.
The payment defines the relationship as a working entity, rather than as
a substitute for other sustaining relationships.
SETTING THE FEE
During my residency, I could wax poetic on money’s necessary role in
psychotherapy, but the clinic continued to manage all monetary issues
for my patients. When I started a small private practice before gradua -
tion, I felt uncomfortable talking to patients directly about fees and pay-
ment for therapy. My motivation to master this topic intensified over -
night.
Early on, I’m sure that my patients could sense my ambivalence
about charging for my services. A new patient would rarely ask details
110 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
about my fee early in the treatment, so it was very easy for me to make
mistakes of omission and delay a discussion about monetary issues until
later in treatment.
EXAMPLE 8.1
The therapist does not review her fee with the private practice
patient early in treatment and then ends up accepting a much
lower fee
During my comprehensive consultation with Sallie Gane, I “forget”
to discuss my fee and she does not ask about it. We decide to continue
working together after the consultation is completed. At the month’s
end, I hand her a bill for my services.
T
HERAPIST: This covers our work together during September. Here is
how my billing works. I will give you a bill at the beginning of each
month and expect payment by the end of the month. [I hand Sallie a
bill for four sessions totaling $400.00 .]
S
ALLIE: Oh . . . okay. ( Looks at the bill .) $400.00!
THERAPIST: You were expecting a different amount?
SALLIE: Ummm, well . . . yes! You didn’t tell me you were $100.00 an
hour!
THERAPIST: Well, I thought you were aware that this is the average fee in
this area. Didn’t your primary care doctor tell you this when she re-
ferred you to me?
S
ALLIE: No, I thought my insurance would pay for this. Can I give this
bill to my insurance? Are you an EntropyMedical provider?
THERAPIST: Actually, I am not part of that insurance plan. [ I feel guilty
and uncomfortable.] Let’s think together how we can approach this
in a way that will feel fair to you.
SALLIE: Well, I think I could afford $200.00 a month. . . .
THERAPIST: Okay, that’s fine.
In Example 8.1, I feel so uncomfortable and guilty about charging
for my services that I don’t discuss monetary issues during the first ses -
sions, and then immediately agree to a 50% reduction of payment when
Sallie balks at her bill. I’m not independently wealthy, so by agreeing to
accept a reduced fee, I’ll have to work an extra hour every other week to
make up the lost income.
Setting the Fee and Billing 111
Sallie didn’t broach the subject of my fee during our first four meet-
ings. When I didn’t mention the cost of the treatment, she may have had
a surreptitious wish that the therapy might be free. My reluctance to talk
openly about my fee is countertherapeutic because it colludes with her
regressive fantasy.
It’s best to talk openly about fees and payment very early in the
treatment. Often, I’ll ask the patient during the first phone call if she
would like to discuss my fee on the phone or wait until the first visit. I
might also inquire whether she intends to use her health insurance to pay
for treatment. This procedure prevents any future misunderstanding or
disappointment if the patient expects to use her insurance to subsidize
her treatment, only to discover that I am not a provider on this insurance
plan during the first visit.
Whether on the phone or in my office, the first conversation about
fees can follow a somewhat standardized format.
EXAMPLE 8.2
The therapist discusses her fee and insurance issues during the
first phone call
Midway through My First Phone Call with Sallie
THERAPIST: Do you have health insurance?
SALLIE: I have EntropyMedical insurance through school. I think it pays
for therapy.
THERAPIST: Unfortunately, I am not an EntropyMedical provider, so the
insurance will not be able to offset my fee if you want to work with
me.
S
ALLIE: My primary doctor thought you would be a good therapist for
me. Is there any way to work it out?
THERAPIST: My fee per session is $100.00 if you are willing to pay out of
pocket.
SALLIE: Oh, gosh I didn’t expect that much.
THERAPIST: What were you expecting?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I thought you wouldn’t charge so much since you
see students. I guess I thought it might cost $35.00 an hour or some-
thing like that. I think $100.00 is too expensive for me. Umm, what
should I do now?
THERAPIST: We have a number of options. If you can obtain a list of
112 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
EntropyMedical providers from your insurance company, I would
be happy to review the list with you on the phone. If I know any of
the therapists, I can help you choose one from the list. I can also re-
fer you to a clinician who might be able to slide his payment scale,
although it still may not be as low as you might like. Also, I have
the numbers of a few community clinics in your area that could pro-
vide therapy at a lower rate. What sounds good to you?
S
ALLIE: I don’t know.
THERAPIST:[ I wait patiently in silence. I sense Sallie’s unspoken wish
that I make a special exception to treat her at a below market rate,
but I do not make this a treatment option. ]
S
ALLIE: I guess maybe I could ask my parents to help me out so I could
at least see you for a few visits, and then see if I want to continue.
THERAPIST: Sure, that is another option.
SALLIE: What do we do next?
THERAPIST: Well, we’ve set a meeting time for 4:00P.M. this Wednesday.
Would you like to keep this time and discuss my fee with your par-
ents before our meeting?
S
ALLIE: Oh, that’s good, I think. That will give me some time to work on
this.
THERAPIST: If it doesn’t look like you will be able to pay my fee, please
call me at least 48 hours in advance of our appointment to review
some of the other options I mentioned. What’s most important is
that you get some help with the problems you are struggling with.
S
ALLIE: Okay. Thanks.
If a new patient prefers to discuss monetary issues during her first
session, I bring up the topic midway through the meeting. I also try to
finish any discussion about fees and administrative details with 10 min -
utes to spare so we can return briefly to the important clinical issues and
plan for further meetings.
The scenario becomes a bit more complicated if I am a provider
under the patient’s insurance plan. (We will refer to EntropyMedical as
our prototypical managed care insurance plan.) Unlike the insurance
plans of the past, many current health plans require psychotherapists to
divulge patients’ personal information before they will provide coverage
for more than a few sessions each year. While the complex issues of man-
aged health care may sometimes feel overwhelming, I try to discuss them
openly with my patients so they can make an informed decision about
their treatment.
Setting the Fee and Billing 113
EXAMPLE 8.3
Discussing managed care as payment for psychotherapy and
how to set a reduced fee
SALLIE: I have EntropyMedical insurance through school. Can I use it to
see you?
THERAPIST: I think you should be able to. I am an EntropyMedical pro -
vider. Are you familiar with how the insurance works?
SALLIE: Not really.
THERAPIST: The insurance provides full payment for eight sessions each
year. Then, if we see that it might be useful to continue treatment,
I’ll talk to an insurance coordinator and give her an update on our
work together. The insurance company will decide whether it will
pay for additional sessions.
S
ALLIE: Do you tell them a lot about me? I don’t feel comfortable with
them knowing my business.
THERAPIST: It is important for you to know that while the insurance
company will try to set up a confidential situation between the co-
ordinator and myself, some or all of the information will be entered
into EntropyMedical’s computer system.
The information isn’t quite as protected as if we were working
without the input of the company. The benefit, of course, is that
your treatment will be supported by your insurance.
When I talk to insurance providers, I try to be as general as
possible, but sometimes they won’t authorize further visits without
specific information.
S
ALLIE: Does the information stay private?
THERAPIST: Most insurance companies try to maintain confidentiality,
but I don’t know who will have access to your information. For
your particular situation with EntropyMedical, you may want to
call to learn details of their protocol.
S
ALLIE: What if I don’t want you to talk to anyone?
THERAPIST: In that case, you have your first eight sessions covered, and I
will only need to provide them with a diagnosis.
SALLIE: What’s my diagnosis?
THERAPIST: It’s difficult to say after only one session, but it may be ad -
justment disorder with depressed mood, or major depression. Both
diagnoses reflect the distress you have suffered after your breakup
with Charlie.
114 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
SALLIE: This is so complicated!
THERAPIST: I agree that it can feel overwhelming, especially the first time
you learn about a managed care system like this.
SALLIE: What happens after the eight sessions if I don’t want to use my
insurance any more?
THERAPIST: At that point, I will charge you my regular fee per session,
which is $100.00.
SALLIE: Since I’m a student, is there any way that you could reduce your
fee for me?
THERAPIST: What portion of $100.00 would you be able to pay?
SALLIE: Umm. Maybe $70.00?
THERAPIST: What is that based on?
SALLIE: I could earn $70.00 a week working extra hours at the library or
tutoring.
THERAPIST: Seventy dollars a session is a bit low, but I would agree to a
reduced fee of $80 a session.
SALLIE: I’m not sure, but I think I could probably manage that. I think
I’ll want to keep working after my eight sessions are up. I doubt
that I’ll totally understand what happened with Charlie after only 2
months of meetings.
T
HERAPIST: I think you’re right that it often takes time to truly under-
stand an emotional event like the breakup with Charlie. We’ll con-
sider $80 your fee for now, and if your financial situation changes,
we can reconsider the fee at that time.
You should also know how I do my billing. Unless you would
prefer to pay me at each visit, I’ll give you a bill at the beginning of
each month; you’ll have until the end of the month to pay me.
S
ALLIE: Oh, okay. Thank you so much for reducing the fee. That really
helps, and I am glad that I can continue to see you.
THERAPIST: I am glad that we were able to work something out as well.
Before discussing out-of-pocket treatment, I try to converse openly
with the patient about managed care’s simultaneous support of and in -
terference with psychotherapy. Due to financial limitations, not all pa -
tients have the choice to pay for treatment out of pocket. Moreover,
early in treatment, a patient may not care about issues of confidentiality
and may feel understandably entitled to her health care benefits. The
treater’s responsibility is to explain the issues involved, especially the im-
Setting the Fee and Billing 115
plications of waiving confidentiality, so the patient can weigh the advan-
tages and disadvantages of the available options and make an informed
decision.
I try not to rush when I’m negotiating a reduced fee with a new pa-
tient so I don’t agree to something I might regret or resent in the future.
At the beginning of each year, I estimate my required earnings for the
following 12 months, and use these figures to calculate how much care I
can reasonably provide at a reduced rate. After these slots are filled, I’ll
refer patients in need of subsidized treatment to other providers or to
community clinics.
If the patient’s financial situation changes, I’ll renegotiate the fee at
that time. Example 8.4 illustrates what I might do if I learn that a patient
with a reduced fee could, in fact, pay full fee if she used financial assets
reserved for “other expenses.”
EXAMPLE 8.4
The therapist confronts a private practice patient receiving a
reduced fee who has monetary resources that were kept secret
S
ALLIE: So, I just can’t stand living in the dorm anymore. I think I might
try to move into an apartment this summer. Maybe I’ll live alone. I
think the change would really decrease my stress level.
T
HERAPIST: When did you start to think about this?
SALLIE: Well, when I turned 21, I was able to access a trust fund from
my grandparents for school and other stuff. I was thinking about it
this week. I can actually afford to move out of student housing this
year.
T
HERAPIST: What does the trust fund provide for you?
SALLIE: Well, it is for college expenses, and maybe a trip after gradua -
tion. I want to spend it carefully so maybe it can help me with a
down payment on a house someday.
THERAPIST: Your financial situation has changed from when we origi -
nally set your reduced fee.
SALLIE: Not really. This money isn’t supposed to be used for psychother-
apy.
THERAPIST: When I agreed to the reduced fee, I indicated that we would
renegotiate if your financial status improved. I’d like to raise the fee
in accordance to our original discussion.
S
ALLIE: Well, my financial situation hasn’t changed at all. Like I said,
this money isn’t for therapy but for living expenses.
116 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
THERAPIST: I understand that, but I also reserve my reduced fees for peo-
ple who do not have adequate monetary resources. I am glad this
money allows you some flexibility, but starting next month I will
raise your fee to the rate of $100.00.
S
ALLIE: I don’t know. That doesn’t feel very fair to me, Dr. Bender.
THERAPIST: If I raised the fee to $100.00, how much of the money in the
trust fund would you be using?
SALLIE: Not much, I guess. Just supplementing the $80.00 that I save
each week to see you with $20.00 from the trust fund. But it just
doesn’t seem right.
T
HERAPIST: What if you were to spend the trust fund $20 on school ex -
penses and pay the $20 for the therapy from other funds?
SALLIE: I never really thought of that and it would work, but I still think
it feels really wrong.
THERAPIST: In what way?
SALLIE: I just worry what my parents would think about me using my
trust fund for psychotherapy. Everyone—both sets of grandparents
and my parents—saved years and years to give me this money.
T
HERAPIST: I can see that the trust fund carries a lot of feelings with it.
SALLIE: It really does. I feel so guilty about it.
THERAPIST: Guilty?
SALLIE: Well, my parents keep telling me how lucky I am to have a trust
fund. It’s supposed to help me pay for extra opportunities that they
didn’t have. I don’t want to use it for therapy!
T
HERAPIST: How does your family view psychotherapy?
SALLIE: Even though I saw Dr. Anders in high school, they don’t really
understand what psychotherapy is. No one else has needed to see a
shrink. And I’ve needed to talk to someone two times already and
I’m only 21! Once should have been enough.
T
HERAPIST: I think this topic is worth talking about more. I will hold
your fee at its lower rate this month, and we can discuss this in
more depth. I will let you know about any potential fee decision at
the end of this month before the next billing period begins.
S
ALLIE: Okay. But I feel really upset about this. Maybe I’ll just need to
stop therapy all together.
THERAPIST: I can see it bothers you very much. Why would you consider
stopping altogether?
Setting the Fee and Billing 117
SALLIE: Well, like I said, if you increased my fee, I would have to use
some of my trust fund money and I don’t want to do that!
THERAPIST: To you, mixing the two—therapy and the trust fund—
doesn’t seem possible. Let’s just try to understand this a little more
together.
S
ALLIE: What’s to understand? Like I told you, the trust fund was given
to me under certain terms. It is supposed to be used for certain
things, and therapy is not on the list!
T
HERAPIST:( I notice a growing feeling of annoyance toward Sallie so I
stay quiet, and only nod .)
SALLIE: I don’t know; this is just the way I feel.
THERAPIST:( Regains composure.) Is it a very strong feeling?
SALLIE: Yes, it is. So what are we going to do about it?
THERAPIST: For now, I think we should continue to talk about it.
In the next few sessions, Sallie continues to express her ambivalence
about using her trust fund to subsidize her therapy. I wonder if I should
keep her fee at the reduced rate, but I also know that I will feel very re-
sentful treating Sallie at a reduced fee when she has the resources to pay
my full fee. I consult with a trusted supervisor who wonders why my
spouse, my child, and I should subsidize Sallie’s therapy, and I decide to
raise Sallie’s fees during the next month of treatment. I tell Sallie about
my decision two sessions prior to the one in which her fee will be raised.
Sallie starts the session by reviewing her week. Then, 10–15 minutes into
the session, I interrupt.
T
HERAPIST: I want to hear more about your week, but I also wanted to
let you know my decision about the fee today.
SALLIE: Oh, no. What did you decide to do?
THERAPIST: As I had mentioned earlier, this month will be at the previ -
ously decided lower fee. But, starting next month, I will be raising
your fee to $100.00.
SALLIE: You are going to raise it? ( incredulous)
THERAPIST: I am. Do you have strong feelings about this?
SALLIE: Umm . . . yes, I do!
THERAPIST: Can you tell me about them?
SALLIE: Well, I thought you understood. You must not understand me at
all if you are going to raise my fee.
118 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
THERAPIST: I know there is a lot of emotion surrounding this issue. By
raising your fee, which part don’t I understand?
SALLIE: That my parents would be so upset if they knew about this, and
my trust fund is an incredibly special gift. I can’t use the money for
something my parents wouldn’t approve of!
T
HERAPIST: That doesn’t feel like an option?
SALLIE: No! They’ll think I’m so messed up that I need to spend this
money on stupid therapy! ( Tears up and grabs a few tissues out of
the box.)
This illustrates how limit setting—holding to the frame—helps
bring the underlying issues to the surface. Sallie may be more fearful of
her parents’ disapproving attitude than she is about the vague conditions
of the trust fund.
T
HERAPIST: How will they feel you are messed up?
SALLIE: I’m incurable. I know they already think I’m nuts that I have to
see a shrink to help me recover after a breakup with a boyfriend!
THERAPIST: Seeking help during a difficult time isn’t seen as a strength?
SALLIE: No, it’s not. And the fact that I tell you how I feel and you still
increase my fee makes me really upset.
THERAPIST: Yes, I can see that the increase in fee is very upsetting to you.
SALLIE: So why did you have to do it?
THERAPIST: Because you are not as limited financially as I had previously
believed.
SALLIE: Maybe I’ll just stop therapy altogether.
THERAPIST: I would hope that wouldn’t happen because of the fee in -
crease, but it is always your choice. We have a lot to discuss about
this loaded topic, and there is probably much to learn from it.
SALLIE: Yeah, but you aren’t the one who is disappointing her parents.
THERAPIST: I’m beginning to understand how uncomfortable it would
feel for you to disappoint your parents. Can you tell me more?
SALLIE: I think there was only one time that I spent money on something
that they disapproved of. When I was in high school, I saved and
saved my money for a really expensive CD Walkman. For whatever
reason, they thought it was a stupid thing to buy. My mother said I
was indulgent. She didn’t understand why I wasn’t happy with just
a plain old radio or a tape player. But I love music and, for me, it
Setting the Fee and Billing 119
was a great investment. Whenever I would get upset, I would listen
on my headphones. I don’t know. Sometimes my parents are strange
about money.
T
HERAPIST: How do you feel now about your decision to get that CD
player?
SALLIE: Umm, at the time I felt guilty, but now I feel that it was one of
the best independent decisions that I have ever made.
THERAPIST: What allowed you to separate your own feelings from those
of your parents?
SALLIE: I’m not sure. (Pauses.) I just knew I really needed it. It was a pri-
vate safe place, sitting in my room senior year of high school and
listening to my music. But I don’t know if I feel as strongly about
therapy.
T
HERAPIST: That’s important to figure out. Perhaps it will help if you
think about how life will be for you if you continued with psycho-
therapy and how it would be if you didn’t.
S
ALLIE: I hadn’t thought about it that way. I’m willing to give it some
more thought, but are you still going to raise my fee?
THERAPIST: Yes, I am, for the reasons I explained, but I appreciate that
you are really working hard here. By having these conversations, I
think we will learn more about what money means to you and how
your sense of your own worth is influenced by your parents.
For any fee change, it is useful to follow the steps demonstrated in
Example 8.4: (1) The therapist lets the patient know she is considering
raising the fee weeks ahead of time in order to get the patient’s input.
(2) The therapist reminds the patient of the fee increase before the next
bill. (3) Even after the decision to increase the fee has been made, the
therapist remains open to talking empathically, and not defensively,
about the patient’s monetary concerns.
BILLING
Unless a patient prefers to pay at each visit, I bill for my services at the
end of each month, and expect payment within 30 days. A money ex -
change at every meeting can be distracting, so I only insist on session-to-
session payment when a patient has repeatedly fallen behind on her ac -
count.
If I meet with a patient within the first week of a month, I’ll hand
the patient last month’s bill at the beginning of our session. This direct
120 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
interaction invites an immediate discussion of the bill if there are any
problems or questions and clearly demonstrates that the billing process
is an interaction between the patient and me. Some patients may experi -
ence the immediacy of this interaction as distracting and unempathic. If
this is the case, I could encourage the patient to talk openly about her re-
action. An in-depth discussion on this topic may ultimately lead to a
greater understanding of other monetary issues in the patient’s life.
Another option is to send the bill through the mail with the expecta-
tion that it will be paid within the month. This is Dr. Messner’s prefer -
ence. I also do this for patients I see infrequently, or for patients whose
parents are paying for their treatment. With mailing, monetary issues do
not interrupt the treatment unless payment isn’t received.
I outline my billing method for a new patient during one of our first
sessions. For most patients, a straightforward and clear discussion about
monetary issues early in the treatment sets the stage for an unencum -
bered collection process. By explicitly outlining the method for money
transfer, it is also easier to delve into any emotional reaction to the bill-
ing process.
Every now and then patients don’t pay their bill, and the overdue
balance becomes an issue within the psychotherapy. If Sallie did not pay
her bill, and then took a break from therapy, I would send her duplicate
bills over the next few months. Often, a second bill sent the month fol-
lowing the first one is all that is necessary to procure payment. If she still
continues to have an outstanding balance, I would discuss the issue with
her by phone, and would design a payment plan if she were struggling
with limited financial resources. Until the balance is paid in full, I would
continue to contact Sallie on a regular basis, either by phone or via a
monthly statement noting the unpaid balance. As long as a patient
works with me in good faith, I don’t mind if the bill is paid off slowly.
On the other hand, if the patient is unwilling to take any responsibility
for her bill, I would eventually add this note to the bottom of one of her
monthly statements: “If the payment in full is not received by MM/DD/
YYYY, it will be referred for collection.”
The situation becomes more complicated for the nonindigent pa -
tient who continues to come for appointments without paying her bill.
The first time I was faced with a patient who didn’t pay her bill, I did -
n’t intiate any discussion about the unpaid balance and just hoped si -
lently that the patient would eventually pay her outstanding balance.
This strategy didn’t work, and it even jeopardized the therapy as I be -
came more and more resentful of the unpaid bill. In Example 8.5, Sal -
lie has the financial resources to pay her bill, but her ambivalence
about the therapeutic process impedes the payment process. The best
approach combines business finesse with some psychotherapeutic prin -
ciples.
Setting the Fee and Billing 121
EXAMPLE 8.5
Discussing payment with the patient who hasn’t paid
It is December 29th, and Sallie has not paid for her November’s ses-
sions. The bill is due December 31.
THERAPIST:( Interrupts flow of conversation about 15 minutes into the
session.) I definitely want to hear more about what has been going
on, but we do need to take a few minutes to iron out a few adminis-
trative details.
SALLIE: Oh, like what?
THERAPIST: I wondered, how is it going with the bill?
SALLIE: Oops. I guess it’s due really soon, huh? I don’t think I’ll be able
to get you the check by the end of the month, but I’ll definitely pay
you next week. I just forgot. Thanks for reminding me.
By the next session, the bill is overdue. I interrupt Sallie at approxi-
mately the 15-minute mark.
T
HERAPIST: I wanted to make sure to ask you about the bill this session
because it is overdue.
SALLIE: Oh no! Did I forget again? I don’t know what is wrong with me!
I’m so sorry, Dr. Bender.
THERAPIST: Maybe this is something we should be curious about. What
do you think is making it hard to remember this?
SALLIE: Oh, I don’t know. I feel so guilty that you have to keep remind-
ing me, but then I keep forgetting to write the check before I leave
home. I am really sorry.
THERAPIST: Let’s talk about it a bit. How does it feel to be paying a ther-
apist in the first place?
SALLIE: Fine. I want to pay you. I’m just disorganized; I’ll make sure to
bring the check next time.
Next Session
I bring up subject of money at the beginning of the session as the
treatment is in jeopardy if the bill is not paid very soon.
THERAPIST: Let’s start the session by touching base about the bill.
122 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
SALLIE: Umm, oh my goodness, I forgot my checkbook again. I don’t
know what is wrong with me. I am so embarassed.
THERAPIST: Let’s also take some time to try to understand why the bill
has been so difficult to pay. Are you in any financial trouble?
SALLIE: Well, things aren’t great, but they aren’t incredibly tight either. I
just need to review my expenses to make sure I can pay you. I think
I should be able to do it.
T
HERAPIST: How do you feel about continuing to forget to write me a
check?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I always try to remember after I leave here and
then I forget.
THERAPIST: When you think about payment and money in therapy, what
feelings come up?
SALLIE: I don’t know. Money is hard for me.
THERAPIST: Hard for you in what way?
SALLIE: It just feels weird paying you to talk to me.
THERAPIST: I’m glad you could share this with me. Could you tell me
any more about this weird feeling?
SALLIE: I’m not sure what it is exactly. It feels uncomfortable to pay you
to listen to me.
THERAPIST: Can you tell me more about how it is uncomfortable?
SALLIE: I just feel that therapy is such a strange concept. We sit here and
talk about all these very private things and then I get a bill weeks
later. Why can’t I make friends that would listen to me for free?
Why am I so screwed up that I need to do this?
T
HERAPIST: Does part of you wish that I would be your friend rather
than your psychotherapist?
SALLIE: Sort of . . .
THERAPIST:( Nods encouragingly.)
SALLIE: I just wonder how you view this whole thing.
THERAPIST: For the sake of the therapy, can you tell me what you imag -
ine?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I just sometimes wonder if you only care about the
money. Therapy is pretty expensive. Maybe that is the only reason
you do this.
T
HERAPIST: Can you tell me more?
Setting the Fee and Billing 123
SALLIE: I just worry that all your concern is fake. Maybe it is so hard for
me to pay because that makes it crystal clear that that you are not a
friend. And you are the nicest person I know at college right now. It
feels so weird. Maybe if I don’t pay you, I can sort of pretend that
we have a connection that is more real.
T
HERAPIST: It doesn’t feel real because it is a therapeutic relationship?
SALLIE: Yes, the money clouds it all.
THERAPIST: I can understand that this feeling might make it more diffi -
cult to pay. I hope we can understand it more together so the whole
process will feel a bit easier for you. However, in order to continue
working together, I will need to get payment for the sessions.
The Bill Payment Is 1 Month Late
SALLIE: Dr. Bender, I have your check! I am sorry it was so late. I’ll pay
for this session now too. It feels so good to be caught up.
THERAPIST: Considering the difficulties you had before, what enabled
you to bring this check now?
SALLIE: I’m not sure really. I got a little worried that you might stop see-
ing me if I didn’t manage to pay up soon.
Five Weeks Later, the Bill is 1 Week Late
THERAPIST:( Brings up topic midsession.): Let’s take a few minutes to re-
view the money situation. Twice now, your bill has been late, and to
avoid a similar situation in the future, I think it would be reason -
able for you to pay for each session at the time of the meeting—
starting next week. What would be better for you—to pay at the
beginning or at the end of each session? [I provide two choices that
are acceptable to me. ]
S
ALLIE: Oh, the end, I think. It might be hard to get started if I’m sitting
here writing a check before the session starts.
THERAPIST: How do you feel about this arrangment?
SALLIE: I guess it’s fine, but I can’t start today. I’ll pay for two sessions
and last month’s bill next week. Is that okay?
THERAPIST: That would be fine. I think it will be useful for us to have a
regular payment schedule to follow.
SALLIE: You’re probably right. I’ll see you next week.
124 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
At the End of the Next Session
THERAPIST: We’ll need to stop a couple of minutes early so I can give
you the bill for this session.
SALLIE: Oh, yes. I am supposed to pay up today. I don’t know how to
say this, but I don’t have my checkbook again. Now what should
we do? I’m really sorry.
T
HERAPIST: I think we need to find a way for billing to work within the
therapy, and then at some point, we will have the opportunity to try
to understand more about what this means.
S
ALLIE: Dr. Bender, you know that I intend to pay the bill. I’m not trying
to cheat you. I’ll pay you next week.
THERAPIST: I’m glad that you plan to pay me next time, but, as I had
mentioned before, I would like for us to have a dependable payment
plan so you don’t end up having a large outstanding bill like before.
In the future, I hope we can talk more about some of the obstacles
that are making it difficult for you to pay on a regular basis. Mean-
while I think that it is time for you pay me before each session. If
you don’t have your payment at the beginning of our next session,
we’ll reschedule the appointment. Does that sound reasonable to you?
S
ALLIE: No, I don’t think that’s fair.
THERAPIST: Considering what’s been going on, what do you think is
fair?
SALLIE: In another month, my finances will be in great shape, and it will
be no problem to pay my balance, but right now I’m pinching pennies.
THERAPIST: I’m not willing to wait a month, but I am willing to extend
your credit 1 week more. [ In other circumstances, I might be more
willing to set up a payment plan when I hear a patient is struggling
with her finances. In Sallie’s case, she has not been responsible
about her outstanding balance, so I only offer limited flexibility .]
At the Beginning of the Next Session
THERAPIST: Before we begin, here is the bill for the last two sessions and
today’s meeting.
SALLIE:( Searching anxiously through her backpack ) Oh no, oh, please
don’t be mad at me. Dr. Bender, I messed up again. I didn’t bring my
checkbook. What happens now? ( Begins to tear up .)
T
HERAPIST: I am sorry, but, as I told you, I am not willing to work with
Setting the Fee and Billing 125
you this hour with the outstanding bill. We can reschedule for an -
other session, but in order to have that session, it will be necessary
for you to pay your balance.
SALLIE: But Dr. Bender, what happens if there is an emergency and I need
to talk to you?
THERAPIST: I hope that we can continue to work together after the bill is
paid. Until then, in case of any type of emotional crisis, I recom -
mend that you go to your local emergency room.
Sallie Gane is not allowed to continue the session, and I charge her
for the adjourned session. She sends me a check in the mail to cover her
balance. If she starts to forget her checkbook at future scheduled ses -
sions, I would follow the same protocol that has been outlined here.
When Sallie repeatedly forgets her checkbook, we can assume that
the action is multidetermined and emotionally meaningful. She is acting
in a passive–aggressive manner when she repeatedly denies me payment
but does not acknowledge the hostility driving this behavior. As the ther-
apy deepens, Sallie and I may learn more about her use of delay and
withholding in multiple personal relationships. As relationships rarely
flourish in such an environment, Sallie’s interactions with others might
improve substantially when she is ready to learn about this part of her-
self.
When I have to withhold Sallie’s treatment because of an unpaid
bill, I make sure to inform her of the services available at her local emer-
gency facilities in case of an emotional crisis. Any other approach pro -
vides therapy for free, and supports Sallie’s wish that I treat her as a
friend and without charge.
Nowadays, rather than watch the bill increase in parallel with my
own internal resentment, I try to talk about unpaid balances early and
often. I am more empathic at exploring the patient’s feelings about mon-
etary issues when only 1 month of treatment is overdue. Sometimes, the
discussion is all that is needed to resolve the billing crisis so treatment
can continue unhindered.
When all else fails for a patient with adequate financial resources
who avoids paying her bill, it is time to consult a collection agency. Your
supervisors will be able to recommmend a reputable business, and most
medical, psychological, or other professional associations can also pro -
vide a list of ethical and decent collection agencies.
In some instances, a patient doesn’t pay her bill because of financial
difficulties. My response to the patient’s needs will depend upon my fi -
nancial limitations. I could help facilitate further treatment by reducing
126 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
the patient’s fee temporarily if I am able. I could also treat the patient on
credit, or refer her to a subsidized clinic for continued treatment after
working out a payment plan for her outstanding bill.
Now and then, a patient’s parents refuse to pay the bill in a timely
manner, after they have promised to subsidize the treatment. Example
8.6 illustrates some tactics I use when faced with this predicament.
EXAMPLE 8.6
How to react when a patient’s relative refuses to subsidize the
therapy as previously promised
In early December, I mail Sallie a bill for her November sessions. I
know she will be forwarding it to her parents. The bill is still unpaid in
early January.
Midsession, January 2nd
THERAPIST: I wanted to mention to you that I haven’t received payment
for the last bill that I sent to you. Are there any problems with the
payment that you know about?
S
ALLIE: Umm, I’m really sorry I haven’t paid it yet. I mailed it to my par-
ents and they haven’t mailed me back the payment yet.
THERAPIST: Any ideas why they haven’t mailed you the payment yet?
SALLIE: I don’t know really. I sometimes wonder what they think about
the fact that I am in therapy again.
THERAPIST: What have you wondered about?
SALLIE: Oh, when they learned I was back in treatment, they made a
couple stupid wisecracks about it. They couldn’t understand why I
needed a therapist to talk about a boy. According to my mom, I
might as well call “rent-a-friend.” But, after all the jokes, they did
say that they would pay for the sessions.
T
HERAPIST: How did you feel when they referred to me as your “rent-a-
friend?”
SALLIE: Horrible. Wouldn’t you?
THERAPIST: Why would they hurt you like that?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I’m probably being oversensitive.
THERAPIST: Have you discussed this bill with them?
SALLIE: Not really. I let them know it was in the mail, and I expected
Setting the Fee and Billing 127
they would mail me back a check pretty quickly so I could pay you
on time. I don’t know what’s wrong.
THERAPIST: Could I have your permission to call them about the bill?
SALLIE: Oh, I don’t know. They’ll pry for details about my life.
THERAPIST: I can understand your concern. How should we approach
this so both the therapy and your privacy can be protected?
SALLIE: Let me talk to my parents one more time. I should have the
check by next week.
THERAPIST: Okay, that should be fine.
Sallie comes to the next meeting in tears.
THERAPIST:( Waits for Sallie to start talking .)
SALLIE: My parents are acting so weird. They have all these excuses why
they can’t give me the check this week. I don’t get it. They promised
to support the therapy, and I know money isn’t the issue. I don’t
know what to do.
T
HERAPIST: What was the conversation like?
SALLIE: When I asked about the check, they were very vague. I don’t
know if they plan to mail it anytime soon.
THERAPIST: Have they ever done something like this before?
SALLIE: Once when I asked them for some money to fund a school re-
treat to Vermont for the weekend, they said yes at first, but never
came through with the money.
T
HERAPIST: Then what happened?
SALLIE: Well, eventually, they paid, but only after I talked to them about
the project in more detail.
THERAPIST: Could that be what they are looking for here? Maybe if they
feel more included in your treatment they would be more willing to
pay. How would it feel to you if I gave them a call to try to clear
things up?
S
ALLIE:( sniffling) Okay, but what are you going to tell them?
THERAPIST: That is an important question. Do you feel comfortable with
me describing any piece of what we have been talking about?
SALLIE: You can tell them that I sometimes feel depressed.
THERAPIST: And may I fill them in on some of the symptoms of depres -
sion that you have experienced, like loss of sleep and appetite?
128 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
SALLIE: Yeah, that would be okay I guess.
THERAPIST: Anything that you would like me to avoid mentioning?
SALLIE: Don’t tell them any details about Charlie and the whole problem
with him. Are you going to tell them a lot about me?
THERAPIST: No, but I do think a bare-bones outline of what we are do -
ing may help them understand the therapy a little better. Would you
be willing to sign a form authorizing me to talk to them?
SALLIE: Okay.
THERAPIST: I will also fill you in on our conversation at our next meet -
ing.
SALLIE: That sounds good.
Phone Call to Mr. and Mrs. Gane
THERAPIST: May I talk to Mr. or Mrs. Gane please?
MRS.G ANE: This is Mrs. Gane.
THERAPIST: Hello, this is Dr. Bender, I am the psychiatrist treating your
daughter, Sallie.
MRS.G ANE: Oh, yes. Is Sallie okay?
THERAPIST: She has some difficulties, but I think treatment will help her
feel better. I am calling to clarify whether you are willing to finance
her therapy. Her current bill is overdue.
M
RS.G ANE: Of course we will provide whatever Sallie needs, but do
you think she really needs therapy? Breakups are a normal part of
growing up.
T
HERAPIST: I think therapy could be very helpful, as your daughter is
suffering from symptoms of depression at this point.
MRS.G ANE: Oh, I don’t know. Sallie was already in therapy once during
high school. I don’t think she really needs any more.
She was doing just fine before the breakup with Charlie. She’ll
survive. I’m sure she’ll be fine in a couple of months.
THERAPIST: There may be a misunderstanding. Your daughter has been
struggling with some symptoms of depression, which is different
from just having an unhappy mood. If it isn’t treated, it can lead to
other problems, some of them serious.
M
RS.G ANE: What kind of serious problems?
THERAPIST: When symptoms of a depression are untreated, a person can
Setting the Fee and Billing 129
lose sleep and appetite, eventually become profoundly hopeless and,
in about 15% of cases, become suicidal. If depression is treated,
these problems are usually avoided.
M
RS.G ANE: Oh no! Is Sallie suicidal? Is that why you are calling?
THERAPIST: While I don’t want to reveal the details of the therapy with
Sallie, I can promise you that if I thought her condition was an
emergency and she was at high risk for hurting herself, I would let
you know.
M
RS.G ANE: Oh, that’s a relief. Are there any less expensive clinics that
could treat Sallie?
THERAPIST: There are some low-fee clinics in my area, but they often
have waiting lists. Also, it can be difficult to start therapy with
someone new if you had already started working closely with some-
one.
M
RS.G ANE: Dr. Bender, my son has some medical problems, and we
seek second opinions all the time. It has never been an issue. He’s
been fine with switching doctors or seeing new people. Sallie might
be upset at first, but I’m sure she would adjust to seeing someone at
the school clinic. At least she could just meet a second therapist and
see how it feels to talk to someone else.
T
HERAPIST: I would be glad to cooperate if she wishes to obtain a second
opinion, but it is more complicated with psychotherapy than with
other health professionals. It takes time to build trust to talk about
emotionally intense issues. To start over can be very tough.
M
RS.G ANE: I am sorry, Dr. Bender, you do sound very concerned about
my daughter, but I need to talk to my husband before I commit to
paying for Sallie’s treatment with you.
T
HERAPIST: Could you call me back by 5:00 P.M. tomorrow so I could
also start talking about this dilemma with Sallie?
MRS.G ANE: Sure, that shouldn’t be a problem. I’ll leave you a message.
THERAPIST: Okay, that would be very helpful.
Sallie’s treatment is turning into a monetary morass. It isn’t easy to
figure out how to proceed. It would be difficult for her to switch provid-
ers at this point. For simplicity’s sake, we’ll say that her parents decide to
support her treatment with me. In real life, it is equally possible that they
might insist that she transfer her care to a clinic.
I would have several options if the Ganes refused to pay for Sallie’s
treatment because of financial constraints. As I review my personal fi -
130 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
nancial situation, I can determine whether I can afford to accept a re -
duced fee or partially deferred fee from Sallie. If neither possibility is fi -
nancially feasible, I could refer Sallie to a low-fee clinic for followup.
With a few preventive measures at the beginning of treatment, I
might be able to avoid a situation like the one outlined in Example 8.6.
Some therapists provide a patient with a form outlining payment proce -
dures for the parents as soon as it is clear that the family will be respon-
sible for the bill. The therapist’s expectations are clear, and the parents
are involved early, without disclosing personal information about the
patient. A model form is provided at the end of this chapter. A similar
form can be prepared for patients whose fees are deferred and who agree
to pay at a future time. We have also provided an example of a bill for
professional services.
Money is a complicated topic. At first, setting the fee, giving the
bill, and then collecting payment may seem graceless and embarrassing
to the beginning therapist. With experience, talking openly about mone-
tary issues might be enlightening to the therapist and to the patient. Both
individuals will benefit as they learn to grapple with these issues and
their underpinnings in everyday life.
Key words: billing, collections, fee setting, free care, health insurance,
managed care, negotiation, payment agreement, third-party payers
Setting the Fee and Billing 131
[Professional letterhead here]
Payment Agreement for Treatment of a Relative or Acquaintance
I, , agree to pay Dr.
for professional services provided by him/her to ,
my (relationship), based on the following fee
schedule: .
Signed:
Date:
Witness:
132
Sample Bill for Services
Suzanne Bender, MD Psychiatrist
258 Avenue of the Americas [voice mail number]
Brookline, MA 02146 [pager number]
Sallie Gane
[address]
For Professional Services:
Diagnosis: Adjustment Disorder with Depressed Mood (309.0)
Date
Description CPT Code Charges
9/5/01 50-minute psychotherapy 90807 100.00
9/12/01 50-minute psychotherapy 90807 100.00
9/17/01 50 minute psychotherapy 90807 100.00
Previous balance:
Received:
Total charges:
Amount due: $300.00
State License Number:
133
9
Telephone Calls
From Dependencies to Emergencies
Phone calls during the course of a psychotherapy can range from ordinary
scheduling communications, to emergencies that require a rapid assessment
and definitive response, to repeated unnecessary contacts that may herald a
regressive dependency. The therapist’s responsibility is to discern the nature of
the call and to respond appropriately. When responding to a phone call from a
patient in crisis, the therapist needs to keep cool under pressure and to listen
with empathy and respect. The goal is to help the patient access her most ef-
fective coping skills.
Every time I examined a patient in medical school, my work was
checked and double-checked by physicians with more experience. I had
a little more autonomy as a medical intern the year after graduation, but
not much. As the physician on the inpatient team with the least amount
of experience, I was responsible for the patient-care tasks that required
the most time and the least skill. My beeper was my constantly intruding
nemesis. Every time I received a new page, I knew that my job list for the
day had just lengthened.
Internship does have some hidden perks that I didn’t appreciate at
the time. Because I didn’t have primary responsibility for the patients on
the ward, I was allowed to sign out all of my outstanding tasks after my
call-shift was completed. Most of the time I was at everyone’s beck and
call, but when I was off, I was unreachable and free.
After internship, I began 3 years of residency training in adult psy -
chiatry at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH). I was ready to dis -
card my role as the medical team’s peon and to assume my new identity
134
as a novice psychiatrist, but I expected to be coddled as the ignorant
newcomer.
I wasn’t.
Instead, my training program highly valued early independence.
While the entire staff, from the chief of psychiatry down, was always
available for questions and for teaching, I was expected to grow out of
my underling’s mentality and to assume primary responsibility for my
outpatients.
Within the first weeks of my residency, I became the designated psy-
chiatrist for a small group of outpatients from the psychotherapy and
psychopharmacology clinic. In case of an emergency, these patients (MY
patients!) could page me through the hospital operator at any time. Ex -
cept for vacations, for which I would organize coverage, I was expected
to keep my beeper on from the moment I signed my employment papers
until the day I graduated.
At first, I hated this arrangement. To be honest, I spent my first
week at MGH trying to drum up support for an alternate emergency
coverage system. At neighboring psychiatric programs, the residents
signed their beepers out to the psychiatrist-on-call after 6:00
P.M. Ie x -
pected that my colleagues would also want to adopt a less demanding
coverage approach, but I was outvoted.
As I slowly adapted to the idea that my beeper was a new con-
stant in my life, my next response, and my next mistake, was to ro-
manticize my new appendage. Early on, I had only a few patients, so I
didn’t expect that I would be called frequently after-hours. I made sure
the beeper was at my bedstand every night so I could respond imme-
diately if it sounded its alarm. The arrangement became problematic
as I began to view my beeper as a type of baby monitor. I was poised
for the first “cry,” ready to comfort and to help if my patient needed
me.
While my attitude was steeped in empathic good intentions, it was -
n’t therapeutic. Patients aren’t babies, and thinking and treating them as
such is infantilizing.
It’s a delicate issue. My patients should be able to reach me in a
timely manner for questions and concerns. On the other hand, if I re -
spond immediately and eagerly to nonemergency pages after-hours, I
might encourage these types of interactions and even promote a patient’s
regression.
Patients first learn about a therapist’s emergency availability at the
beginning of a treatment. The verbal and nonverbal cues during this dis-
cussion can set the tone for the entire therapy. Early on, I unwittingly en-
couraged increased dependency by presenting the beeper (or the message
center) as a conduit for unlimited after-hour contact.
Telephone Calls 135
EXAMPLE 9.1
The therapist sets herself up for abuse of her pager and of her
emergency services.
End of First Consultation Session
THERAPIST: Let me tell you how to reach me in case you need to resched-
ule or in case of an emergency.
SALLIE: Okay.
THERAPIST:( somewhat proudly) I have my voice mail number listed on
the card if you want to leave me a message. I also have my beeper
on 24 hours a day in case of emergencies.
S
ALLIE:( Nods.)
THERAPIST: If you have an emergency, please page me immediately, and I
will get back to you right away.
Without some clear limits, my statement “If you have an emergency,
please page me immediately and I will get back to you right away” offers
my pager as a patient’s life line. Putting aside the fact that this statement
may detrimentally affect my private life, acting as a personal 911 service
can lead to disastrous consequences if modern technology fails, and a
page transmission or reception is impaired. It would be tragic to miss the
emergency page from a suicidal patient who is poised to act.
In Example 3.5, we reviewed how to talk to a new patient about the
appropriate use of an emergency contact system. Whether I use a beeper,
an answering service, or a voice mail system for emergency coverage, the
basic rules are the same. I don’t promise that I will be able to answer a
message immediately, but I will return the call as soon as I can. A patient
needs to know that it is her responsibility to go the nearest emergency
room for acute intervention if she can’t wait for my reply. From the get-
go, the patient and I share the responsibility of reacting to a crisis.
Some therapists work in group practices or community clinics in
which a designated person or a designated emergency facility takes calls
after hours. For these patients, emergency care is provided by the clini -
cian on call, who may or may not be the patient’s primary provider. If a
patient expresses disappointment that you, her personal therapist, won’t
be available after hours, her feelings should be thoroughly discussed
within the treatment. But, usually the coverage system should not—and
often cannot—be altered. To provide the most seamless coverage, each
therapist in the group practice may want to inform her colleagues about
her more fragile patients.
136 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
Surprisingly, although I graduated from my residency a few years
ago, I’ve decided to stick with the beeper coverage system that I used in
training. In retrospect, I appreciate that my training program didn’t let
me off the hook after hours. I’ve learned how to respond effectively to
emergency pages and to set limits when a patient pages me excessively
and inappropriately. There are advantages to this system that I hadn’t
recognized when it was first introduced to me. My pager is only avail -
able to my patients, and I am best prepared to answer their questions
and to respond to their concerns because I know them so well. Since I
am familiar with the personality style of each patient I treat, I am less
likely to over- or to underreact to an emergency call.
My skill emerged slowly with experience. The following examples
document some of the clinical scenarios that helped me learn to set limits
with the patients in my practice.
DEPENDENCY PHONE CALLS
Early on, it was easy to let a phone call develop into an unscheduled
therapy minisession.
EXAMPLE 9.2
The therapist allows and then encourages extended phone calls
outside the session
On Wednesday, Sallie Gane cancelled an appointment for the first
time on the morning of the appointment. She said she had “the flu” and
was unable to come to our session.
On Saturday evening at the local movie theater with my husband,
my beeper goes off. The beeper reads, “Sallie—” and is followed by her
home phone number. She has never paged me before so I feel worried,
leave the film, and head to a private area to call her back on my cell
phone.
T
HERAPIST: May I talk to Sallie Gane please?
SALLIE: It’s me. (Sniffles.) Dr. Bender, I just feel horrible, so I called you.
THERAPIST: What’s wrong?
SALLIE: Well, remember I told you that one of the ways I have coped
with the breakup with Charlie is to talk to my friend Gwen? Well, I
just got in a terrible fight with her, and she is one of my only friends
here at school. We were arguing about what to do tonight, and
Telephone Calls 137
then, in the middle of the discussion, she got up and walked right
out of my apartment. She even slammed the door. I don’t know
what to do. I’m sure she hates me now.
T
HERAPIST: How are you feeling?
SALLIE: I just feel overwhelmed. I didn’t know what to do so I called
you.
THERAPIST: Could you tell me what happened?
SALLIE: Well, it started over breakfast yesterday. ( Starts describing the
details of the fight .)
Sallie and I talk for 30 minutes. I miss the end of the movie. She re-
ceives a free psychotherapy minisession.
SALLIE: Oh, Dr. Bender, I feel so much better. I really appreciate that you
called me back. You are the best doctor I have ever had!
THERAPIST: I’m glad I could help. Feel free to call me back if I can be of
further help. [ I feel proud and accomplished that Sallie’s crisis has
passed due to my therapeutic intervention .]
As an insecure novice practitioner, flush with the power of being a
therapist rather than a medical intern, I believed that Example 9.2 mod-
eled the ultimate empathic response. Sallie had felt abandoned and be-
reft, and I was available, approachable, and comforting. But Sallie’s call
was not truly an emergency clinical situation. She called for comfort,
and I sacrificed a substantial amount of free time to take care of her. The
question is whether this type of behavior should be encouraged.
There are many hazards to providing extensive psychotherapeutic
discussions outside the scheduled session. If Sallie realizes that she can
obtain an unscheduled evening minisession after an emotionally difficult
day, this sort of phone call may be just the first in an upcoming series.
Weekend or evening calls, especially after a missed weekly appointment,
may become more frequent. Sallie might even try to substitute telephone
calls for regular office visits. Complex payment problems might arise. If
I’m really unlucky, the behavior might be contagious, with the patient’s
relatives or friends starting to call me to partake of my cost-free and—
for them—“risk-free” therapy.
I might also become resentful of Sallie if she phones frequently.
Without noticing, I might emotionally withdraw from her during our
normally scheduled time, and the therapy itself might suffer. (Such a
withdrawal would be an example of a countertransference enactment.)
Finally, by missing a significant amount of my planned evening en -
138 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
tertainment in order to untangle Sallie’s tiff with Gwen, I may convey
the subtle message that I don’t believe Sallie can cope with her troubles
independently. If Sallie is treated as though she is incapable of handling
basic crises without intervention, she might learn to fulfill these expecta-
tions. (This would be an example of intersubjectivity.)
However, we are not advocating a harsh response to a patient’s
page. Example 9.3 outlines how a therapist can be available while simul-
taneously setting limits and not encouraging evening/weekend comfort
calls.
EXAMPLE 9.3
Assessment of a situation after a page followed by a quick but
empathic crisis intervention
Same scene: Sallie pages me Saturday night while I am at the movies
after she missed her appointment the Wednesday prior because of “the flu.”
T
HERAPIST: May I talk to Sallie Gane please?
SALLIE: Well, remember. . . . [See Example 9.2 for details of Sallie’s fight
with Gwen.] What am I going to do?
THERAPIST:( Assessing whether the situation is an emergency .) How are
you doing?
SALLIE: I feel so upset. I didn’t know what to do, so I called you.
THERAPIST: It sounds like it was a difficult situation.
SALLIE: Yes, I can’t believe it. She never walked out on me before. What
if our friendship is totally over and done with?
THERAPIST: Have you ever gotten into these types of fights with Gwen
before?
SALLIE: Yeah, we do tend to disagree. But this fight felt much more in -
tense.
THERAPIST: I don’t know a lot about your friendship with Gwen, but it
does sound very troubling. We’ll be able to discuss this situation
with the time it deserves at our next session. Could you write down
everything that happened so we can discuss it together on Wednes -
day?
S
ALLIE: Okay, but right now, I feel so overwhelmed.
THERAPIST:( Continues calm, but firm tone .) I think your first goal at
this time is to take good care of yourself. At other times when
you’ve been upset, what has been most soothing?
Telephone Calls 139
SALLIE: I don’t know. Sometimes I feel a little better if I just veg out and
watch TV. I guess sometimes I also write in my journal.
THERAPIST: Sounds good.
SALLIE: Well, my weekend has gotten off to a fabulous start ( sarcasti-
cally), but I should be okay. Can you give me any advice about
Gwen?
THERAPIST: I don’t think there is an easy answer, but together on
Wednesday we’ll try to make some sense of what happened. (with a
tone of voice that I am starting to end the conversation )
SALLIE: Thank you for calling. I’m sorry I bothered you.
THERAPIST: It sounds like a distressing situation, but I look forward to
talking to you more about it on Wednesday. If you’d like, you can
also share with me what you write in your journal.
S
ALLIE: Okay.
THERAPIST: See you Wednesday.
SALLIE: Bye, I’ll see you on Wednesday.
As a page from Sallie is an unusual occurrence, I assess whether her
call is a true emergency at the beginning of our conversation. If I were
the least bit unsure of the severity of Sallie’s crisis, or if I didn’t know
Sallie well, I would screen for suicidality during this phone call, even if it
felt overprotective. Since I know Sallie fairly well at this point in the
treatment, I know that her risk of self-harm after a fight with a friend is
very low. She has no history of self-mutilatory behavior, severe substance
abuse, or suicidal gestures. Since Sallie is not in imminent danger, I limit
our conversation to a brief empathic crisis intervention.
At the beginning of the phone call, I make a conscious effort to vali-
date Sallie’s feelings. Then, as it would be impossible to review the fight
in adequate detail over the phone without supporting the Saturday night
paging behavior and ruining my weekend movie night, I postpone a
more detailed discussion until our upcoming session. The comment
“We’ll be able to discuss this situation with the time it deserves at our
next session” establishes the limits of the phone call while simulta -
neously acknowledging Sallie’s concerns.
During our conversation, I avoid asking Sallie for any emotional
associations to the upsetting episode. Instead I help her identify adaptive
strategies that may enable her to feel a little better and enhance her inde-
pendence. I don’t take on the role as the primary comforting person in
her life, and I avoid any invitation to call me later if she continues to feel
upset.
140 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
By returning Sallie’s page, reminding her of our upcoming session,
and then encouraging recall of other ways she can comfort herself, Sal -
lie’s isolation is diminished; a malignant regression is not encouraged;
and my private time is protected—all in a 5–10 minute phone call. In our
subsequent session, I’ll ask Sallie how she experienced our phone con -
versation. A discussion of her reaction will help increase my understand-
ing of her predicament and will reinforce the therapeutic alliance.
A small percentage of patients try to contact me frequently between
sessions. With a persistent, intransigent caller, I end each phone session
as quickly as courtesy will allow and then discuss the calls in careful ex -
ploratory detail with the patient during the next scheduled session. If the
number of nonemergency phone calls at inopportune times continue, I
might be at risk for unleashing my frustration on the patient after endur-
ing numerous interruptions. Instead, I limit my availability for non -
emergency phone calls using the empathic, firm, and effective approach
illustrated in Example 9.4.
EXAMPLE 9.4
Setting limits empathically for outside phone contact between
sessions
Sallie has called me five nights in a row to talk about her troubles
with Gwen.
Twenty Minutes into the Session Following the Calls
SALLIE: And so I just don’t know what to do with Gwen!
THERAPIST: I do think we need to continue trying to understand this
friendship and what it means to you, but I think it’s important to
take a little time to talk about your calls to me this week.
S
ALLIE: Oh, you were really helpful. Thank you for being there for me.
This has been such a tough week.
THERAPIST: I’m glad I was helpful, but the best way to cope with an on-
going problem that is difficult to deal with—like Gwen—is to have
a number of strategies in place that can help you feel better. Let’s
think together of other ways you’ve been able to soothe yourself
when you’ve been upset in the past.
S
ALLIE: Well, I don’t know. What do you mean?
THERAPIST: Before we started working together, what would you do to
help yourself feel better when you felt upset?
Telephone Calls 141
SALLIE: I don’t know . . . sometimes I would watch TV.
THERAPIST:( Nods.) What else?
SALLIE: Well, sometimes I would call my mother. She tends to get impa -
tient, but sometimes she listens when I’m upset, and then I feel
better.
THERAPIST: What other activities help? Have you ever tried writing in a
journal?
SALLIE: I used to do that, but I haven’t written anything for a long time.
Do you think that might help?
THERAPIST: Journals are often very useful for helping someone think
about a personal problem and how to approach it. I think these
three things—watching TV, calling your mother, and writing in a
journal—could be a good preliminary list to comfort you during
this tough time with Gwen. How does it feel to you?
S
ALLIE: I don’t know. I guess I could do these things when I’m upset, but
it really does help a lot to talk to you when I feel really over-
whelmed.
T
HERAPIST: What is helpful about it?
SALLIE: Just touching base, I guess. Just hearing your voice helps.
THERAPIST: Can you tell me what is helpful about hearing my voice?
SALLIE: I just have been feeling so alone and upset this week. I just feel a
bit better after we talk. Otherwise, I feel totally alone.
THERAPIST: It does sound like it has been an especially painful week.
Other than paging me, what would be some other options that
might be helpful?
S
ALLIE: I don’t know. . . .
THERAPIST: I have some ideas. Let me know what you think. If it is hear-
ing my voice that is helpful, you could leave a message on my voice
mail when you are feeling lonely, and we can discuss the message at
our next meeting.
S
ALLIE: Oh, I’d feel stupid doing that.
THERAPIST: How come?
SALLIE: Talking to a machine . . . I don’t know. It might help, but it
wouldn’t make me feel that much better. I need to hear you talk
back.
T
HERAPIST: Have you ever imagined what I might say at such a time?
[I’m trying to help Sallie conjure up an internal image of me for
142 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
comfort between sessions so she won’t need to call me after each
disappointment. This is an example of evocative memory .]
SALLIE: No.
THERAPIST: What if you try it now?
SALLIE: Huh? How?
THERAPIST: Do you remember how you felt before you called me last
night?
SALLIE: No, this feels stupid. I just need some extra support right now.
Talking to you helps with that, not just talking to your machine.
THERAPIST: I understand that the phone calls are helpful, but I’m not al-
ways available. With a whole group of comforting strategies, you’re
less likely to become dependent on talking to me to feel better.
SALLIE:( Nods.) I understand, I think. But if it helps me the most to talk
to you, what is so bad about continuing our talks?
THERAPIST: I’m glad our talks are helpful, but the helpfulness doesn’t
last. If we can work together to help you find some coping strategies
that will stay with you, your pain will decrease gradually. You’ll
also feel more confident in your ability to take care of yourself.
S
ALLIE: That makes sense, but I have so much to tell you. I sometimes
forget to tell you everything during this meeting, so I call you to fill
you in.
T
HERAPIST: I am interested in being filled-in, but therapy works best if
we try to concentrate the work we do together during scheduled
sesssions. Since this is a crisis-filled week, would it be useful to meet
an extra time?
S
ALLIE: Maybe. . . .
THERAPIST: What would that be like for you?
SALLIE: I think it might help to talk about this some more. It feels like
the one session a week is up before it has even started.
THERAPIST: Should we schedule an extra session this week?
SALLIE: I think it’s a good idea. Let’s do that.
THERAPIST: Let’s also plan together how you can help yourself feel better
if you have another difficult evening sometime this week.
SALLIE: Yeah. What should I do?
THERAPIST: What if you try writing down your thoughts, phoning your
mother, watching TV, or calling my voice mail between the two ses-
sions? If you are feeling that the situation is really an emergency and
Telephone Calls 143
cannot wait, you can page me. If I don’t answer right away and you
feel you need to talk to someone immediately, it is important not to
sit and wait but to go straight to the nearest emergency room.
S
ALLIE: I don’t get it. I wouldn’t feel comfortable going to an emergency
room. Why would I go there?
THERAPIST: If for whatever reason you felt that you were in danger of
hurting yourself in any way, that would be a reason to hightail it to
the nearest ER. If you were in danger, I would want you to get im -
mediate care in that instance and not just wait around for me to call
you back. [I reinforce the idea that my pager is really for emergen -
cies only.]
S
ALLIE: Oh, I have never felt that bad. I don’t think you have to worry
about that.
THERAPIST: I’m glad. But it is good to review together how to use the
voice mail and beeper so we both know how to approach an emer-
gency.
S
ALLIE: Okay. I’m sorry if I beeped you too much this week.
THERAPIST: I think it’s useful that we talked about it. This new approach
will actually serve you better than if we continued to talk every
night. The two sessions will provide some increased support. With
fewer phone calls, you’ll also learn how to help yourself feel better
when I’m not readily available.
S
ALLIE: It feels a little scary, but it makes sense.
If I set limits before I’ve become frustrated with a patient’s repeated
calls, I’m much more empathic and able to follow the calm, firm ap -
proach outlined here. By supporting Sallie’s nonregressive coping mecha-
nisms (methods of comforting herself that don’t involve talking to me on
the phone), I play to her emotional strengths. When Sallie expresses her
need to talk to me more often, the extra session is a viable alternative
that works within the limits of my schedule and the frame of her treat -
ment.
As a trainee, one of my supervisors told me about a patient who
would not respond to any clear restrictions, such as those outlined in Ex-
ample 9.4. Despite frequent attempts at limit setting by all of his care
providers, including his primary care doctor and various specialists, he
paged them all frequently and at all hours whenever he became upset. To
limit the patient’s spiraling regression, his psychiatrist wrote a letter with
the help and approval of the hospital’s legal department. The letter was
signed by all clinicians involved in the patient’s care.
144 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
The letter outlined that the patient was not allowed to page any
providers at any time if he wanted to continue to receive medical care at
the hospital. Instead, frequent brief meetings with all of his clinicians
were provided. All emergency care was referred to the hospital’s emer -
gency room. If the patient did page any of his clinicians, the practioners
were legally obligated to respond, but then, as documented in the letter,
they could refer him to another facility for further treatment.
The psychiatrist on this multidisciplinary team presented the letter
to his patient. He stated that the medical team was concerned about the
patient’s continued welfare and had outlined what care they could and
couldn’t provide rather than just “refer” his care elsewhere, as had hap-
pened at numerous other hospitals. Since the therapist’s resentment was
held in check by the letter’s protective limit setting, the document could
be presented with consideration and concern, rather than with exaspera-
tion and desperation.
The psychiatrist was surprised by the patient’s response. The patient
viewed the letter as a caring gesture. It served as both a communication
of treatment limits and a tangible memento of the hospital staff’s interest
in his condition. He carried it in his billfold for months. The serial pages
ceased.
COPING MECHANISMS FOR THE THERAPIST:
HOW TO DEAL WITH FRUSTRATION
As patients tested my limits, I needed to find ways to release my frustra-
tion without affecting the treatment detrimentally. As a medical student,
I imagined that once I became a psychiatrist I would always feel calm
and contained when working with patients. In reality, even after years of
experience, I sometimes feel irritated when faced with emotionally diffi -
cult clinical situations. The trick is figuring out how to release my frus -
tration in an effective way that still spares my patient.
My first stop is often with supervisors and colleagues. To stay in
close touch with the psychotherapy community, I continue to pay for in-
termittent supervision and to attend a peer supervision group once a
month. When grappling with complicated clinical scenarios, the mutual
support makes all the difference.
I’ve also used directed fantasy to release frustration. This estab -
lished technique works best if the fantasy is affect-laden, detailed, and
intense. If I’m furious at a patient, an uncivilized fantasy may be a very
effective way to manage my feelings. In my head, I can express my frus -
tration freely. When the distinction between fantasy and action is clearly
delineated, there is no harm in releasing anger in any imaginary scenario.
Telephone Calls 145
Such procedures are well documented in the cognitive-behavioral ther -
apy literature.
Once I’ve expressed my anger in a forum apart from my patient, her
treatment will be protected from intense unprocessed irritation. By re -
leasing pent-up patient-evoked hostility, I also will be protecting my
family, friends, and associates from emotional spillovers of work-related
emotions.
A therapy may even benefit if the therapist is aware of an unsavory
countertransference reaction toward a patient. If I’m aggravated by a pa-
tient, I’m probably not the first person to feel this way toward her, but I
may be the first person able to talk to her about her actions in an
empathic and curious manner. After privately pinpointing my patient’s
behaviors that are evoking my anger, I try to understand what benefit
she might be deriving from these actions. Probably she wouldn’t be act-
ing in this manner unless it satisfied some type of internal—perhaps un -
conscious—need. Maybe over time the two of us will be able to under -
stand the motivation fueling her behavior. That understanding might
eventually enable the patient to improve her relationships with me and
with others.
EMERGENCY PHONE CALLS
Fortunately, the true psychiatric emergency is a relatively rare event, but it
does happen. About 30,000 completed suicides occur in the United States
yearly. A phone conversation with an actively suicidal patient is an anxi-
ety-provoking experience for even the most experienced clinicians.
EXAMPLE 9.5
Emergency evaluation by phone
I receive a page from Sallie Gane on Saturday evening at 7:00. Sallie
has not paged me previously.
T
HERAPIST: May I talk with Sallie Gane please?
SALLIE: Dr. Bender, thanks for calling back. ( muffled, tearful voice )
THERAPIST: You sound upset. Can you tell me what’s happened?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I can’t really talk about it, but I just can’t stand it
anymore!
THERAPIST: What do you mean?
146 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
SALLIE: I’m not sure, but I thought I would call you before I did some -
thing stupid.
THERAPIST: I am glad you called me. What were you thinking of doing?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I wish I could just go to sleep and escape.
THERAPIST: I’m concerned; you must be feeling pretty desperate. Have
you made any plans to make this “escape”?
SALLIE: Well, I just went to the drugstore. . . .
THERAPIST: What did you get?
SALLIE: I bought a bunch of stuff. Umm . . . some pain relievers, some
sleeping pills.
THERAPIST: Are you planning to take them?
SALLIE: Maybe. Everybody hates me—Charlie, Gwen. I thought this
would just make me feel better, but I thought I would call you first.
THERAPIST: I am really glad that you did. Let’s think together what we
can do now to help you.
SALLIE: I just feel so horrible!
THERAPIST: What would be helpful to you?
SALLIE: I’m not sure. . . .
THERAPIST: How safe do you feel tonight?
SALLIE: Ummm, what do you mean?
THERAPIST: Well, for starters, are you in a familiar place? Are you at
home?
SALLIE: Yes, I’m in my room.
THERAPIST: Is anyone there with you?
SALLIE: No. I’m here alone.
THERAPIST: I wonder if you will be okay at your apartment alone over -
night, or if it would be better for you to be seen in an emergency
room tonight if you are at risk of hurting yourself.
SALLIE: I’m not sure.
THERAPIST: If you are not sure, then I think we should be extra careful
and have you come to an emergency room to be evaluated.
SALLIE: Oh, I don’t know if I want to go in. It’s so cold out tonight!
THERAPIST: Here are our options. We could set up a time for you to
check in with me by phone tomorrow as well as a special meeting
Telephone Calls 147
on Monday to talk together or you can go in tonight to see some -
one. I can call and let them know to expect you.
SALLIE: Then someone I’ve never talked to before would want to know
what’s bothering me?
THERAPIST: Yes, but he or she could call me as well to learn a little back-
ground.
SALLIE: I think I’d rather just see you on Monday.
THERAPIST: Do you think you will make it through the night without
hurting yourself?
SALLIE: Yes, I guess so. . . .
THERAPIST: “I guess so” doesn’t feel safe enough for me. If you are un -
sure, I think you need to be seen tonight.
SALLIE: Well, I still feel depressed, but it does help to know that I have
an appointment with you on Monday.
THERAPIST: Where are the pills?
SALLIE: On my desk.
THERAPIST: What about flushing them down the toilet?
SALLIE: Are you serious?
THERAPIST: Very. If you aren’t going to the ER, we need to make sure
you are 100% safe tonight.
SALLIE: Okay, I’ll do it.
THERAPIST: Why don’t I stay on the phone while you do it right now?
SALLIE: Wow, you take this stuff so seriously!
THERAPIST: I really do.
SALLIE: Okay, hold on.
THERAPIST: Yes, of course. [ I can hear the toilet flushing in the back -
ground.]
SALLIE: Dr. Bender?
THERAPIST: I’m here. Did you flush the pills?
SALLIE: Yes.
THERAPIST: All of them?
SALLIE: Yes.
THERAPIST: How are you feeling now?
SALLIE: Better since you called.
148 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
THERAPIST: But still pretty awful?
SALLIE: Yes.
THERAPIST: One other thing: Would you tell me your address?
SALLIE: Why do you want to know?
THERAPIST: I don’t have your record with me. I want to know where you
are just in case I would need to send help at some point.
SALLIE: Oh, Dr. Bender, what do you mean? You wouldn’t send the po-
lice over or something, would you?
THERAPIST: At this point, I feel good about our plan to touch base to -
morrow and then meet on Monday, but I think it is important that I
have your address available in case things were to get worse.
SALLIE: Okay, I guess. I’m at 1111 Central Street in downtown Boston.
THERAPIST: How are you feeling as we continue to talk?
SALLIE: Still pretty upset.
THERAPIST: How are the thoughts of hurting yourself right now?
SALLIE: Well, they still cross my mind.
THERAPIST: Thoughts are troubling enough, but the real question is
whether you have any intention of acting on them.
SALLIE: No, I really don’t think so.
THERAPIST: What if the plan to hurt yourself returns in the middle of the
night or tomorrow?
SALLIE: I don’t know . . . I’ll call you?
THERAPIST: Yes, page me or go straight to the emergency room.
SALLIE: Okay, thanks.
THERAPIST: You are very welcome. Now, would you page me as a check-in
at 10:00 A.M. tomorrow and come to the office at 3:00 on Monday?
SALLIE: Let me check my book. . . . Yep, I can do both of those.
THERAPIST: Until our meeting, what will you do to comfort yourself?
SALLIE: I think I’ll call this girl, Nancy, who I met in my journalism class
and ask her if she could spend the day with me tomorrow. I’d feel
better if I had some company.
T
HERAPIST: What if Nancy isn’t available?
SALLIE: I guess I’ll just go to the library then. There’s a table where the
economics students study together. Maybe I’ll see someone I know
from class there.
Telephone Calls 149
THERAPIST: I think that is a very good plan. What are your plans for to -
night?
SALLIE: I’m pretty tired now. I think I’ll just go to bed soon. I feel better
than when I called you.
THERAPIST: I’m glad. I look forward to talking to you tomorrow at 10
A.M. and seeing you on Monday at 3:00P.M. [establishing a future]
SALLIE: At your office?
THERAPIST: Yes. I’ll be waiting for you.
SALLIE: Thank you. I’ll be there. [ confirming a future, an essential fea -
ture in estimating safety ]
A suicidal crisis is a psychiatric emergency that must be evaluated
thoroughly and immediately. In Example 9.5, I assess Sallie’s suicidal
risk by reviewing her suicidal ideation, intent, and plan. I devise my
treatment strategy based on her current risk profile and her degree of co-
operation.
Sallie has two risk factors for suicide: major depressive disorder and
an interpersonal loss. In addition, it is particularly worrisome that she
has a predefined plan and has taken some steps to enact it. It is reassur-
ing that she called me before taking the pills, because this shows some
forethought, restraint, and a wish for help. During the phone evaluation,
she is engageable, honest, and cooperative, so I feel comfortable post-
poning the face-to-face assessment until Monday.
In an emergency clinical situation, I don’t limit my phone availabil-
ity. Instead, I invite Sallie to contact me during the night or the following
day if her suicidality increases. While our planned phone check-in will
provide some extra support on Sunday morning, I still try to encourage
emotional growth rather than regression by helping Sallie think of activi-
ties that would comfort her during the rest of the weekend. I try to dis -
cern how much she is willing and able to accomplish for the sake of her
own safety.
If I had any reason to believe Sallie was lying to me and had already
taken the pills, or if Sallie had refused to go the emergency room for fur-
ther evaluation but had also been unable to contract for safety convinc -
ingly, I would be forced to call her local police department to escort her
to the nearest emergency room against her will. With the possibility of
overdose or other self-harm, I could also arrange to send an ambulance.
If I didn’t have her address or if she refused to give it to me, the police
could access her address from her telephone number. Sending Sallie to an
emergency room against her will would probably cause at least a tempo-
150 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
rary rift in our therapeutic alliance, but that would be preferable to the
dangers of postponing urgent treatment.
Some patients are at higher risk for self-harm than others. Men in
the United States are at higher risk than women for completed suicides,
although women may attempt suicide more frequently. (The reverse is
true in China and in some other countries.) Patients with a chronic medi-
cal illness such as AIDS, substance abuse, major depression, severe panic
disorder, borderline personality disorder, impulsiveness, and history of
violence, trauma, or psychosis are all at higher risk for completed sui -
cide. Life stressors, including advanced age (especially older men), ado -
lescence, divorce, bereavement, or loss of employment, are also associ -
ated with suicide attempts. A review of a patient’s risk factors helps
guide my assessment, but ultimately I evaluate each patient’s specific sit-
uation apart from statistical risk factors.
Very early in my psychiatric training, only 3 months after my in -
ternship, one of my former patients from the adult psychiatric inpatient
unit overdosed and died 8 weeks after discharge. During her 12-week
hospitalization, the patient had been treated with electroconvulsive ther-
apy (ECT) for a malignant psychotic depression. At the time of dis-
charge, she had been hopeful and future-oriented, although still vulnera-
ble due to the severity of her disease. She had close followup scheduled
with her caring and competent outpatient provider. The attending psy-
chiatrist on the inpatient unit and I tried to piece together what had hap-
pened. We were shocked and so sad. She was only 32.
Even though I wasn’t this patient’s primary psychiatrist, I still felt
completely overwhelmed and guilt-ridden when I heard the news. Dur-
ing our first year of psychiatric training, Dr. Messner had mentioned that
at least one member of my class might have a patient successfully com -
mit suicide in the next 12 months. I had been sure that I would be
spared, and I was wrong.
For months after this young woman’s suicide, I obsessed about my
suicidality assessments whenever a patient mentioned any thoughts of
self-harm. During an evaluation, I would repeatedly ask a patient about
her suicidal thoughts, intent, and plan. I began to worry that my evalua-
tions were too lengthy or too anxiety-driven and consulted with Dr.
Messner. I remember exactly what he said, even though the conversation
occurred over 7 years ago. “Take as much time as you need, Suzanne,”
he said. “Review your suicidality assessment as many times as you’d like
in order to feel comfortable with your treatment decision.” This is the
wisdom I would like to impart to you. If you are unsure about the pa -
tient’s safety, keep talking to him or her in detail until you feel confident
about his or her safety or the need to hospitalize. There is no need to
Telephone Calls 151
rush these types of evaluations. Take your time to feel comfortable with
your decision. The patient’s survival may be at stake.
Over time (and after making many of the mistakes outlined in this
chapter), I’ve learned how to provide intersession and emergency care
effectively. Because I have followed the strategies we have provided in
this chapter, my patients now rarely page me after 6:00
P.M.,a n dIa m
awakened at night by a page only a few times a year. This isn’t because I
have the most stable office practice in Boston, but because I have learned
slowly how to help my patients maximize their coping skills and take
advantage of our time together in the office, rather than to depend on
evening or weekend phone or beeper contact for support. All these strat-
egies are designed to prevent self-injurious action; to limit regressive,
intrusive, maladaptive dependency; to reinforce autonomy; and to culti -
vate collaboration.
Key words: abuse, autonomy, boundaries, countertransference
enactment, dependency, emergencies, evocative memory,
exploitation, frame, intersubjectivity, limit setting, object constancy,
psychotherapy, safety, self-discipline, suicide, therapeutic contract
152 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
10
No-Shows, Late Arrivals,
and Late Departures
Psychiatric emergency departments, many substance abuse counseling cen-
ters, and numerous neighborhood mental health centers welcome patients on
a walk-in basis. In contrast, psychotherapy of virtually all types is conducted by
appointment only. A scheduled appointment ensures that the therapist will be
available, and that the patient will meet with the same therapist each time.
Patients’ late arrivals, absences without notice (“no-shows”), or delays in
leaving at the end of the appointment can be frustrating for the clinician. If
these occurrences are explored tactfully and empathically, they may ultimately
prove to be tr easure troves of meaningful communication.
A LATE ARRIVAL
As a trainee, I looked forward to the sessions with my psychotherapy
patients. About half an hour before a patient was scheduled to arrive, I
would obsessively prepare the office for our upcoming meeting: moving
the clock to an unobtrusive corner of the room, plumping the pillows on
her chair, checking tissue availability. . . . I was ready to start the session
about 15 minutes ahead of schedule.
After such preparation, I was painfully aware if my patient wasn’t
absolutely punctual. I’d repeatedly check the waiting room a minute af-
ter she was due to arrive, and if I didn’t see her, my imagination would
start to wander. Maybe my patient had experienced an extraordinary
metamorphosis since our last meeting. Perhaps she had dyed her hair
blond and grown 3 inches since our last visit. If an accelerated aging
process had occurred over the last 7 days, she might be the older woman
sitting in the corner knitting a sweater.
153
These creative fantasies were a bit bizarre, but in retrospect, I un -
derstand how they were protective. My odd musings helped me to
wait and to contain my anticipation. If my patient were present, even
disguised in a new form, I would have something else to do rather
than to mark time forlornly near the secretary, peering at the clinic’s
entrance.
HOW TO REACT TO THE LATE-ARRIVING PATIENT
I imagined that my supervisors could transform a patient’s late arrival
into a therapeutic breakthrough. After listening to the patient’s com -
plaints about traffic on the way to the office, they would pounce on the
issue: “So, it’s difficult to come on time? What do you feel this means
about the treatment?” In my fantasy, the patient wouldn’t respond de -
fensively, but would engage instead in a barrage of psychologically
meaningful associations. Together, the two of them would rapidly come
to a new and deeper understanding of her unconscious.
With experience and consultation, I’ve realized that my imagining is
a bit fantastical, and my aspirations have become more humble and less
dramatic. When I related my therapeutic expectations in response to a
late arrival, my supervisors informed me that it is not useful to assign
significant psychological meaning to a single event. Even when an un-
conscious drive is fueling the tardiness, direct and somewhat insensitive
confrontations often lead to defensiveness and withdrawal rather than
to increased insight. I stopped hoping for the psychological epiphany,
and became more interested in how late arrivals might subtly affect the
process of an ongoing treatment.
As a novice therapist, I was often overaccommodating when a pa -
tient was late. Although my intentions were good, extending the session
to make up for the lost time had unforeseen clinical consequences.
EXAMPLE 10.1
The therapist is overaccommodating and extends the session to
placate a late patient
S
ALLIE:( rushing in 20 minutes late ) Dr. Bender, I got stuck in traffic. I
couldn’t call to tell you that I was going to be late because I didn’t
want to waste a moment. I’m so frustrated!
T
HERAPIST: I can understand that feeling. Why don’t we go in and get
started?
We walk together to the office.
154 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
SALLIE: So, I have so much to tell you. I’ve told you about my friend
Gwen, who had been my most supportive buddy after the breakup
with Charlie? Well, lately she’s changed, and I have no idea why.
She rarely calls me anymore, and when we do talk, she seems sort of
distant. [Sallie continues to talk about her concerns until 5 minutes
before the end of the session .]
T
HERAPIST: It seems that your relationship with Gwen has become more
complicated. I hope we can continue to discuss it next week.
SALLIE: Dr. Bender, I need to talk to you more today. This situation with
Gwen is difficult, but something just happened at home that is re -
ally horrible, I wanted to bring it up earlier, but I was scared to be -
cause I hate even thinking about it. Honestly, my problems with
Gwen are stupid in comparison. Please, could we talk a little lon -
ger? It wasn’t my fault that the traffic was so bad.
THERAPIST:[ I’m very curious and decide to extend the session .] Okay,
just this once. It’s generally important to stick to our allotted ap-
pointment time, but we can take that up in a future visit. What is
going on at home?
S
ALLIE: Well, I didn’t really tell you much about this before, but my brother,
Tom, is actually pretty sick. He has this problem with diarrhea.
It’s sort of embarassing to talk about, but sometimes it gets so
bad he has to go into the hospital. I think it is called ulcerative coli-
tis or something like that. Anyway, when I was in high school, he
had his first attack and he was in the hospital for weeks. He had to
go to the bathroom about 30 times a day, and it was bloody too.
My Dad would sleep at home with me, and my Mom slept at the
hospital with Tom. I almost never saw her, but that was okay. I
knew that Tom needed her more than I did.
What’s strange is that sometimes he gets better, and then he’s
totally normal. For the last few years, he had been doing really well.
But last night my parents called, and said that he had to go back to
the hospital yesterday. It sounds like he’s doing really bad again,
and no one knows now long it will take for him to get better again.
(Sobs, and reaches for tissues. )
T
HERAPIST: Oh, I can understand why this unexpected news was very
upsetting.
1 Minute to Go before Session is Over
SALLIE: Right now, he is not allowed to eat, and he only gets food in his
veins. My parents are both very upset, but my Mom is a total mess.
No-Shows, Late Arrivals, and Late Departures 155
I asked her what I could do to help, and you know what she said?
It’s kinda strange.
THERAPIST:[ I can’t resist.] What did she say?
SALLIE: She said hearing about my courses, my economics courses, helps
her feel a little better. She said it distracts her from the hospital and
all that stuff. When she thinks about my future in business, it really
makes her happy.
So there was no way that I could tell her that I hate my classes
right now. They are SO boring, but I tried to sound really interested,
because I didn’t want to burden her more. ( Blows her nose .)
T
HERAPIST: What a tough position to be in. Can you tell me more about
how you experience this burden?
SALLIE: She thinks I like business as much as she does. I like it, I guess,
but I don’t love it. I think she would be bummed if she knew this.
The Hour is Up
THERAPIST:( Nods, concerned look .)
SALLIE: I just didn’t want to talk to you about this before.
THERAPIST:[ I don’t even begin to wrap up the session .] What allowed
you to bring it up with me today?
SALLIE: I don’t know. Maybe the fact that he went back into the hospital
and I needed to talk to somebody about it. But, part of me sort of
hopes that if I don’t talk about it, it might just go away.
T
HERAPIST: What does it feel like to talk about it with me?
SALLIE: Surprisingly okay. Maybe it took more energy to ignore it. I re -
ally appreciate you extending the hour for me, Dr. Bender. Gwen
isn’t there for me, but you certainly are!
The conversation continued for 15 minutes beyond the scheduled
ending time. I miss my 10-minute break after Sallie’s session and am late
for my next patient.
Interestingly enough, patients who arrive late and patients who are
reluctant to leave are often one and the same. Sallie illustrates the
“hand-on-the-doorknob” phenomenon, sharing the session’s most emo-
tionally intense information at the end of the hour. Sometimes patients
employ this tactic—often unconsciously—when they don’t feel comfort -
able talking about a topic in detail. In Sallie’s case, she may also be un -
156 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
consciously trying to push the time limits of the session by ending with
powerful material.
As Sallie is not acutely suicidal, it is not in her best interest to bend
the treatment frame excessively, as I do in Example 10.1. An extension
in even a single session may have a number of future ramifications: Sallie
might continue to request prolonged sessions, and her motivation for ar-
riving on time might diminish. Even though she might appreciate the ex-
tra time and attention, it may also feel confusing if I vary a session’s
length depending on its content. A 60-minute session could be regarded
as an unexpected reward, while a shorter, 45-minute session could be
viewed as a punishment.
If I prolong the session, it will be difficult to engage Sallie in an ex -
ploration of her end-of-the-hour actions. In contrast, if I end the session
on time, Sallie will still be in touch with the feelings that fueled her re -
quest for an extended session. In a subsequent meeting, I can ask her
how she experienced my limit setting and try to learn why it was difficult
for her to talk about Tom’s illness earlier in the meeting.
Example 10.2 illlustrates how I could hold firm to a treatment’s
boundaries in an empathic but resolute manner.
EXAMPLE 10.2
The therapist does not extend a session to accommodate a
patient who was late
Five Minutes Left to the Session
SALLIE: Dr. Bender, I need to talk to you more today. This situation with
Gwen is difficult, but something just happened at home that is re -
ally horrible. . . . Please, could we extend the session a little today?
THERAPIST: I would like to hear what you want to tell me, but we will
need to stop on time. I would like to know what is on your mind,
and then we can definitely continue to talk about it next week.
S
ALLIE: Next week seems so far away. The problem is that my brother
Tom is in the hospital again. I don’t remember if I told you, but he
has this kind of rare chronic disease. He’s been fine for years, but
now he is having a relapse.
T
HERAPIST: Oh, I can understand that can be very upsetting. What kind
of chronic illness does he have?
SALLIE: It’s called ulcerative colitis. If he doesn’t get better, he may need
to have surgery. I just don’t know what to do! ( Sniffles continue;
reaches for a tissue and blows her nose .)
No-Shows, Late Arrivals, and Late Departures 157
THERAPIST:[ I refrain from asking exploratory questions such as “What
allowed you to bring it up today?” or “What does it feel like to
talk about it with me?” and I start to sum up instead .] I can see
this has been very painful and I hope we can talk about it in more
detail next time. I know it may feel difficult to end our sessions
once an issue like this comes up, but, unfortunately, we need to
stop soon.
S
ALLIE: Oh, it just feels overwhelming. Dr. Bender, he is so sick. I need
help dealing with this! Why won’t you help me?
THERAPIST:( gripping the chair )[ metaphorically gripping the frame ]I
feel stuck because I really do want to hear more about this, but un -
fortunately there isn’t time to talk to you about it right now. Would
it be helpful to schedule an extra session to talk more about this
later in the week?
S
ALLIE: No. I don’t have time. You can’t talk now, even just 20 minutes
more? (A tear rolls down her cheek .)
Sallie’s Session Is Over
THERAPIST: I can see that the situation with your brother is so upsetting
to you, and I understand that it was difficult for you even to let me
know about it. Unfortunately, this session is ending at a really inop-
portune time. Why don’t you take a moment to collect yourself and
decide whether you want to meet later in the week with me so we
can give it the time it deserves?
S
ALLIE:( Nods, hiccups, doesn’t move from her seat .)
THERAPIST:( Nods, and waits patiently .)
SALLIE:( Grabs a handful of tissues and stands up .) It is so hard to talk
about this, so I don’t think I want to think about it again this week.
Let’s just meet next week as usual.
T
HERAPIST: Okay. That would be fine. I look forward to seeing you
then.
SALLIE: Okay. (Leaves.)
In Example 10.2, I follow each empathic comment with a remark
about the end of the session, and Sallie leaves the meeting within a cou -
ple minutes of the appropriate time. If she brings up emotionally intense
material at the end of future sessions, we will try together to understand
the meaning of this behavior.
158 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
EXAMPLE 10.3
When a patient repeatedly brings up emotionally loaded topics
at the end of the session
One week after Sallie tells me about her brother’s illness for the first
time.
Five Minutes Before Sallie’s Session Is Over
SALLIE: Enough about Gwen. I guess I didn’t talk very much about my
brother, Tom, today even though I planned to bring it up earlier this
session. I need to tell you more about what is going on.
T
HERAPIST:( Nods.)
SALLIE: Dr. Bender, this week has really been the pits. I’m such a mess.
Either I’m worried about Gwen or upset about Charlie, but it’s all
over if I even start thinking about Tom. I’m so worried about him.
T
HERAPIST: What are you most worried about?
SALLIE: I just feel so bad for him, but I get overwhelmed even thinking
about it. I don’t know why I talked about Gwen today instead of
Tom.
T
HERAPIST: Do you have any understanding why you talked about
Gwen instead?
SALLIE: I don’t know. Maybe it’s easier to talk about Gwen and distract
myself from what is really bothering me.
THERAPIST: That could be so. Not many people recognize such possibili-
ties. [I recognize and support Sallie’s psychological mindedness .]
SALLIE: I wish we could keep talking about it now.
THERAPIST: It is a difficult situation. I can see this is such a sensitive
topic, but by bringing it up at the end of the hour rather than ear -
lier, we don’t have the opportunity to talk about it together. Our
time today is drawing to a close, but I hope we can continue learn -
ing about this.
SALLIE: Okay. (Gets up to leave .)
When I hold to the parameters of the session, Sallie is able to ac -
knowledge how difficult it is for her to talk about her brother’s illness. In
a future session, she also might share how she felt when I didn’t extend
the session in response to her request.
No-Shows, Late Arrivals, and Late Departures 159
REPEATED LATE ARRIVALS
For some patients, arriving late to therapy, canceling at the last minute,
or not showing up at all may become a recurrent problem. Because this
behavior is a detriment to the therapy, it deserves some special attention.
Before I broach this topic with a patient, I try to distinguish whether
the frequent late arrivals are due to obstructions or resistances to the
therapy. Obstructions are factors out of a patient’s control and often un-
predictable (such as blizzards, floods, lack of transportation, or an ill -
ness in the patient or in the patient’s family). Resistances to therapy refer
to anything that interferes with the progress of therapy over which the
patient has some influence (missing the bus, cancelling because of a mi -
nor ailment or an optional scheduling conflict). Some events are more
difficult to label as obvious obstructions or resistances (such as an unan-
ticipated change in the patient’s schedule that interferes with the therapy
appointment), and I reserve judgment for these events until more infor -
mation is available.
Whether or not the recurrent lateness is due to a resistance or to an
obstruction, or a combination of the two, a discussion about lateness
should be approached with empathy and curiosity. Timing is also impor-
tant. As a beginning resident, I’d be so eager to broach the topic, that I’d
open a session by asking a patient about her tardiness. Not surprisingly,
the discussion was rarely fruitful. It took me a while to learn that the
best time to explore a late arrival or a missed session is not necessarily
the first available second in the next scheduled meeting. Instead, I’ve
learned to wait for a cue, that is, some comment by the patient about
time, appointments, or people in her life who are late. Then I’ll ask the
question I’ve been harboring: “I’ve noticed that sometimes you have
been coming to the therapy session about 15 minutes late. Any thoughts
about what might make it hard to come on time for some sessions?”
At the beginning of Example 10.4, Sallie Gane refuses to admit that
her recurrent late arrivals have any underlying meaning, but as our meet-
ing continues, she is increasingly able to discuss the emotional signifi -
cance of her actions.
EXAMPLE 10.4
Discussing repeated late attendance in a therapeutic manner
Sallie came to the session 20 minutes late today. She was also 10–15
minutes late for the three sessions before this one.
When the session has only 10 minutes remaining, she starts to talk
faster.
160 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
SALLIE: You won’t believe the latest incident with Gwen. Last night, she
wanted to go to this foreign movie, and when I said I’d rather see
the latest release for the school’s Alfred Hitchcock revival, she hung
up on me. This was one of the few times I even disagreed with her
plans a little bit, and she responded by shutting me out! My night
was ruined. I don’t know what I did wrong, or what made her so
mad. Maybe I am just a social failure.
T
HERAPIST: Gwen wasn’t open to any discussion about the evening’s ac-
tivities?
SALLIE: That’s right, but I should have just gone to the foreign flick. The
last time Gwen and I got in a tiff like this I didn’t want to spend an
afternoon shopping in the city with her, because I had a paper due.
We didn’t talk for a few weeks. It felt like forever. I can’t afford to
lose her now, because I need all the support I can get, especially
with Tom being sick.
T
HERAPIST: It’s difficult when a friendship that means so much is unable
to sustain little disagreements.
SALLIE: It really is. Maybe I need some more friends so I don’t have to
depend on Gwen so much, but I have trouble making new friends. I
get shy.
T
HERAPIST: It’s important to talk about this, but we don’t have the time
today to talk about it in the detail it deserves. We only have a cou-
ple of minutes left.
S
ALLIE: Yeah, I wish I had more time.
THERAPIST:[ I grab the opportunity to talk about Sallie’s recurrent late-
ness.] Any idea of what might be making it hard to come on time?
SALLIE: I don’t know. . . . It’s not easy to talk about this stuff every week,
you know.
THERAPIST:( Nods encouragingly.)
SALLIE: Can I tell you just one more thing? It’ll just take a minute.
THERAPIST: We do need to stop, but I hope we can continue this discus -
sion in the future. Perhaps the fact that it’s not easy to talk about
these painful topics has some influence on your lateness. It can be
useful to try to understand it together, and maybe we can start to
puzzle it out at our next meeting.
Sallie comes to the next session 15 minutes late.
S
ALLIE: Well, a lot has happened with Gwen since our last meeting.
No-Shows, Late Arrivals, and Late Departures 161
THERAPIST:( Nods encouragingly.)
SALLIE: Well, like I expected, we didn’t talk all week because I didn’t go
with her to that stupid movie. Then, she called yesterday and pre -
tended nothing had ever happened. She invited me to a dorm
barbeque, and we had a great time. I guess everything is normal be-
tween us again.
THERAPIST: How do you feel now that the relationship is back to base -
line?
SALLIE: I’m so relieved. I don’t know what I would do without Gwen.
Other than you, she is my number one support in college. No of -
fense, but talking to you once a week isn’t enough. Gwen’s an im -
portant part of my life here.
THERAPIST: No offense taken. I agree with you that it is really important
for you to have close friends. How did you feel when Gwen pre -
tended that your argument had never happened?
SALLIE: I felt so lucky. I would hate to talk to her about our disagree-
ment.
THERAPIST: What would you hate about it?
SALLIE: I’d be scared that I might say something wrong, and she’d stop
talking to me again. I can’t afford to jeopardize my friendship with
Gwen in any way.
T
HERAPIST: The friendship with Gwen is so important to you, but it also
feels rather fragile?
SALLIE: You bet. I’ve seen her drop other friends in an instant. She col -
lects friends, and then every so often she cleans house and discards
the “uninteresting” ones. Sometimes she makes me feel like the best
friend she has ever had, but she also has a definite mean streak.
The difference between us is that she can make a new friend in
5 minutes, but I’m more shy. I need her more than she needs me.
T
HERAPIST: It’s hard.
SALLIE: Yeah, I hate talking openly about feelings.
THERAPIST: We spoke a little last week about what might be making it
difficult to come to sessions on time, and I’m wondering if it could
be related to the fact that you hate talking openly about feelings.
What do you think?
S
ALLIE: No, I don’t think it relates at all. Do you?
THERAPIST: Maybe. I had some thoughts about it. Let me know how
they sound to you. Maybe if you had some feelings that were
162 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
hard to express directly to me, it might be more difficult to come
on time.
SALLIE: What do you mean?
THERAPIST: Well, with Gwen, you have been concerned that more direct
communication would lead to difficulties within the friendship. It
makes sense that you might have mixed feelings within any relation-
ship, and avoiding the issue is one way to cope with these feelings.
Coming late to therapy could be one way to protect yourself
from talking about any mixed feelings you might have about our
work. [I feel proud to unveil my interpretation .]
S
ALLIE: I don’t have any mixed feelings about you.
THERAPIST: You don’t? [My interpretation didn’t work? I had been per-
fecting it all week .]
SALLIE: No, I don’t. Dr. Bender, you are so important to me. I really
treasure our sessions. I don’t really understand what you are get-
ting at.
T
HERAPIST: None of what I said fits with your experience? [ It’s hard to
give up my interpretation that I am so proud of, but it’s becoming
clear that, at this point in the treatment, Sallie isn’t able to talk
about our relationship so openly .]
S
ALLIE: No, it just makes me nervous, that’s all. I don’t think you are
right. If I’m late it is because of traffic, that’s all.
Sallie is beginning to sound annoyed. I try to reinforce our thera-
peutic alliance.
THERAPIST: I’m glad you correct me so I can try to understand the situa-
tion better.
I’ve been asking about your lateness for the sake of the thera -
peutic process. When the session starts late, it reduces the time we
have to work together.
SALLIE: I guess it does, but traffic is traffic, that’s all.
THERAPIST:( Nods, remains quiet to see what Sallie talks about next .)
SALLIE: Well, it’s hard to come here and talk about all this stuff, even
though I generally feel better when I leave.
THERAPIST: Can you pinpoint what is hard about it?
SALLIE: Well, I sometimes get a little worried about what you think of
me. I don’t want you thinking that I am some kind of whiner who
can’t keep friends.
No-Shows, Late Arrivals, and Late Departures 163
THERAPIST: Is that what you imagine that I think? ( curiously; noncon-
frontational tone)
SALLIE: I don’t know. I just worry that one day you might get so sick of
hearing what I have to say that you tell me to shut up. I talk about
the same stuff every week, and even though I know that we are
making progress, I figure you must feel sort of frustrated.
T
HERAPIST: Have I seemed frustrated to you?
SALLIE: No, you haven’t at all, but maybe you are the type of person
who is really patient for a long time but then erupts without warn -
ing.
THERAPIST: It is hard to trust that I won’t become unpredictable and
mean, sort of like Gwen?
SALLIE: I hadn’t really thought about that, but I guess that is true.
THERAPIST: I can understand why this could hold you back. Can you tell
me more?
SALLIE: What if I do say something offensive, and you are upset with
me?
THERAPIST: Upset in what way?
SALLIE: Mad, angry, frustrated, bored . . . I don’t know. I don’t want to
mess up this therapy. It’s helping me.
THERAPIST: Actually, it is very useful to discuss this together in order to
learn more about the feelings involved. Let’s imagine for the sake of
the therapy that I might feel some of the feelings you listed. What
would that be like for you?
S
ALLIE: Oh, I’d be terrified.
THERAPIST: Can you tell me why?
SALLIE: Because the relationship would be over. . . .
THERAPIST: How so?
SALLIE: Well, you probably wouldn’t want to work with me anymore.
THERAPIST: Why not?
SALLIE: Because you’d be pissed.
THERAPIST: I can see why this is so scary. There is a feeling that if there is
any type of misunderstanding or disagreement between us, the ther-
apy would be over.
SALLIE: Yes. I would be very worried if I made you angry.
THERAPIST: What would you imagine would happen?
164 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
SALLIE: I don’t know. I guess I’d feel really uncomfortable talking to you.
THERAPIST: Tell me if this sounds possible to you. You might expect that
our relationship would be similar to your friendship with Gwen. It
wouldn’t be resilient, so it couldn’t easily sustain a misunderstand-
ing.
S
ALLIE: Yes, actually that does sound right.
THERAPIST: Do you think that being late might be protective in some
way?
SALLIE: Well, I have less opportunity to be annoying if I’m not here the
whole time. Even if you are a little annoyed at me for being late, I
know I can be on really good behavior for 30 minutes.
T
HERAPIST: So, by being late, you are trying to protect our relationship?
SALLIE: I know it sounds stupid, but maybe I am.
THERAPIST: I don’t think it sounds stupid at all. I am glad we can talk
openly about it, and we might understand it even better together
over time.
Many patients, especially those new to psychotherapy, are similar to
Sallie at the onset of Example 10.4. They may have trouble talking
openly about their recurrent late arrivals, and the therapist must facili-
tate the discussion slowly and sensitively.
Midway into Example 10.4, I illustrate what can happen if the ther-
apist pursues a more aggressive approach. I take control of the session’s
content when I introduce my carefully concocted interpretation: “Com -
ing late to therapy could be one way to protect yourself from talking
about any mixed feelings you might have about our work.” Sallie balks
and is unable to process my comment in any meaningful way. I realize
that the interpretation was premature when it doesn’t facilitate a more
open and honest discussion, and Sallie adamantly repeats that her recur-
rent late arrivals are meaningless.
The conversation does progress in the second half of the example as
Sallie morphs into a patient with more psychological insight, and I
evolve into a therapist with more experience. I try to clarify Sallie’s con-
cerns (“It is hard to trust that I won’t become unpredictable and mean,
sort of like Gwen?”) instead of presenting sweeping interpretations. I
learn about Sallie’s fear that she may not maintain appropriate behavior
if she comes to her session on time, a very different explanation for her
recurrent tardiness than the interpretation I had offered earlier.
Sallie’s late arrivals may have many meanings. At this time, Sallie
believes it is only an attempt to avoid confrontation, but it may also be
No-Shows, Late Arrivals, and Late Departures 165
her method of expressing hostility and resentment. Even if this conjec -
ture is valid, Sallie appears far from ready to recognize her own animos-
ity. It is not the right time to talk to her about this second possibility, so I
think about it silently.
As Sallie’s therapist, I also start to wonder why Sallie has trouble
making new friends, and why she is so attached to Gwen even though
Gwen treats her poorly. Early in treatment, I can only hypothesize some
explanations. Maybe Sallie perceives Gwen as irreplaceable because
Gwen is somehow symbolically tied to someone in Sallie’s life who does
have a unique and vital role, such as her mother, father, or brother. We’ll
learn more about this as the therapy continues.
RECURRENT CANCELLATIONS OR NO-SHOWS
While late arrivals can be annoying, at least the patient shows up. As a
trainee, I found cancellations or no-shows the most aggravating, mainly
because I would bend over backward to try to accommodate my patient
when rescheduling.
The typical scenario would unfold as follows. My patient would
miss her scheduled appointment by cancelling or not showing up. Then,
she’d call shortly afterward to apologize and to attempt to reschedule
within the next few days. I’d feel concerned and, in order to meet as
soon as possible, I would reschedule the patient in the evening or early in
the morning. If I was lucky, the patient would show for this session, but
sometimes the pattern would continue, and my resentment would esca-
late exponentially.
With experience, I’ve learned a different strategy that also protects
my time. I use the patient’s request to reschedule as a moment to reassert
the frame. Unless there is a compelling emergency, I set the next appoint-
ment at our regularly scheduled time during the following week.
The situation is more tricky if the no-shows become a chronic prob-
lem.
EXAMPLE 10.5
Responding to a patient who recurrently misses her
appointments
Sallie has just finished the consultation process, but then misses her
first scheduled therapy session and does not call to cancel.
I call her and leave the following message, hoping to demonstrate
interest.
166 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
“Hello, this is Suzanne Bender, calling for Sallie Gane. After I did
not see you at our meeting today, I wondered if you were interested in
rescheduling. If so, please leave me a message with some times that I
could reach you.”
Sallie calls back 2 days later and leaves the following message.
”Oh, Dr. Bender, I got your message. I am very sorry I missed our
appointment. I had a final at school the morning of our meeting, and I
just completely forgot about our session. I still am very interested in
therapy. Please call me so we can reschedule.”
I call Sallie back, and after we reschedule I mention my cancella -
tion policy. I explain that unless there are extenuating circumstances, I
will charge her for future appointments unless she calls to cancel at least
48 hours in advance.
She misses her next appointment without calling to cancel.
A second missed appointment is less likely to be due to chance
alone. Unless I am worried that Sallie may be in some danger, I don’t im-
mediately call her after the second no-show.
For Sallie, the process of psychotherapy may feel comforting,
revealing, and frightening at the same time. In response, she may feel
simultaneously pulled toward and pushed away from treatment. If I
call her back immediately after each missed session, she may react in
an avoidant manner. If I wait before contacting her, she may feel less
external pressure to continue therapy and may be able to experience
both sides of her ambivalence. Then, if she decides to pursue treat-
ment, it will be an independent decision, fueled by her desire for emo-
tional relief.
After Sallie’s second no-show, I’ll wait a few days to a week before
calling her.
If I’m unable to contact her directly, my second phone message may
be similar to the first with the addendum: “If I do not hear from you, I
shall assume you are not interested in meeting at this time, and I shall
close your file. If an emergency arises, please contact your nearest emer -
gency room.”
At the end of the month, I will send Sallie a bill, including a charge
for the second meeting that she missed.
With two cancellations in a row, Sallie’s ambivalence about psycho-
therapy is tilting toward aversion and avoidance. Unless the therapy can
help her to talk openly about her recurrent no-shows, her resistance will
continue unabated. If she contacts me in the future, I will make sure that
we talk about the two no-shows shortly after she returns.
No-Shows, Late Arrivals, and Late Departures 167
Sallie calls back a few weeks after her second missed appointment
and my second phone response.
SALLIE: Dr. Bender, I am so sorry I missed my last appointment. But now
that school is out, I’d like to set up a time to meet. I have a lot to tell
you.
T
HERAPIST: Okay. Unfortunately, the times I have available are relatively
limited right now.
SALLIE: That’s okay. I have a very flexible schedule during my break. Just
name the time.
THERAPIST: How is Thursday at 11:00? [ I choose a time to meet that is
very convenient for me. In case Sallie doesn’t show up, I will go to
an early lunch .]
S
ALLIE: Great! Perfect! I’ll see you then. Thank you so much.
THERAPIST: If for any reason, you find that you will be unable to make
the appointment, please call to cancel, preferably 48 hours in ad-
vance.
Thursday arrives. Five minutes after 11:00, I check my voice mail.
Sallie had left a message at 11:00 that she was unable to find a parking
place and would be late for our appointment.
At 20 minutes after the hour, Sallie rushes into the clinic, apologiz-
ing profusely.
S
ALLIE: Dr. Bender, it is so good to finally see you again. I am sorry I am
late. I hope you got my message. I guess I’ll have to talk fast. Re -
cently, I have been really depressed.
THERAPIST: How would you describe the depressed feeling?
For the next 10 minutes, I focus on Sallie’s main concern and assess
whether she is at any risk.
THERAPIST: With all this pain and turmoil, perhaps part of you didn’t
want to come to our sessions to talk about it even though another
part of you wanted some help and comfort.
S
ALLIE: I don’t know. Well, I guess I have felt pulled both ways.
THERAPIST: That is how it is with a lot of people. If you decide you want
to look into it more, we can keep meeting and learn what will be
best for you in your situation. Also, if you want to stop treatment
now because it doesn’t feel like the right time to be in therapy, that
is okay too.
168 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
If Sallie continues to miss sessions after this discussion, she may be
too ambivalent about therapy to continue at this time. Even if she re -
peatedly states that she is interested in treatment, she is “voting with her
feet.” I would follow up with a letter (see Figure 10.1).
My letter purposely does not guarantee future treatment. If Sallie
decides to stop treatment for the time being and then contacts me
months later, ready to start, I will agree initially to meet for only one
consultation visit. After the single-session consultation, Sallie and I can
discuss her treatment options: continuing with me if I have the time
available, placing her name on my waiting list for my next open time slot
if the need is not urgent, or finding a new therapist who can meet her
current clinical needs.
CANCELLATION POLICIES
Cancellation policies vary widely among therapists. Some therapists con-
sider a patient’s session a rented hour and require that the patient pay
No-Shows, Late Arrivals, and Late Departures 169
[Use the clinic’s letterhead.]
Date
Ms. Sallie Gane
1111 Central Street
Boston, MA 02114
Dear Ms. Gane:
I am writing to you because I’m unclear about your decision regarding future
treatment since we last met on MM/DD/YY .
I don’t, of course, have any way of knowing what’s going on with you currently,
but I hope things are better.
If you want to be in touch with me about future psychotherapy, I would be happy
to meet with you to discuss your treatment needs. I wish you well.
Sincerely,
Suzanne Bender, MD
voice mail#
FIGURE 10.1. Letter inviting the patient to resume contact.
for a cancelled meeting if the therapist is not able to find someone else to
fill the time. Some therapists, with more chutzpah than I, even require
the patient to pay for sessions when the therapist is on vacation! Neither
of these policies have ever felt quite right to me.
I tell patients about my cancellation policy during the consultation
or after the patient has missed her first session. I require 48 hours notice
for a cancelled session. I will charge for the missed hour if the cancella -
tion occurs less than 48 hours before the session.
Of course, every rule has its exceptions. I don’t charge for cancelled
sessions until I’ve explained my policy to the patient, and I don’t charge
if the patient cannot come to her appointment due to extenuating cir -
cumstances such as a snowstorm or unexpected significant illness in the
patient or a family member (in other words, an obstruction). A rare pa -
tient may take advantage of this flexibility and concoct incredible ex -
cuses for frequently missed sessions. In such a situation, I may start
charging for all future missed sessions, after explaining to the patient
that I am unwilling to save a session without payment. But this situation
is extremely unusual. Usually, the cancellation policy protects the ther-
apy. Once a patient realizes that she may be financially responsible for a
missed session, I’ve been amazed at how quickly attendance rates im-
prove.
With patients who are using their insurance to pay for treatment,
cancellation policies are not as straightforward. Insurance policies don’t
reimburse clinicians if a patient doesn’t show up. For a private practice,
it may be possible to negotiate a payment agreement with my patient, so
she will pay for abruptly cancelled sessions while the insurance will sub-
sidize the sessions that do occur. (This agreement must comply with any
restrictions outlined by the insurance carrier.) With a clinic practice, I
may not have this luxury, but it is still useful to discuss the recurrent
missed sessions. I’d remind the patient that the appointments that are
not cancelled with adequate notice cannot be made available to patients
who might benefit from them. Sometimes people who are neglectful of
their own well-being (and their own psychotherapy) may act more re -
sponsibly when they realize that their behavior might deprive or harm
others.
Some clinic treaters ask their patients to make a donation to a char-
ity for every missed session. If the patient is able and willing, this policy
can act as an informal cancellation agreement. Since the patient has only
a moral obligation to make the donation, the policy lacks any bite be -
hind its bark.
If after lengthy discussions a clinic patient continues to abuse the
privilege of a weekly reserved hour, I might taper her access to my ser -
vices. Possibly with sessions on alternate weeks, she might be able to
170 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
come more regularly. If the no-shows continue unabated, I might talk to
the patient about deferring further treatment until she can demonstrate
that she is able to proceed on a regular basis. In such a situation, I would
also remind her of the availability of emergency services should the need
arise.
THE THERAPIST IS LATE TO A SESSION
When the therapist is late to a session, a different set of dynamics come
into play.
EXAMPLE 10.6
The therapist is late to the session
On the way to the clinic to see Sallie at 2:00
P.M., I realize that I left
my wallet sitting on the table in the cafeteria. I rush back, retrieve the
wallet, and then run to the clinic. I am 10 minutes late. It is the first time
I have been late for a session since I have started working with Sallie.
T
HERAPIST:( a bit breathless from running to the clinic ) Please come on
in.
SALLIE:( Looks quizzically at me .) So, I have a lot to tell you about
Gwen.
THERAPIST: Yes. I’m sorry to have kept you waiting.
SALLIE: Oh, I knew something unusual must have come up. It’s okay. I’m
not too picky about starting on time.
THERAPIST: If you have any feelings about the fact I was late, please feel
free to share them with me.
SALLIE: Nah, the stuff with Gwen is much more pressing.
THERAPIST: Are you able to stay an extra 10 minutes so we can make up
the time?
SALLIE: Sure, that would be great. [ Proceeds to talk about Gwen ]
Ten Minutes Later
SALLIE: Umm, I did have this weird thought that crossed my mind when
you were late.
THERAPIST: I am glad you bring it up. What was it?
No-Shows, Late Arrivals, and Late Departures 171
SALLIE: Well, I know this sounds paranoid, but I heard about a really
bad car accident on the radio on the way here, and I was worried
that maybe you were in it. Where were you anyway?
T
HERAPIST: You were worried that I was hurt?
SALLIE: Yeah, I felt a little scared.
THERAPIST: Can you tell me what you were scared of?
SALLIE: Umm, well, what if you were badly hurt? I don’t want anything
bad to happen to you. If you were late all the time, I wouldn’t have
been so worried. But you have never been late before so I got sort of
freaked out.
T
HERAPIST: It sounds like it was somewhat frightening.
SALLIE: I guess it was.
THERAPIST: For the sake of our work together, can you tell me more
about what you imagined? What did you imagine had happened to
me in the car accident?
S
ALLIE: I don’t know. That feels like a weird question. I think I’m just
wired this way. I usually get worried when people are late for a
meeting. Gwen might be an exception, though. She’s late all the
time and I don’t ever worry about her. Maybe I don’t care about her
in the same way. [continues to talk about her feelings about people
being late]
While some patients are unable to talk openly about a therapist’s
late arrival (Sallie at the beginning of Example 10.6), others will use the
event to further the therapy (Sallie at the end of Example 10.6).
Over time, it may become clear that Sallie may have a barrage of
feelings about my late arrival. While she may feel concerned and worried
up front, other feelings, including anger or disappointment about the
lost time, may surface in the future.
If I am late for a session, I will extend the meeting to make up for
lost time. Some very traditional therapists will end the session on time
believing it is better to maintain a strict treatment frame and let the pa -
tient express how it feels to pay for a full hour but only receive a portion
of it. We believe it is respectful and fair to extend the hour if other pa -
tients are not adversely affected.
Now and then, I’ll tell the patient some details about my tardiness.
If I arrive at the office covered in grease after changing a flat tire, it
would be absurd to ignore the obvious and pretend nothing unusual had
happened. Early on, I was at risk for sharing too much information
(“My tire was acting strange all week, and I should have taken the sub -
172 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
way. It blew three blocks from the office”), but all the patient really
needs to know is the bare details (“I had to change my tire on the way to
the office”).
Some patients may also become overwhelmingly anxious if I’m late
and may imagine that something terrible has happened in my life. In this
type of situation, providing some information about my situation will al-
leviate the patient’s anxiety and will facilitate a discussion of her emo -
tional reaction.
It is especially meaningful if a therapist repeatedly breaks the frame
with recurrent late arrivals. If such a sequence occurs, one’s first reaction
may be self-critical, but this response is actually the least helpful to the
therapy. To help the treatment progress, it is more useful to give oneself
credit for noticing the pattern of behavior and then schedule a discussion
with a trusted supervisor in order to understand what the actions might
signify. Just as in the case of the patient, once the underlying dilemma
fueling the repeated tardiness is verbalized and understood (in this case,
in supervision), it should become easier to be on time and less necessary
to act in response to the feelings.
No-shows, late arrivals, and late departures are all actions relevant
to the therapy whether they are produced by the patient or by the thera-
pist. By translating the meaning of relevant actions into words, the ther-
apist and patient gain greater understanding of the process and of them-
selves.
Key words: ambivalence, avoidant behavior, counterresistance,
duration of sessions, intersubjectivity, obstruction, psychotherapy,
psychotherapeutic contract, psychotherapeutic frame, resistance
No-Shows, Late Arrivals, and Late Departures 173
11
Confidentiality and Its Limits
Your patient must be able to rely on confidentiality to make the highly personal
and often exquisitely sensitive disclosures that are essential in psychotherapy.
However, your patient should know that if she is at clear risk of harming her-
self or others, your first obligation is to protect. Occasionally, you may need to
break confidentiality to ensure safety.
PROTECTING PATIENT INFORMATION
As a therapist, I am the antithesis of a traditional storyteller. I am a story
holder, privy to the details of my patients’ lives, their most private atti -
tudes, wishes, and disappointments. To protect my patients, I am bound
to a code of silence (or confidentiality, as it is called in professional cir -
cles); if I share information about a patient, it is only under specific and
controlled conditions.
When I started training, it wasn’t easy to adapt to the rules of my
new profession. Emotionally laden information is inherently interesting,
and part of me wanted to describe my patients’ stories with my family
and friends. During social gatherings, it was frustrating to refer to my
work in vague technical terms as I listened to my nontherapist friends
eagerly share the concrete details of their days.
In retrospect, I understand why it was so difficult to maintain confi-
dentiality when I started this work. I craved emotional support after lis -
tening to my patients’ suffering. I needed to debrief, but I wasn’t sure
whom I could tell.
I would have welcomed a “novice therapist information packet”
that outlined the basics of confidentiality. Neophyte therapists need to
174
know how to process their experience while simultaneously protecting a
patient’s privacy. This chapter attempts to satisfy that need.
TELLING THE SUPERVISOR
As my professional contacts increased, it became much easier to main -
tain my patients’ confidentiality during conversations with my friends
and family.
As a part of my training, I was required to review the details of my
patients’ treatments with three or four instructors each week. My as -
signed supervisors, all experienced psychotherapists, provided crucial
guidance and support for my work. As integral members of the treat -
ment team, they also bore some clinical responsibility and authority for
a patient’s therapy. With their help, I was able to develop an effective
treatment strategy for each patient. Disclosure to a supervisor is allowed
by law in most jurisdictions, but these specialized practioners are also
ethically and legally bound to keep all clinical information secure.
My supervisors became my trusted teachers and mentors. Our
weekly meetings provided an approved professional structure in which I
could talk openly about my concerns. With their help, I found it much
easier to tolerate my patients’ distress and to maintain clinical confiden-
tiality.
As part of the informed consent requirement, patients who are
under the care of a trainee need to be told that a supervisor is involved,
from the diagnostic consultation to the therapy that might follow. (For
further information on how to discuss a supervisor’s involvement, please
see Chapter 3.)
EXAMPLE 11.1
The therapist-in-training informs the patient that a supervisor
will advise and guide the therapist
About halfway through our first session, Sallie and I decide on a fu-
ture meeting time, and I tell her about my supervision.
T
HERAPIST: Before we talk a bit more about Charlie, I wanted to take a
moment to tell you about my supervision.
As you know, this is a teaching hospital. One of the advantages
of receiving your care here is that trainees, like me, receive advice
regularly from experienced fully trained clinicians. To obtain that
guidance, I’ll have to give my supervisor information about you. I
Confidentiality and Its Limits 175
wanted to make sure to tell you this early in case you have any
questions about it.
SALLIE: I don’t know. I don’t really want anyone else to know what we
talk about.
THERAPIST: Can you tell me more what you are concerned about?
SALLIE: What will your teachers think of me? I don’t want anyone else to
know my business.
THERAPIST: I understand your wish for privacy. By law, my supervisor is
required to keep the information that I share with him completely
confidential.
It’s important that you know that my supervisors are available
for your benefit, not just mine. With their help, I will be able to pro-
vide you with the most comprehensive treatment.
I still seek clinical advice from my supervisors intermittently, even
though I’ve been out of training for a number of years. This process is
known as a consultation, and it’s a tool even experienced clinicians use
to ensure the quality of the care they’re providing. Consultants are often
selected among highly respected clinicians in the local mental health
community. They usually charge a fee for their services. Unlike supervi-
sion during training, the consultant does not have any clinical authority
or responsibility concerning the case.
During a consultation, I do not disclose my patient’s identity. Unless
there is a chance that the consultant will recognize the patient from the
material presented, I do not need to obtain a patient’s informed consent
for the meeting.
TELLING OTHER CLINICIANS
There are some instances in which I disclose information to my patients’
other health care providers. In general, all clinicians treating a patient,
such as her internist, gynecologist, psychotherapist, or others, have the
right to communicate with each other about a patient’s treatment. Be -
cause psychotherapy is an especially private venture, it’s best if the pa -
tient provides permission for these discussions with a verbal or, best of
all, a written release of information. During discussions with other care
providers, I use discretion and reveal only what is necessary for optimal
medical care. I don’t share irrelevant clinical details that may be poten -
tially embarrassing to the patient.
176 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
TELLING A CONFERENCE
During my residency, my colleagues and I were often asked to summa -
rize a patient’s treatment for a clinical conference. Starting out, I felt
very unsure about how to prepare for the conference but simultaneously
protect the patient’s privacy. To treat a patient with the same deference
and respect she would receive during a session, we think that it makes
the most sense for a patient to know if her clinical story is going to be
presented at a formal conference. Here is one way that her informed
consent could be obtained.
EXAMPLE 11.2
The therapist requests permission to consult a group of
clinicians at a case conference
T
HERAPIST: I’ve been offered an opportunity to consult a group of psy-
chotherapists at a conference. With your permission, I’d like to ask
for their advice about your treatment.
S
ALLIE: Tell them about me?
THERAPIST: Yes, but without revealing your identity. I wouldn’t tell them
your name or the names of any of the people you have mentioned.
Also I’d change a few facts that aren’t essential to make it even less
likely that you could be recognized.
S
ALLIE: I don’t know. They might think my problems are stupid.
THERAPIST: That sounds like what you feel about your problems sometimes.
The people who will attend the conference will all be profes -
sionals. They’ll respect your courage as I have. They will view the
problems you and I are facing as just that: problems to be solved.
SALLIE: I’m not sure.
THERAPIST: You can think about it, and let’s keep discussing it. We don’t
have to decide for a couple of weeks.
SALLIE: Will you be mad at me if I don’t agree to it?
THERAPIST: No, I wouldn’t be a bit mad, and we would continue work-
ing together as we have, but maybe we can learn a little more about
that concern. How does it feel for me to request this of you?
In both oral and written presentations, I would mask my patient’s
identity by referring to her and to important people in her life by a
Confidentiality and Its Limits 177
pseudonym or an initial. For example, Sallie might be referred to as
“X,” and Gwen might be referred to as “Y.” Even without a name, it’s
possible that a clinician at the conference might identify the patient by
the details in the handout. For that reason, I will disguise the informa -
tion further by altering facts that are not essential and by generalizing
where possible. To avoid public dissemination of the handout’s contents,
I will collect all copies at the end of conference. I might keep one copy of
my written presentation for my records, but I’ll shred the rest of the pa-
pers after the meeting.
TELLING COLLEAGUES: WHERE AND WHEN
Sharing psychotherapy tips and discussing cases with my colleagues con-
tinue to be a mainstay of my professional development. With experience,
though, I’ve become more stringent about when and where these discus-
sions take place.
As an eager beginner, I’d try to avoid talking about patients in any
open place where others could easily overhear, but I would have to repri-
mand myself often. I’d be at lunch in an open public area with one of my
fellow residents and we would naturally fall into a discussion of our
week’s work. Occasionally, we’d catch ourselves spouting too much in-
formation midway into the conversation. Judging by my experience and
observations of others, I can predict that many beginners will mention
something about their patients in a public place early in training. Our
hope is that by outlining the risks openly, the readers of this book will
avoid these errors of confidentiality, both for the sake of their patients’
privacy and their own medicolegal security.
I had been a psychiatric resident just a few weeks when a colleague
of mine starting talking about his new psychotherapy patient while we
rode on the subway. Even though he didn’t mention the patient’s name,
he did share a number of identifying features of the patient as well as
confidential information from the psychotherapy hour. I had an unusual
visceral reaction, a mixture of interest and nausea.
Nowadays, I use this physical symptom as a personal cue. It means
that I (or the person I am talking with) need to be more vigilant about
confidentiality. While my method of visceral introspection may seem un-
usual, this sort of self-knowledge (autognosis) can be highly useful in life
in general and in psychotherapy in particular.
Subways aren’t the only common area of risk. Clinic waiting areas
where colleagues converge to wait for upcoming patients can be prime
places to overhear information that should stay behind closed doors.
178 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
Social gatherings, especially if a therapist’s tongue is loosened with some
alcohol, are also potential traps.
With experience, I’ve learned to avoid discussing case vignettes,
even if I think I have sufficiently disguised a patient’s identity, in heavily
populated open spaces—or in closed public spaces like elevators. Even if
it’s unlikely that anyone overhearing the conversation might know my
patient, open discussions aren’t respectful of patients in general and re -
flect poorly on our profession.
If I could “do over” the subway incident, I would have exited the
conversation the minute it felt inappropriate. When the topic became
unsuitable for public consumption, a simple, “I don’t think we should
discuss this here. Let’s talk about it later in a more private place” would
have sufficed.
It is safest to relegate all discussions of patient information to pri -
vate enclosed areas, such as an office. A phone conversation that cannot
be overheard is also acceptable. It’s worth avoiding cell phones as much
as possible because others could theoretically intercept your conversa-
tion. Circumstances and opinions vary about the security of e-mail.
Rules, rules, and more rules. I imagine at least some readers believe
we are proposing an overprotective approach to treatment. It’s true that
our rules may be more strict than those of other health care providers,
but our work is often more sensitive. In some ways, a therapist’s atten-
tion to confidentiality is akin to that of a community religious leader. All
confidential information must be carefully cherished and protected.
Because of the careful attention we pay to confidentiality, practicing
psychotherapy 40-50 hours a week and not being able to talk openly
about work can be a pretty lonely experience. For this reason, many
therapists mix teaching or writing with clinical practice. In public, one
can talk freely about a class, paper, or book that is in progress in con -
trast to the more guarded approach appropriate for psychotherapeutic
material.
WHAT SHOULD YOU WRITE IN YOUR NOTES?
In both my private and hospital clinic practices, I keep two sets of re -
cords for each patient. The offical psychiatric record of each patient at
both sites includes a detailed write-up of the first consultation visit
(chief complaint, past psychiatric and medical history, medications,
etc.), a risk assessment for suicidality, and an outline of the treatment
plan. For each followup visit, I record a short note that documents a
patient’s pertinent medical and safety information. I am very cautious
Confidentiality and Its Limits 179
about what I write in the notes that become part of the patient’s medi -
cal record as this chart may be reviewed by other physicians or by in -
surance companies in the future. (See Figure 11.1 for a record of Sal -
lie’s psychotherapy session.)
For each psychotherapy patient, I also keep a second shadow file
that includes more detailed notes reviewing my patients’ more personal
concerns. These process notes are for my personal use only, and I keep
them in a protected area, separate from the official medical record. They
may include details of each psychotherapy meeting in an “I said, she
said” format, along with nonverbal communications and any questions
and concerns I might think of during and after a patient’s session. I don’t
include the patient’s name on these notes, although it is safe to include a
180 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
Patient’s name Sallie Gane
Date 3/16/01 Time of day 11:30 A.M.
Duration of the session (50’ psychotherapy)
Assessment of suicidality (SI) if appropriate
Occasional thoughts of death, but no wishes, intentions, plans, or actions. Good
plans for immediate future.
Assessment of homicidality (HI) if appropriate
No history of violence. No intentions, plans, or actions.
Current medications
None
Any medication changes
N/A
Any change of symptoms related to medications
N/A
Adverse side effects
N/A
Return to clinic (RTC) date
3/23/01
Supervisor
Edward Messner, MD
Diagnosis
296.21
Treatment goals
1. Recovery from depression
2. Diminish rejection sensitivity
An overview of the issues being discussed (e.g., “family issues discussed” )
Breakup with boyfriend. Conflicts with female friend.
FIGURE 11.1. Information included in a clinical psychotherapy note that will be-
come part of the medical record.
coded designation on the papers, such as the patient’s initials. (For more
information on how to write process notes, see chapter 6.)
Each state has its own laws regarding a psychotherapist’s obligation
to document information. Our recommendations are based on our expe-
rience with Massachusetts law, so it might be worthwhile to understand
your state’s specific guidelines as well.
The two-note standard described herein complies with the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), which will require
a new standard of psychotherapy documentation on a national basis
starting in 2003. These new regulations legally differentiate between
medical record notes and psychotherapy process notes. The medical re -
cord should document medication prescription and monitoring, counsel-
ing session start and stop times, the modalities and frequencies of treat -
ment, results of clinical tests, and any summary of the following items:
diagnosis, functional status, the treatment plan, symptoms, prognosis,
and progress. A separate file, such as process notes, is allowed, and de -
scribed as a record or analysis of the conversations during a counseling
session. The HIPAA maintains that these separate notes are only for the
therapist’s own use, and can be protected from others, including the pa-
tient, payer, other MD’s, and so on.
While process notes are intended only for my personal use, it is cur-
rently impossible to guarantee that no one else will ever read them. For
example, if my process notes are specifically subpoenaed by a court, I
might be legally obligated to share the material. (Currently, legal obliga-
tions differ depending on the jurisdiction.) Because the future is unpre-
dictable, I write all notes with the knowledge that someone else may
read them someday. I avoid writing anything in any record that could be
misunderstood about my own countertransference reaction toward the
patient (disparaging, angry, or sexual feelings toward a patient, for ex -
ample). These feelings deserve processing in supervision or in the clini -
cian’s own therapy, but documentation is risky. In case my notes were
ever subpoenaed, a countertransference feeling or fantasy could be easily
misconstrued by those in the judicial system, and might even be used as
incriminating evidence. In the courts, there is a danger that a docu -
mented thought might carry as much weight as a corresponding action.
THE PATIENT WANTS TO SEE
HER OWN PSYCHOTHERAPY RECORD
Now and then, one of my patients becomes intensely interested in re -
viewing her own psychotherapy medical record. Example 11.3 illustrates
how I might react to such a request from Sallie.
Confidentiality and Its Limits 181
EXAMPLE 11.3
The therapist tries to learn the meaning behind the patient’s
request to see her own psychotherapy records
SALLIE: Dr. Bender, I was thinking after our last meeting that I would
like to review the record of our sessions.
THERAPIST: Could you tell me what you are interested in reviewing?
SALLIE: Nothing really. I would just like to see what your notes say.
THERAPIST: I wonder what has sparked your interest.
SALLIE: Well, I just learned in psychology class that I have a legal right to
review my own records. It sounded kind of interesting. Could we do
it during the next session?
T
HERAPIST: You do have a legal right to review the records, but I think it
is important that we approach this question just like anything else
in therapy. Rather than just acting quickly, we should try to under-
stand your request in more detail together.
S
ALLIE: There’s nothing to it. I am just curious.
THERAPIST: What are you curious about?
SALLIE: I don’t know, but sometimes I do sort of wonder what you think
of me. Maybe it’s a little hard to trust your niceness. So, I’d just like
to check out the record, okay? ( a little defensive )
T
HERAPIST: Can you say more about what is hard to trust about my
niceness?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I’m just interested if what I see is really what I get,
if you know what I mean.
THERAPIST: What do you mean? I want to make sure I understand. (with
an encouraging tone )
SALLIE: I don’t know. I just don’t feel as comfortable talking to you
lately.
THERAPIST: When did you start to feel less comfortable?
SALLIE: Umm, I don’t know.
THERAPIST:( Nods.) [hoping to facilitate Sallie’s associations]
SALLIE: You just seemed a little distracted last week.
THERAPIST:( Nods, empathic look .) Distracted? Can you say more?
SALLIE: Well, I just felt you weren’t as interested as you usually are.
182 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
THERAPIST: Can you tell me any more details? Did I seem uninterested
during the whole meeting or at certain specific points?
SALLIE: I think the whole meeting. I just wondered if you were thinking
about something else. I didn’t want to bring it up though. I know
we all have some days that are better than others.
T
HERAPIST:[ I thought I had listened attentively last week, and I don’t
know what Sallie perceived. I avoid the urge to defend myself.] Did
I say or act in any way in particular that made you feel like I was
thinking about something else?
S
ALLIE: No, I just felt it.
THERAPIST: Do you feel it now?
SALLIE: Maybe a little bit. . . .
THERAPIST: I am glad you could tell me about this, and I can imagine
that it is upsetting to you. I am sorry I added to your discomfort last
week and right now as well. Maybe together we can learn more
about what it going on between us and what I am not understand-
ing.
S
ALLIE: Maybe. (Tears appear in her eyes unexpectedly and she changes
the topic.)
Whenever a patient requests a change in the treatment frame, I try
to understand the meaning behind the request in more detail before
jumping to action. In this example, Sallie focuses on seeing her record
when she feels I am less engaged in her treatment. Jumping to examine
the record with her would have overlooked the concern driving her re -
quest. Her interest in the record becomes less urgent and even unimpor -
tant as the interview delves into the underlying issue.
If Sallie still wanted to see her psychotherapy record after an exten -
sive therapeutic exploration, she has the legal right to do so. This situa -
tion does underline why it is prudent to write one’s records with the con-
sideration that someone else may read them someday. I would share the
medical record version of my notes, as the process notes are written only
for my personal use.
When I share my notes with a patient, we’ll look at it together so as
to avoid any further misunderstandings and confusion. I consider the
discussion as part of the therapy, and it is often very fruitful. Some pa -
tients may wish I had written less, while others may feel that I haven’t
written enough. Either reaction is invariably the beginning of an interest-
ing interchange.
Confidentiality and Its Limits 183
My most challenging experience involving a medical record review
request occurred when a paranoid patient in his 50s with a diagnosis of
depression with psychotic features decided he wanted to review his med-
ical record midway through treatment. He had no insight that his para -
noia was part of his psychiatric disorder, and he was convinced that he
was constantly being monitored by a government agency. I had docu -
mented that his paranoia was part of his psychosis in notes of my ongo -
ing assessment, and I was worried about how he might react when he
read this in his record.
He insisted on examining my notes, and before proceeding we
talked about the process at length. I asked him how he might feel if I had
or had not documented the possibility of a psychotic process in my med-
ical notes. To strengthen the therapeutic alliance while we reviewed the
notes, I documented his reaction during the process as a medical record
addendum. For instance, when he became upset reading about the possi-
bility of a psychotic diagnosis, he dictated: “Rex [not his real name] does
not agree with Dr. Bender’s assessment that his symptoms may be consis-
tent with a diagnosis of depression with psychotic features. He feels very
confident that the unusual phenomena he experienced did happen to
him.” We agreed to disagree about the cause of his symptoms and to my
surprise, the therapeutic alliance not only survived but thrived.
For a subset of patients, viewing the psychiatric record could lead to
a decompensation or even to a suicide or to violence. It would be
countertherapeutic for these individuals to see any part of their medical
therapy record, and I have some legal recourse to protect them. A clinic’s
or an insurance company’s attorney will have the latest information re-
garding one’s legal obligation and rights in this situation. Currently, in
Massachusetts, the therapist can provide a treatment summary to a pa -
tient if she believes that reviewing the complete record with the patient
directly would be clinically contraindicated.
If a patient continues to request her entire record rather than a sum-
mary, a statute in Massachusetts (Massachusetts General Laws, chapter
112, section 12CC) as of the year 2000 does provide some recourse:
If in the reasonable exercise of his professional judgment, the psychothera -
pist believes providing the entire record would adversely affect the patient’s
well-being, the psychotherapist shall make the entire record available to
either the patient’s attorney, with the patient’s consent, or to such other psy-
chotherapist as designated by the patient.
While there is no similar federal statute, it is worthwhile checking
on the particulars of your state’s law. Hospitals, professional associa -
tions, and clinics usually have attorneys available who specialize in these
184 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
types of situations. Whenever I have any legal questions, I obtain exper -
tise early on.
SOMEONE WANTS PERSONAL
INFORMATION ABOUT YOUR PATIENT
In certain instances, I may be asked to divulge information about my pa-
tient to a stranger. Unless it is an emergency, as we will discuss later in
this chapter, I am bound first and foremost to protect my patient’s confi-
dentiality.
EXAMPLE 11.4
The therapist protects the patient’s confidentiality in response
to an unexpected phone call
Therapist’s Office Phone Rings
GWEN: Hello, hello? Is this Dr. Bender?
THERAPIST: This is Dr. Bender. Who is this?
GWEN: Hi, my name is Gwen. I am a good friend of Sallie Gane’s. I
know you’re her therapist. I wanted to call you, because I am really
worried about Sallie. She’s been acting strange lately, sort of distant
or withdrawn. I don’t know if something is very wrong. I figured
you would want to know since you are her doctor.
T
HERAPIST: I cannot confirm whether Sallie Gane is my patient. [I know
that Sallie is searching for other friends and is slowly withdrawing
from Gwen.]
G
WEN: Oh, I know she sees you. I just wanted to check to see if she is
okay. She has been acting so weird lately. I’m pretty worried about
her, and I didn’t know who else to call.
T
HERAPIST: If you want to provide information about someone, I am
willing to listen, but I cannot disclose whether any person is actu -
ally my patient.
GWEN: Well, what if Sallie is suicidal or something? You would need to
do something—right? I don’t think she’s in any immediate danger,
but I don’t want to make any mistakes. A cousin of mine had a
friend who killed herself, and no one saw it coming. So I wanted to
do the right thing here.
T
HERAPIST: What I can tell you is that if any one of my patients were at
Confidentiality and Its Limits 185
risk for harming herself, I would be obligated by law to protect her
and let the appropriate people know about her condition.
GWEN: But you can’t tell me about Sallie specifically?
THERAPIST: I can only share my general policy regarding patient safety.
GWEN: Could you at least tell me if you think she’s going to be okay? I
don’t know if I’m overreacting, but I really am worried about her.
THERAPIST: As you may know, a psychotherapist can reveal information
about someone only with that person’s consent. [ I pause to give
Gwen time to respond .]
GWEN: You can’t tell me anything?
THERAPIST: No. I am sorry if this is disappointing. I’m going to end this
conversation now. Good-bye.
In Example 11.4, I protect Sallie’s confidentiality while also treating
Gwen with respect and empathy, a winning combination. Interestingly
enough, as I have become more comfortable setting and holding limits
within a treatment, it has become easier (and more effective) to link a
polite attitude with firm limits.
I will inform Sallie of Gwen’s call during her next psychotherapy
session. Our therapeutic alliance might increase in strength when Sallie
learns that I am so vigilant about protecting her privacy.
Even when I have a signed consent to talk to another individual
about a patient, I make sure the person on the phone is the person I am
authorized to talk to before sharing confidential information. For in-
stance, if Sallie had agreed that I could talk with a school counselor, I
would confirm the individual’s identity by calling his business number
directly before discussing any clinical issues.
THE INSURANCE COMPANY WANTS
INFORMATION ABOUT YOUR PATIENT
Sometimes insurance companies request a copy of my patient’s outpa -
tient medical record. With rare legal situations as exceptions, I cannot
provide any medical information to another party without a release
signed by my patient.
If a patient authorizes me to correspond with her insurance company,
it is to her benefit if I provide as little personally sensitive information as
feasible. Insurance companies aren’t innocuous institutions interested
solely in a patient’s welfare. It is even possible that they could misuse the
information they obtain to deny present or future treatment benefits.
186 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
Whenever an insurance company asks for a summary of the ongo -
ing treatment, I talk openly with my patient about the information I will
include in the report. Some patients are less worried about confidential -
ity and more concerned that they obtain their full insurance benefits for
mental health, no matter what needs to be revealed. Others are not will-
ing to be so open and may end insurance coverage of sessions prema -
turely in order to protect their privacy. By reviewing with the patient
what information needs to be kept private and what can be revealed to
the insurance company, the therapeutic alliance will be protected. As al -
ways, if I have any doubts, I’ll consult supervisors about their recom -
mended strategies in such situations.
YOUR PSYCHIATRIC NOTES ARE SUBPOENAED
A subpoena is a document that requests the presence of a witness or of
records before a court. While complete coverage of this topic is beyond
the scope of this book, we have outlined a preliminary strategy that we
follow if a subpoena requests a patient’s psychiatric notes. If faced with
this type of situation, we also recommend consulting a supervisor and/or
an attorney to review the specifics of your clinical situation.
One example: I receive a subpoena from my patient’s ex-husband’s
lawyer for my patient’s psychiatric record. Currently, the couple is bat-
tling for custody of their only child. What should I do?
First, I’ll call my clinic’s or hospital’s attorney. If the subpoena isnot
accompanied by the patient’s authorization or a court order specifically
agreeing to or ordering the release of psychotherapy records, the hospi -
tal attorney and I should let the issuer of the subpoena know that I can -
not comply because the patient’s records are privileged under state law. I
will not discuss any details of the records with the ex-husband’s attor -
ney.
At my patient’s next session, I will inform her of the subpoena and
my response to it. I will also call the company providing my professional
liability insurance to inform them of the details of the situation.
If the subpoena includes the patient’s authorization or a court order,
I am required to provide the court with a copy of the patient’s official
medical psychiatric record. I shall also notify my clinic’s attorney and my
professional liability insurance company. In this particular situation, it is
again an advantage to have two sets of patient notes: the official medical
record and my own personal process notes that don’t include the pa -
tient’s name. Personal notes are not official medical record material, and
I can provide the court with the patient’s medical information without
sharing many of her private concerns.
Confidentiality and Its Limits 187
What if the subpoena specifically requests my process notes or
broadly requests any and all records related to the patient? If the attor -
ney obtains a court order or the patient’s authorization, I may be bound
to release my process notes in addition to the medical record. Faced with
this type of complication, I would also return to my supervisor and an
attorney for more detailed guidance.
To avoid this type of situation, some therapists choose not to keep
process notes for therapy cases that have a high likelihood of legal in -
volvement. While this decision is certainly understandable, it’s not a sim-
ple decision. The absence of notes may make it difficult—at least for
some of us—to provide optimal treatment.
Sometimes, my patient may wish to share her psychotherapy re -
cords with her attorney. She may hope the information in the notes will
help her win her lawsuit, whether it be a custody battle or an insurance
dispute. In fact, the release of these records is rarely helpful in a legal
sense, and the decision may have many unforeseen negative emotional
consequences. Once the psychotherapy file becomes part of the legal re-
cord, the opposing side has the opportunity to misuse, misunderstand,
or manipulate the information. If I am subpoenaed to testify, I am re-
quired under oath to answer all questions accurately, even if that means
divulging very private information about the patient. My role as an ad-
vocate could be very limited, and the process may affect future treatment
if the therapeutic alliance is threatened. If a patient requests a psycholog-
ical perspective as part of her legal argument, it is legally and therapeuti-
cally more secure to obtain an independent consultation with a clinician
she will not see for ongoing treatment.
CONFIDENTIALITY MAY BE BROKEN WHEN THE
PATIENT IS A DANGER TO HERSELF OR TO OTHERS
There are a few situations in which it is in the best interest of the patient
or the greater community for the therapist to disclose privileged infor -
mation. In an emergency situation, such as when a patient is suicidal,
homicidal, or unable to care for herself, a clinician has the right—in fact,
the duty—to obtain help. Usually this includes divulging essential infor -
mation about the patient’s condition.
As a beginner, it can be easy to overreact and to bring in an emer -
gency team prematurely when a patient expresses thoughts of suicide
or homicide. I make this mistake in Example 11.5 when Candice Jones
unexpectedly expresses suicidal and homicidal feelings during a ses -
sion.
188 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
EXAMPLE 11.5
The patient recalls a history of physical abuse, expresses suicidal
and homicidal feelings, and the therapist panics
CANDICE: I’ve never talked to you about this before, but I think I under-
stand now why I am having so much trouble sleeping this month.
It’s the anniversary month.
THERAPIST: Anniversary of what?
CANDICE: Anniversary of the day I left home to escape my father and
live with my aunt in Boston. I was just 16. It should be a happy oc -
casion. I don’t know why I always feel so upset around this time of
year.
THERAPIST: This sounds like a very distressing memory. What were you
escaping from when you went to live with your aunt?
CANDICE: I haven’t told you the details about this, but my father used to
hit me all the time growing up. I had lots of company. My mother
and my sister had to deal with it too.
We didn’t tell anyone about it. We all kept the secret together.
At a certain point, when I couldn’t bear it any longer, I left. (becom-
ing increasingly agitated as she talks about this topic )
T
HERAPIST:[ I am worried about Candice’s ability to tolerate these feel-
ings, so I check how Candice is experiencing the discussion .] What
does it feel like to talk about this?
CANDICE: It is infuriating! That man deserves to die for what he did to
my family. When I think about it, I just want to kill my father for
what he has done. Then, I might as well kill myself also. It would be
easier than having to deal with these memories.
T
HERAPIST: I’m glad you could tell me about this incredibly traumatic
time, and I want to learn more about it. I am worried to hear that
these memories are so unbearable that you feel like killing your fa -
ther and yourself. [ I hear increased anxiety in my voice .]
C
ANDICE: Well, that’s the way it is. That son of a bitch should get what
he deserves.
THERAPIST: I am sorry, but if you are at risk of hurting yourself or any -
one else I must take you to the emergency room to be evaluated. [ I
call hospital security to escort Candice to the emergency room .]
When Candice becomes overwhelmed with affect, I panic and move
Confidentiality and Its Limits 189
into crisis mode before clarifying whether she actually has any true in -
tent or plan to hurt her father or herself. While it is always better to be
cautious, my reaction is based on fear rather than on a thorough assess -
ment.
A deeper evalution would have obtained additional information be-
fore leaning toward an emergency room consultation. Figure 11.2 out -
lines the pertinent questions I need to answer in order to decide whether
Candice is safe to leave the office and go home. If Candice doesn’t have a
history of acting on her destructive feelings (a history of violence is a
strong predictor of future violence) and can assert that she doesn’t have
a current intention or plan to hurt herself or others, it’s likely that her
threats are solely an expression of her distress.
If I still feel unsure whether Candice or her father is at risk after a
more detailed assessment, I would send Candice with an escort for fur -
ther evalution in the emergency room. While I will need to share perti -
nent clinical information with the crisis team, I can still safeguard most
of Candice’s confidences from our previous sessions. (See Chapter 9 for
more information on patients’ crises in general.)
Whatever I decide to do, my note will document the details of my
suicidal and homicidal assessment and will state the reasoning behind
my treatment decision.
Example 11.6 illustrates a strategy I might employ if Candice is sui-
cidal and/or homicidal with intent and a plan.
190 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
The therapist can ask, “Have you had a(n) ______?”
Of others Of self
Fleeting thought of death
Passive wish for death
Active wish for death
Intent to pursue death
Plan to pursue death
Actions to implement the plan for death
For each of these questions, the therapist can also ask whether the patient has had
previous experience with these thoughts, feelings, and actions, and whether alcohol or
other psychoactive drugs were involved. These factors increase a patient’s present
and future risk.
FIGURE 11.2. Suicidal or Homicidal Assessment Chart.
EXAMPLE 11.6
The therapist carefully assesses suicidality or homicidality in a
high-risk patient
The scene opens with Candice becoming increasingly agitated as she
talks about years of physical abuse by her father.
CANDICE: Dr. Bender, he deserves to be punished for his behavior. He
was never legally charged for his crime. I still have chronic knee
pain where he kicked me when I was 13. That son of a bitch should
die. Someone needs to make him pay for his actions.
T
HERAPIST: I agree that your father’s behavior was reprehensible, but I
am also wondering if you have thought about being the one to exact
revenge?
C
ANDICE: I have, in fact. Next week I’ll return to Florida to see my
mother, and I plan to stop by and see my father. It’s time that he suf-
fer the consequences of his actions.
T
HERAPIST: Make him pay in what kind of way?
CANDICE: Like I said, Dr. Bender, he deserves to die. I’m not worried
about jail. Maybe after he’s gone, I’ll be ready to die too. I haven’t
decided on the specifics yet.
T
HERAPIST: Let’s think it through together. How would you make him
pay?
CANDICE: I don’t know. I’m not sure if I’ll have the guts to go through
with it, but it’s definitely what he deserves. I’m not sure what will
happen, but I can’t promise. . . .
T
HERAPIST: Promise?
CANDICE: I don’t know. I am just thinking about my options.
THERAPIST: Which options have you considered?
CANDICE: I’d rather not say. Let’s just pretend I never brought this
up.
THERAPIST: It’s a lot better for you and for our work together if you talk
to me about this openly.
CANDICE:( increasingly manipulative) I’m not interested in discussing it
anymore.
THERAPIST: We need to talk about this here or, to protect you, we can
walk down together to the emergency room downstairs and talk
there.
Confidentiality and Its Limits 191
CANDICE: Dr. Bender, I feel you are acting intrusive. This is my private
decision, and I would rather not talk about this anymore.
THERAPIST: I hope we can work through this together, but my first prior-
ity is for your safety. I’d like to bring in some other clinicians to get
additional opinions on this situation. [I reach for the phone and re-
quest security, using a code word to come to my office and to escort
Candice to the emergency room .]
If Candice were cooperative, I’d assess her homicidal impulses to -
ward her father in detail. To protect Candice and her father, I need to
know if she is truly planning to hurt her father in the near future by as -
sessing her intent and plan. When Candice becomes increasingly provoc-
ative and refuses to answer my questions, I am legally obligated to con -
tinue the evaluation until I can adequately assess both her safety and the
risk to her father as a potential victim.
I don’t need to tell Candice about my legal obligation to protect her
father at this point. By managing her distress in a structured setting, I
can protect both parties at once. Either Candice and I need to talk until
we have formulated an effective and protective treatment plan, or I need
to make sure that she is evaluated immediately in an emergency facility
During the emergency room visit, my colleagues and/or I can decide
whether Candice is safe to go home or whether she requires hospitaliza-
tion to protect herself and her father. If Candice has access to a firearm,
it should be turned over to the authorities as part of the crisis interven-
tion. I would only contact Candice’s father as a last resort, for example,
if Candice elopes from treatment. I’d much prefer to contain her with
therapeutic means, such as a locked inpatient hospitalization. The pro -
gram would provide the necessary intensive patient care while protecting
the potential victim and preserving the patient’s confidentiality.
In Example 11.6, I call the hospital’s emergency security number to
ask for assistance in moving Candice from the clinic to the psychiatric
emergency room. If I were in a private office and I were unable to con -
vince my patient to obtain an emergency assessment, I would consider
calling the police to escort my patient to the nearest emergency facility. If
my patient flees from the office, I will ask the police to locate her and
then to take her to the nearest hospital for an evaluation.
I have the legal responsibility under laws that vary from state to
state to protect a potential victim from an impending assault and to re -
port information about a violent crime that might occur in the future. In
Massachusetts, and many other states, clinicians are also required to re -
port any potential or ongoing abuse or neglect that puts children, the el-
derly, or the disabled in harm’s way. However, as a therapist, I do not
192 FRAME AND VARIATIONS
have the responsibility to report details of a crime that has already oc -
curred. In fact, this information is protected under the confidentiality
agreement of the therapy.
Confidentiality is a complicated issue that pervades all aspects of
psychotherapy. As a therapist, I have a fiduciary duty to safeguard a pa-
tient’s privacy and physical safety. In specific instances, I also have the
conflictual duty to disclose information in order to protect the safety of
the patient or of other individuals. Each case is unique, and even with
some experience with these issues, I have a low threshold to consult a su-
pervisor and/or an attorney when new questions emerge.
Key words: communication, confidentiality, consultation, court
orders, data storage, disclosure, disguised information, duty to
report, electronic data storage, ethics, exceptions, fiduciaries,
informed consent, litigation, medical records, patients’ access to
records, privileged communication, process notes, psychotherapy,
psychotherapy records, subpoena, supervision, trust, waivers
Confidentiality and Its Limits 193
Part III
Chemistry
12
Substance Abuse
For a patient struggling with substance abuse, drug-seeking may become the
major focus of life, overriding personal relationships and occupational responsi-
bilities. Self-deception and deception of others around issues involving drugs
are cardinal aspects of substance abuse.
Early in treatment, a patient with chemical dependence may deny that
she has a problem. The interpersonal and situational problems that beset the
patient will rarely be resolved effectively while the substance abuse continues.
The psychotherapy of a patient who is actively abusing substances re-
quires some special strategies. Early detection, firm but empathic confronta-
tion, consistent encouragement, and patience in responding to slips and lapses
are necessary to help the patient recover.
The comprehensive treatment of patients with substance abuse is a clini-
cal subspecialty. This chapter attempts to provide an introduction for clinicians
learning to treat this set of patients.
When I started practicing psychotherapy, I had both the enthusiasm of a
true believer and the naiveté of a novice. I believed in the power of psy -
chodynamic psychotherapy to alleviate distress, and I didn’t see the need
to alter the approach based on the patient’s needs. The basic strategy
seemed foolproof—every individual would experience sustained emo -
tional growth if he or she had the opportunity to talk about the past and
to connect its difficulties with the present.
While my model was well intentioned, it wasn’t long before I real -
ized that one treatment modality can’t be applied effectively to every pa-
tient. When a patient begins to talk about past or current emotional con-
flicts in psychotherapy, her anxiety level is likely to increase before it
subsides. For most patients, this increase in anxiety is relatively short-
lived and tolerable, but for patients with less well-honed coping mecha -
197
nisms, an immediate focus on emotionally stressful material may be
destabilizing. This is often the case for the patient who is actively abus -
ing substances.
In response to the flood of feeling that accompanies an intense
psychotherapy session, the substance abuser is apt to turn to alcohol
or drugs to manage her distress. If the therapy continues to uncover
conflicts without calming the patient’s increasing dysphoria, the sub -
stance abuse and all related difficulties are likely to get worse instead
of better. For treatment to be effective for this group of patients, the
traditional psychodynamic insight-oriented approach needs to be mod -
ified.
To formulate the most effective treatment strategy for a new pa -
tient, I try to identify whether she has an active substance abuse problem
within the first few visits of the consultation. Doing this takes some clin-
ical finesse, because both nonusers and active users will deny drug con -
sumption when asked about it directly.
In this chapter, we will focus on the treatment of a new hypothetical
patient, Mr. Anthony Lee, a 35-year-old business consultant who begins
therapy because of increasing feelings of depression over the preceding
several months. In Example 12.1, I fail to identify Anthony’s active sub-
stance abuse problem during my initial assessment.
EXAMPLE 12.1
The therapist does not recognize that her new psychotherapy
patient is also an active substance abuser
During the First Three Consultation Meetings
ANTHONY: So, I don’t really understand why I feel so down, Doc, but
one of my best friends encouraged me to at least try therapy, so here
I am. I figured it couldn’t hurt.
T
HERAPIST: I’m glad you took this first step to get some help; it sounds
like you have really been suffering. Could you tell me, during this
tough time, have you ever tried to drown your sorrows in alcohol or
drugs?
A
NTHONY: Nah. I just drink with my friends after work. It’s part of the
business culture. Nothing to really worry about.
THERAPIST: When you drink, how much do you drink?
ANTHONY: Nothing out of the ordinary. Maybe a beer or two at most.
THERAPIST: Okay.
198 CHEMISTRY
Example 12.2 illustrates how I could clarify my patient’s substance
abuse more accurately during the consultation.
EXAMPLE 12.2
The therapist identifies her new psychotherapy patient as an
active substance abuser
During the First Three Consultation Meetings
THERAPIST: During this tough time, have you tried to drown your sor -
rows in alcohol or drugs?
ANTHONY: No. I just drink with my friends after work. It’s part of the
business culture. Nothing to really worry about, Doc.
THERAPIST: When you drink, what is your drink of choice?
ANTHONY: Oh, just beer mainly, especially the local brews made here in
Boston. At this point, I’m a bit of a connoisseur, if I say so myself.
It’s a fun hobby.
T
HERAPIST: How much beer can you hold down in one sitting? [I appeal
to Anthony’s machismo, which may help him to report his actual
use rather than to minimize his intake .]
A
NTHONY: Oh, I don’t know, maybe two or three beers at a time. If it’s a
long night, I may have a few more. Nothing to worry about though.
It never affects my work performance.
T
HERAPIST: Can you hold down four to six beers in a few hours?
ANTHONY: Oh, definitely. That’s not a problem.
THERAPIST:[ A tolerance for four to six beers at one sitting may be exces-
sive for any individual, but especially for Andrew, who is 5’8’’ and
not obese. This information suggests that his liver has developed an
increased capacity to metabolize alcohol. My concern that Anthony
may be actively abusing alcohol has increased. ] How often do you
go drinking? Every night? [ My guess is purposely high so Anthony
won’t feel embarrassed in case he is actually drinking that often .]
A
NTHONY: Oh, not that often. Just a few times a week, at the most.
THERAPIST: Including weekends?
ANTHONY: Usually Saturday night—socially—and I might drink a little
on Sunday afternoon if there is a football game.
THERAPIST: Have you experimented with any drugs?
ANTHONY: Well, I used to smoke pot in college, but I do that only occa-
Substance Abuse 199
sionally at parties these days. I never buy the stuff, but I may take
part in the festivities, if you know what I mean. At my work, this is
a normal part of the social scene.
T
HERAPIST: Ever tried any other drugs? Cocaine? Heroin? Pills?
ANTHONY: I’ve made it a point to stay away from the hard drugs, Doc.
Didn’t want to get addicted, you know.
Hey, I know you are just doing your job, but I don’t think we
need to focus on this so intently.
THERAPIST: Right now, I’m just trying to understand what role alcohol
and drugs play in your life. All these substances can affect mood
and may contribute to the “down” feeling you are describing to me.
I have four questions I ask everyone about alcohol and drug
use. I’d like to review them with you now. [I prepare to review the
CAGE questionnaire—a list of four screening questions have been
specifically developed to identify surreptitious alcoholics or sub -
stance abusers.]
A
NTHONY: Okay.
THERAPIST:[ I ask the first CAGE question .] Have you ever tried to cut
down on your alcohol and/or drug use at any point in your life?
ANTHONY: Well, drugs have never been a big deal for me. I am trying to
cut down a little bit on my drinking now, but there’s a good reason.
My first year at my consulting firm, I wanted to make a good
impression with my boss, and he spends every evening after work in
the local pub. I made a special effort to keep him company after
hours talking shop, and it paid off. We’ve got a great relationship,
and if I can knock down a few more brewskies than I could last
year, well that only makes it easier to keep up with my colleagues on
our nights out.
This year though, I am trying to cut down on my pub meetings
to about two to three times a week because I’ve gained a fair
amount of weight. Alcohol and chips isn’t the greatest diet, I guess.
My mother started to worry I was malnourished because my only
vegetables were the olives on the bar nachos. Unless you count the
ketchup on the burger ( grins). You know what I mean.
My diet has improved though, and I recently joined a health
club near work. So far, this year I’m much healthier than last.
T
HERAPIST: That sounds like progress in taking better care of yourself. [I
note privately that the answer to Question 1 is yes and move on to
Question 2 .] Has anyone ever gotten annoyed at you for your
drinking or your drug use at any time in your life?
200 CHEMISTRY
ANTHONY: Let me think. I don’t think so. Most of my friends and busi-
ness buddies drink as much as or more than I do. Oh, there was one
woman I briefly dated last spring who was concerned about my
drinking, but I really think she was overreacting. Maybe some of
my buddies have a problem, but in contrast, I’m a total lightweight.
T
HERAPIST: Have you ever been annoyed at someone for bothering you
about your drinking?
ANTHONY: I don’t think so. Well, maybe I got a little annoyed at Angela,
the woman I dated, even though I knew she had my best interests at
heart. She did fixate on my drinking; I really think she was overre -
acting.
T
HERAPIST:[ I silently note that the answer to Question 2 is yes .] Have
you felt guilty about your drinking or drug use ever in your life?
ANTHONY: Just when Angela kept drawing my attention to it. I liked her
a lot, even though I’m complaining about her now. The relationship
just petered out after a few months. I think I was too busy to get in-
volved with anyone seriously last year.
T
HERAPIST:[ I note the answer to Question 3 is yes .] Do you ever drink
or use drugs in the morning to help get you going after a long night
of partying?
A
NTHONY: Oh, no! I would never do that!
THERAPIST:[ The answer to Question 4 is no .] This information is im-
portant, and may help us understand the depressed feelings you
have described to me. The alcohol may be affecting your mood in
ways you haven’t considered.
In Example 12.2, I use the CAGE questionnaire (C-Cut down, A-
Annoyed, G-Guilty, E-Eye-opener) to evaluate Anthony’s current alcohol
problem. While these four questions were orginally developed to screen
for alcohol abuse, I also use them to evaluate any concurrent drug abuse.
The questionnaire purposely avoids questions about quantity or fre-
quency of drug use as most patients will minimize this information. Re -
search has found that if a patient answers “yes” to more than one ques -
tion on the CAGE questionnaire, there is a greater than 80% chance that
he (or she) has a substance abuse problem. With three “yes” answers
(like Anthony), nearly all respondents are sufferers from alcohol or drug
abuse or dependence. (For more information on the CAGE question -
naire, see Chapter 5.)
Once I’ve identified substance abuse as a significant problem in a
patient’s life, I start to strategize. If I don’t choose my words carefully
Substance Abuse 201
when I talk to Anthony about his excessive alcohol use, he may become
defensive and withdraw. On the other hand, the treatment will undoubt-
ably suffer if I ignore the fact that he is drinking too much too often.
EXAMPLE 12.3
The therapist confronts her patient about his substance abuse
in an authoritative and ultimately nontherapeutic manner and
then colludes with the patient to ignore the mounting evidence
that the patient has a substance abuse problem
I have just reviewed the CAGE questionnaire (as illustrated in Ex -
ample 12.2).
T
HERAPIST: As I think about your answers to my questions about alco -
hol, I wonder whether you are drinking excessively, and whether
this should be our first focus in your treatment.
ANTHONY: Oh, I don’t think my drinking is a problem. I don’t drink
anymore than any of my friends. I don’t drink every night. My work
reviews have been excellent. Not what you would see with an alco-
holic, I would think.
T
HERAPIST: Have you ever gotten into any trouble with your drinking?
ANTHONY: No, not at all. Doc, I hate to say this, but you may be overre-
acting because your circle of colleagues has fun in a very different
way than mine. I don’t see shrinks being the drinking type. My
work is different. Socializing is a big part of what I do. I don’t think
you need to worry. My drinking is not a big deal.
T
HERAPIST: Why doesn’t it feel like a big deal to you?
ANTHONY: Well ( sounding irritated), because it’s not. I don’t see how
you came to this conclusion in the first place. I’m not at all worried
about my drinking.
T
HERAPIST:( becoming somewhat authoritative and a little defensive )
Well, I am worried about your alcohol use. The questions I asked
you have been used for years to screen individuals for alcoholism.
The data have shown that if a person answers more than two of the
questions affimatively, it is highly likely that a substance abuse
problem exists. Now, we can ignore this information, or we can use
it to benefit our work together. I’m concerned that if we ignore it,
any work that we do would be unlikely to make you feel better. Al-
cohol is a depressant, and if we don’t address your drinking head
on, your suffering is likely to continue, or even get worse.
202 CHEMISTRY
ANTHONY:( Responds with an offensive approach) Look Doc, I appreci-
ate your concern, but I came to see you because of the difficulties I
have had concentrating at work and this depressed feeling I some -
times get. If anything, alcohol makes me feel better, not worse. I
didn’t come to you to talk about my social life with my work bud -
dies. My interactions with these guys is one of the few parts of my
life that is fun, and it isn’t causing any problems.
THERAPIST:[ I feel intimidated and unsure. I don’t want to make Anthony
more upset than he already is .] Okay, maybe I’m wrong. Can you
tell me about how you view your difficulties?
ANTHONY: Well, it’s like this . . .
Anthony becomes more defensive and oppositional when I confront
him about his alcohol use in a direct, rather authoritative manner. In an
attempt to avoid further conflict and salvage the therapeutic alliance, I
switch topics before we reach any mutual understanding about his use of
alcohol. Neither strategy helps Anthony consider treatment for his ex-
cessive drinking.
Example 12.4 illustrates a more effective way to talk openly but
sensitively to a patient in denial about a substance abuse problem.
EXAMPLE 12.4
The therapist sensitively confronts a patient with an active
substance abuse problem who is in denial
I’ve just reviewed the CAGE questionnaire (as illustrated in Exam-
ple 12.2).
T
HERAPIST: From what you have said, your drinking sounds risky. It
would be in your best interest if we were to start treatment by fo -
cusing on this problem.
ANTHONY: Oh, I don’t think my drinking is a problem. I don’t drink any
more than any of my colleagues. I don’t drink every night and I
don’t drink alone. It’s more of a social thing.
T
HERAPIST: I understand that you don’t see it as a problem. Maybe you
aren’t aware of the difficulty yet, but alcohol can cause trouble
quickly.
A
NTHONY: Nah, I appreciate your concern, Doc, but you don’t have to
worry. What I’m here for is to understand why I feel depressed most
of the time nowadays. If anything, drinking makes me feel better.
Substance Abuse 203
THERAPIST: I agree that it is very important to understand why you have
been feeling so depressed lately. Many people don’t realize that
drinking may exacerbate a low mood. Although alcohol can make a
person feel better briefly, over time it can act as a chemical depres -
sant, affecting mood in a very negative way. I wouldn’t be doing
you any favors by ignoring this potential problem.
A
NTHONY: I think alcohol has been one of the few joys left in my life, to
be honest. What’s your point? What would you want me to do dif-
ferently?
THERAPIST: Well, for starters, would you be willing to have some blood
tests? They could give us some indication of whether alcohol has af-
fected your body.
ANTHONY: Sure, but you’ll see. I’m sure the tests will be normal. I’m
very healthy.
THERAPIST: I hope that’s true, but we need to keep a very close eye on
this. Have you ever been in any legal trouble related to your alcohol
use, or otherwise?
A
NTHONY: No, never. See, it’s not that bad. I came in for help with my
depression. That’s my biggest concern at this point.
THERAPIST: It’s a very good point. We won’t lose sight of the fact you are
struggling with depression. [ I make a point to use Anthony’s terms
to describe his melancholy mood .]
Because alcohol can act as a depressant, it may help to stop
drinking. Alcohol may be making you feel worse in the long run
rather than better.
A
NTHONY: I don’t really understand. A beer after a long day of work
just helps me relax. What could be wrong with that?
THERAPIST: As the blood level builds up, alcohol can feel relaxing, but
over time, even days later, its chemistry fosters depression.
ANTHONY: Alcohol is the great escape from all my day-to-day pressures.
I don’t want to give it up.
THERAPIST: This is a worrisome statement. Alcohol seems to be helping
you cope during a difficult time, and this can lead to further prob -
lems. In therapy, we can try to find ways for you to deal with your
worries that don’t have such destructive potential.
ANTHONY: You sure are stuck on this point. You really think it’s that
important?
THERAPIST: I do.
204 CHEMISTRY
ANTHONY: This just doesn’t sound right to me. I’m not an alcoholic; I’m
a businessman who drinks. Most of us do.
THERAPIST: What does the the term “alcoholic” mean to you?
ANTHONY: You know the image. The homeless guy asking for a quarter
with a bottle inside a brown paper bag. You have to agree. That’s
not me at all.
T
HERAPIST: That’s certainly not you, but only 3% of alcoholics are on
“Skid Row,” and the other 97% have other kinds of problems. I’m
glad you have been doing so well at work, but from what you have
told me, it is likely that the alcohol use may be involved in the de -
pression that is bringing you down.
A
NTHONY: Doc, I think you are chasing an issue that really doesn’t ex -
ist. I don’t want my therapy to focus on drinking when it isn’t really
a problem.
THERAPIST: I understand that you don’t see this as a problem, but alco-
hol can be dangerous the way that you have been using it.
ANTHONY: Boy, you are really serious, I guess. ( Looks a bit upset .)
THERAPIST: Yes.
ANTHONY: Well, if you really think it’s that important, I guess I can get
the blood tests and try to stop drinking for a week to see if it helps
me feel better.
Example 12.4 illustrates a number of therapeutic tactics a clinician
can employ when talking to a patient about a potential substance abuse
problem.
First, I concentrate on educating Anthony on the physical and emo-
tional dangers of his current alcohol use, while avoiding a lecturing tone.
I don’t use phrases such as “I’m very concerned about . . . ” or “I’m con-
vinced you have a problem . . . ” because they subtly pit my opinions
against his beliefs. Instead, my statements review the facts while exclud -
ing my opinion within the sentence structure: “Because alcohol can act
as a depressant, it may help to stop drinking as alcohol may be making
you feel worse in the long run rather than better.”
Second, I don’t use authoritative phrases such as “You should,”
“You need to,” or “I think that this is definitely the issue here.” Instead,
my statements refer to the patient’s own words: “From what you have
said . . . ” and “I understand that you don’t see this as a problem. . . . ”
By excluding directive comments, I am more likely to solidify the thera -
peutic alliance and to make a useful intervention.
Substance Abuse 205
For the intervention to work, I need to impart the same message of
empathy and concern for an active substance abuser as I might for any
other patient. The moment the patient feels that I am judging him unfa -
vorably, his defensiveness will increase, and my ability to be effective
will be impaired.
To support this process, it often helps to externalize the substance
abuse problem so the patient and I can critically examine it together. Al-
cohol is personified and discussed as a problem, separate from the per -
son who is drinking it. I use this strategy in Example 12.4 when I com -
ment, “As the blood level builds up, alcohol can feel relaxing, but over
time, even days later, its chemistry fosters depression.” This statement
carries a very different emotional valence than “When you drink, your
alcohol level builds up, and that causesyour depression to get worse.”
By using the cognitive and empathic approaches outlined above, I
let Anthony know that it is in his best interest to focus on alcohol use
during his treatment. I can order liver function tests (GGTP, SGOT,
SGPT, CAMP, alkaline phosphatase, MCV; acronyms are spelled out in
the “Key words” section) and a complete blood count to assess whether
Anthony has any liver damage associated with his increased alcohol con-
sumption. Anthony could obtain these tests at his primary care physi-
cian’s (PCP) office or at an outside laboratory. Since non-MD therapists
do not have the option of using an outside laboratory for testing, they
will need to refer the patient to his PCP for a medical workup.
Once Anthony agrees to discuss his substance abuse openly within
the treatment, the therapy should proceed with a slightly different slant
from that of a traditional insight-oriented psychotherapy.
EXAMPLE 12.5
Typical therapy session with a substance abuser in the very
early stages of recovery
A
NTHONY: Doc, it feels like a month since our meeting last week.
Damn, it was a difficult week at work!
THERAPIST:( concerned look) What happened?
ANTHONY: Well, my boss (Remember the one I told you about who
drinks every night? His name is Bruce, by the way.) had some sort
of vendetta against me this week. I’m not the only one who has no-
ticed it. While he used to go out of his way to help me out, over the
last 7 days he has become obsessed with critiquing my work. I think
the greatest joy of his day is pointing out what’s wrong with me. It’s
all I can do to stay calm in the office.
206 CHEMISTRY
THERAPIST: I can understand that this would be very upsetting. Has he
ever done this before?
ANTHONY: Never. In general, I get along with him better than most of
my colleagues. I worked so hard to create a place for myself at
this firm, this is NOT what I need right now. I hear his ex-wife is
in town this week, and maybe that’s why he is being such a pisser.
Whatever the reason for his attitude, it’s making my life impossi -
ble.
T
HERAPIST: How are you feeling?
ANTHONY: I feel like crap. Who wouldn’t?
THERAPIST: How are coping with feeling so badly?
ANTHONY: Ummm, well, I went drinking last night with some friends
from work and that helped. A little escape can do wonders, you
know.
T
HERAPIST: How much did you drink?
ANTHONY: Not much, just a few beers.
THERAPIST:[ I remember that Anthony is likely to minimize his alcohol
intake. Also of note: In the last session he had agreed to abstain
from alcohol because it is a mood depressant. Clearly Anthony
wasn’t able to avoid drinking for even a week.] How long were you
able to keep from drinking since our last session?
A
NTHONY: Oh, yeah, I didn’t forget our discussion that alcohol could be
making my depression worse. I didn’t touch the stuff until yester-
day. At that point, I needed any pick-me-up I could find. It was a
hellish day. Bruce was impossible.
T
HERAPIST: You wanted to drink because it helped distract you after
Bruce was so unreasonable?
ANTHONY: Yes, but so what? A lot of people have a drink or two after a
hard day at work.
THERAPIST: How do you think alcohol helped you to feel better?
ANTHONY: Well, I was so angry and the beers helped me feel mellow
and back to normal. It was such a relief to take a break from the
stress and have some fun.
T
HERAPIST: The conflict with Bruce is very stressful.
ANTHONY: Yeah, it is.
THERAPIST: I agree that it is very important to have a way to relieve your
stress after dealing with Bruce. Alcohol seems to work in the short
Substance Abuse 207
term, but it will ultimately increase your level of stress by exacerbat-
ing your depression.
Maybe we need to think together about other strategies that
will help you cope with Bruce without worsening your depression.
ANTHONY: What do you mean?
THERAPIST: Can you think of other ways to release stress other than
drinking?
ANTHONY: Well, I feel better after I work out.
THERAPIST: Working out is a great way to feel better, and it improves
physical and emotional health. How often do you exercise?
ANTHONY: I try to go to the gym a couple times a week, but work has
been too busy lately, so I haven’t been able to go for a while.
THERAPIST: If you aren’t able to make it to the gym, what other ways
can you decrease your stress?
ANTHONY: Other than drinking?
THERAPIST: Yes.
ANTHONY: Umm, well, I do like to watch sports, especially football.
THERAPIST: But you told me you drink beer on Sundays when you watch
football.
ANTHONY: But that would be easy to give up. The sport itself is like a
drug for me. I love it so much.
THERAPIST: Why football specifically?
ANTHONY: I played in high school and in intramurals in college. I was
the quarterback both times.
THERAPIST: Are they good memories?
ATHONY: Yeah. I’m too small to be really good, but I love the game.
Plus, when I was playing often, I was in good shape and hung
around with some great guys. They are still some of my best friends.
T
HERAPIST: How would it feel to try these two activities—working out
and watching sports—instead of drinking this week when you feel
stressed?
A
NTHONY: Sure. I’ll give it a try.
During the next 2 months, Anthony and I discuss many different
adaptive mechanisms to help him deal with stress. During each discus -
sion, he seems interested in trying new alternative coping mechanisms,
such as imagery, music, or social activities, that don’t involve alcohol.
208 CHEMISTRY
However, he admits that he continues to drink heavily and frequently. It
is time to talk about Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) to augment his current
treatment plan.
Midway into Our Next Session
THERAPIST: When alcohol is used to help with emotional pain, it can end
up causing more problems than it helps. Often, it can be helpful to
talk to others who have coped with similar difficulties and hear
what other methods they have discovered that don’t involve drink -
ing.
A
NTHONY: Where would I do that?
THERAPIST: I have a list of Alcoholics Anonymous meetings that meet in
the financial district and attract people in professions that are fast-
paced like yours. What would you think about attending one?
A
NTHONY: WHOA! This is too much! I had a night out with my friends
last night, but I am not an alcoholic, and NO WAY am I going to an
AA meeting! Look, I know this is on the top of your agenda, but I
think your focus on my alcohol use is more annoying than thera-
peutic.
T
HERAPIST: I don’t intend to annoy you, but I understand how our dif-
ferences of opinion can have that effect. It has been difficult for you
to give up drinking these past months. Doesn’t that concern you?
A
NTHONY: Look, if that’s what you are worried about, then I’ll just stop
drinking, cold turkey. I’d rather stop drinking altogether than to
have to keep returning to alcohol as a central topic.
T
HERAPIST: Okay, let’s see if you are able to stop cold turkey one more
time. But if you are unable to stop drinking altogether, then I think
it will be time to start recognizing the hold that alcohol has on you.
A
NTHONY: Okay, if I don’t stop. . . . But when I do, you’ll see that you
have worried unnecessarily. Don’t get me wrong. I appreciate your
concern. I just think it is misplaced. And I don’t see any AA meet -
ings in my future . . . ever.
T
HERAPIST: That would be your decision, of course, but I hope that the
meetings won’t be seen as a punishment but rather as the next indi-
cated step in treatment. I wouldn’t be providing good care for you if
I just ignored the alcohol problem.
ANTHONY: Yeah, well it’s a non-issue. No more alcohol use for me,
period. I’m always up to a challenge. I don’t think it will be that dif-
ficult.
Substance Abuse 209
THERAPIST: I would have no trouble being proven wrong, but you need
to let me know if you do drink again.
ANTHONY: Sure, I think that is fair.
THERAPIST: Let’s take it step by step together and see what happens. I
think we should continue to try to find other methods that help you
to feel better and to improve your depression.
The discussion in Example 12.5 is much more structured than some
of the other therapeutic interchanges modeled in this book. First, when
Anthony starts talking about his current difficulties with Bruce, I don’t
delve deeply into his feelings about this relationship. I purposely avoid
questions that might evoke an intense reaction, such as “Can you tell me
more details of what you feel when Bruce criticizes you?” or “Does he
remind you of anyone else in your life from the past?”
These explorations can come later, after Anthony has some health -
ful coping mechanisms in place. To conquer Anthony’s ongoing sub-
stance abuse, we spend our time recognizing the events that trigger alco-
hol use, strategizing how to reduce or avoid these events when possible,
and introducing alternative coping methods.
Bruce’s treatment of Anthony is a good example of the social pres-
sures that oppose sobriety. Often, people drink when they feel lonely or
misunderstood, and a social structure of other heavy drinkers supports
the habit. Becoming sober may become more difficult if Anthony loses
his special social connection with his boss when his alcohol consumption
decreases.
When Anthony’s drinking continues unabated, I introduce AA as a
possible adjunctive treatment. AA supports sobriety because it provides
ongoing contact with sober people in recovery who help the patient bat-
tle loneliness without alcohol or drugs. It adds what a patient with ex -
cessive drug use may be unconsciously seeking: the soothing effect of so-
cial support combined with techniques to fight addiction.
When Anthony balks at this recommendation, I agree to his chal -
lenge to pursue abstinence one more time. It is a no-lose proposition: Ei-
ther Anthony’s drinking subsides or he will have new insight into the se-
verity of his substance abuse when he is unable to abstain. The treatment
alliance is reinforced, and the patient’s needs are protected.
Psychotherapy with active substance abusers is slow work. If An -
thony continues to avoid additional substance abuse treatment, such as
AA, medications to reduce his desire for alcohol, or alcohol abuse clin -
ics, I will continue to analyze his resistance in a supportive empathic
manner. If his drinking escalates and he begins to endanger himself or
others, I might start to recommend a more intensive intervention, such
as day treatment or an inpatient stay, as the next therapeutic step.
210 CHEMISTRY
ANTISOCIAL BEHAVIOR IN ACTIVE SUBSTANCE ABUSERS
Active substance abusers also require a special therapeutic touch because
they are likely to exhibit comorbid antisocial behaviors. Such behaviors
might not remit until the patients have been abstinent for a prolonged
period of time. It makes some psychological sense: If a person is
ashamed of her substance use but is also psychologically and/or physi -
cally addicted to a drug, deceptive behavior patterns are likely to follow.
It’s not unusual for active users to lie, to minimize their drug use, and to
pursue illegal behaviors (stealing) to obtain more of the drug. In fact,
whenever I have any suspicion that substance abuse may be an issue, I
make a point of asking the patient if she has had any troubles with the
law.
Often, the deception that affects the active user’s relationships with
her family and friends eventually infects the user’s relationship with her
therapist. When a patient relapses multiple times, she is unlikely to con -
fess to each incident and may lie or minimize her substance use. As the
therapist, I’m most effective in this situation if I maintain a sensitive but
extremely firm therapeutic stance. Early in treatment, I may rely on the
patient’s report to track substance abuse. At the first signs of dishonesty,
I’ll either ask for corroborated information from a significant person in
the patient’s life or introduce other methods, such as urine screens, to
monitor drug intake objectively.
As a naive beginner, I had a humbling experience treating an active
substance abuser with a substantial antisocial streak. I saw the patient,
whom I’ll call Roy, in weekly substance abuse/psychopharmacology ses-
sions for about 6 months. He was an aspiring artist in his early 20s who
had been an active heroin abuser for about a year when circumstances
led him to seek treatment at the clinic. He adamantly denied any prior
substance abuse during his adolescence. Despite my repeated attempts to
focus the treatment on his heroin use, he identified depression and anxi-
ety as his primary problems. We compromised by talking about both.
At first, the treatment seemed like a success in the making, and I
was pleased with Roy’s progress. Within the first few months of treat -
ment, he moved away from the neighborhood in which his heroin-abus -
ing friends congregated. He agreed to attend two Narcotics Anonymous
(NA) meetings a week. I didn’t ask for written proof of attendance, since
he related the details of each meeting during our sessions.
Then, after approximately 30 days of sobriety, he relapsed. I recom-
mended that he start additional counseling from a substance abuse spe -
cialist to supplement our weekly meetings. He was reluctant to pursue
this, but after 2 more weeks of active using, I insisted that he add this to
his treatment program. I also asked that he allow open communication
among his various treaters in order to facilitate comprehensive care. He
Substance Abuse 211
agreed, although without a lot of enthusiasm. He reported the next week
that he had started seeing a clinician, “Morgan Murphy,” at the MGH’s
substance abuse specialty clinic.
According to Roy, he was sober at this point, but he continued to
complain of newly emerging difficulties in his relationships with his fam-
ily and friends. He complained that no one understood him. Everyone
was judging him. He didn’t feel he could trust anyone in his life. I won-
dered whether he had relapsed, and I called the substance abuse specialty
clinic in order to discuss my concerns with Ms. Murphy.
I quickly discovered that Ms. Murphy did not exist, and that Roy
had only attended one assessment visit at that clinic. They hadn’t seen
him for weeks. When I mentioned this to Roy, he also confessed that
he had stopped going to his twice weekly NA meetings months ago.
He was a little embarrassed at being exposed, but he kept repeating
that he hadn’t been interested in seeing the substance abuse counselor
in the first place. A toxicology screen was positive for heroin metabo -
lites.
I was naive to trust that Roy would tell me the truth about his ad-
diction. Still, I felt foolish and furious after I learned that Ms. Murphy
existed only in fantasy. I had a taste of the deception that Roy’s family
and friends coped with on a daily basis.
As Roy’s clinician, I needed to understand my first reaction, but
then to respond in a way that was therapeutic, rather than impulsive or
angry. I turned to Dr. Messner for supervision, and we worked together
to set up a treatment protocol that would acknowledge Roy’s vulnerabil-
ity but protect the therapy from a similar deception in the future. It’s a
fine line we walk as therapists: trying to understand without condoning
self-destructive behavior.
My confrontation with Roy went something like this:
EXAMPLE 12.6
Confronting an active substance abuser who has been lying
about his treatment compliance
Moments after I Tell Roy That I Discovered “Morgan Murphy”
Doesn’t Exist
THERAPIST: If you lie about something to your doctor, it must be very
precious to you.
ROY: Look, Dr. Bender, I am really sorry. I kept intending to go to that
clinic, but I like you as my therapist. I didn’t want to see anyone
else.
212 CHEMISTRY
THERAPIST: Psychotherapy depends upon truth. Unless we are honest
with one another, we aren’t really conducting psychotherapy, and
your distress is unlikely to improve with treatment.
R
OY: I’m sorry I lied to you. I’ll try to tell you the truth from now on.
THERAPIST: I am glad you feel comfortable working with me, but be -
cause heroin addiction is so powerful, your treatment should in -
clude additional supports, such as NA meetings and work with the
substance abuse clinic. I will continue to work with you as we have
been doing if these extra supports are in place.
R
OY: Well, I’m not really using that much that often anymore. The last
time was about 2 weeks ago. I think I can taper off. I’ve got the
message now, and I promise that I’ll tell the truth to you from now
on.
T
HERAPIST:[ I remember that Roy is probably lying .] If an emotionally
difficult situation presents itself, your first impulse is to use drugs
and then to deny it.
R
OY: Only now and then. Not always.
THERAPIST: I’m glad you aren’t using all the time, but heroin is so ad-
dicting I think you need to follow a new treatment plan in order for
our work to have a fighting chance.
R
OY: What do you mean?
THERAPIST: In order for us to work together weekly in psychotherapy,
you need to have weekly urine toxicology screens, confirmation of
substance abuse meetings and weekly individual meetings with a
substance abuse counselor. From now on, I plan to be in touch with
your counselor on a regular basis.
R
OY: Are you kidding? I don’t want to do all that stuff.
THERAPIST: Apparently we disagree, so we might need some time to re -
solve our differences. I’d like to discuss it with you for a month or
two. After 4–8 weeks, you’ll need to comply with this treatment
plan if we are to continue working together in psychotherapy.
R
OY: Well, what if I refuse to do it?
THERAPIST: Of course, that is your choice, but then our weekly work to-
gether would end for the time being. I’ll continue to see you every
4–6 weeks to monitor your medications.
If you’d like to transfer your care elsewhere, I can provide you
with the names of other clinics. For emergencies, you will need to
go to your local psychiatric emergency room or to the one at this
hospital.
Substance Abuse 213
ROY: Why are you doing this to me?
THERAPIST: If I am to work with you in psychotherapy, I need to know
that your addiction is also being treated aggressively. I don’t want to
stand around ignoring the problem while your increasing use could
lead to serious injury or death. I can’t make you stop using, but I
also don’t want to support your addiction.
R
OY: But you are my doctor. You can’t just leave me like this.
THERAPIST: If you won’t comply with the treatment contract, I am un -
willing to act as your psychotherapist, but I will continue as your
psychopharmacologist.
ROY: Ha! You sound like you are trying to get rid of me.
THERAPIST: Not at all. I’m offering 4–8 sessions for us to discuss the new
treatment plan. As we talk about the addiction, you may recognize
that the new approach has the best chance of helping you recover. If
you still refuse to do it, we’ll only meet intermittently regarding
your medications. Maybe, over time, you’ll make some progress
recognizing the substance abuse problem. [ I externalize “the prob-
lem” as outside of Roy, which makes it more tolerable and less
shaming.]
With 20:20 hindsight, I realize that I should have insisted early on
that Roy provide me with objective evidence of attendance in the adjunc-
tive treatment programs. I might have also considered frequent urine
toxicology screens from the treatment’s beginning. Another important
addition to the treatment would be patient-authorized contact between
the clinician and someone in the patient’s life—a spouse partner, relative,
or friend—to monitor clinical progress. With a less impaired patient, it
might make sense to start with a more trusting policy. With a patient
struggling with a severe addiction, a structured approach is necessary
from the start.
Roy and I continued to work together for 2 months after the con -
frontation illustrated in Example 12.6. He continued to deny the severity
of his substance abuse and insisted that his relapse was just temporary.
After repeated reminders, I followed through with my plan and ended
therapy for the time being. Therapists, just like family and friends, can
enable active substance abuse by ignoring its severity.
Unfortunately, after the therapy ended, Roy dropped out of treat -
ment altogether. Roy decided not to meet with me on an intermittent
check-in basis. Following Dr. Messner’s suggestion, I sent him a letter by
certified mail with a return receipt, letting him know he was welcome
214 CHEMISTRY
back for medication treatment. He didn’t respond. Evidently, he still
wasn’t ready for any substance abuse treatment.
Clearly, treating patients struggling with active substance abuse re -
quires special clinical skill. Because their treatment is specialized and
complicated, we recommend that your supervisor for these patients be
an expert or at least be richly experienced in the treatment of active ad -
diction. He or she will teach you when and how to guide patients to -
ward the different treatment options available (AA and NA meetings,
detoxification centers, inpatient hospitalization, psychopharmacological
options, and partial day programs).
The clinical recovery of an active substance abuser takes much pa -
tience and determination on the part of the therapist as well as powerful
motivation on the part of the patient. With an empathic attitude and a
sensitive but insistent identification of the emotional triggers that lead to
active use, the therapist can help the patient learn when she is at risk.
Over time, more healthful coping mechanisms can be put into place. Af-
ter the patient has at least 6–12 months of continuous sobriety, the ther-
apist can cautiously try a more open-ended psychotherapeutic approach.
With some sober supports in place, the patient may be able to tolerate a
more insight-oriented psychotherapy and the increased affect that might
emerge in its wake.
Key words: Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), alkaline phosphatase, cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (CAMP), CAGE questionnaire,
detoxification, diagnosis, drug counseling, gamma glutamyl
transpeptidase (GGTP), mean corpuscular volume (MCV),
Narcotics Anonymous (NA), Rational Recovery, serum glutamic
oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT), serum glutamic pyruvic
transaminase (SGPT), twelve-step programs
Substance Abuse 215
13
Integrating Psychopharmacology
with Psychotherapy
Either an overeager drive in favor of medications or a bias against their use
may interfere with optimal psychiatric treatment. If psychotropic medications
are indicated, the clinician needs to talk to her patient about the risks and ben-
efits of the treatment and to respond to any concerns the patient may have.
Appropriately prescribed medication may enable the depressed, panicky,
manic, or psychotic patient to engage more meaningfully in the work of psy-
chotherapy. Depending on the specifics of the clinical situation, it may be pref-
erable to have separate treaters provide the medication and the psychotherapy.
As an undergraduate majoring in psychology, I debated the impact of
nature versus nurture on human behavior. As a psychiatrist, I view the
two as inextricably intertwined. Experiences affect biology, and biologi-
cal changes may affect experiences. For example, the complex alter -
ations in brain chemistry seen in clinical depression may affect a person’s
ability to relate to others. The converse is also true. Emotional events
from birth onward have an impact on brain development. It makes sense
that comprehensive psychiatric treatment may include both biological
(medication, electroconvulsive therapy [ECT], or others) and psycholog-
ical (the psychotherapies) interventions.
Psychotherapeutic and pharmacological treatments ought to enrich
one another. The detailed understanding of the patient derived from psy-
chotherapy can inform the choice of medication. Meanwhile, when psy -
chiatric symptoms endanger life, the appropriate medications can accel -
erate recovery and enhance the psychotherapeutic process.
Some psychodynamic therapists worry that the introduction of
medications will alter the transference in a countertherapeutic manner.
216
Patients might leave psychotherapy prematurely once they feel some
symptomatic relief. Traditionalists believe that the patient may have
more difficulty transferring her feelings from other important relation -
ships onto the therapist when the clinician assumes a directive, rather
than neutral, stance around psychopharmacological issues.
As a graduate psychoanalyst and a prescriber of medicine for more
than 30 years, Dr. Messner has found (as I have with my increasing ex -
perience) that an effective and empathic psychopharmacological inter -
vention will nearly always help a therapy to evolve. As the patient feels
understood and experiences some relief through the medications, the
therapeutic alliance will be enhanced. With increased emotional stability,
the patient may be less distracted by her symptoms and more able to talk
meaningfully about all issues. The transference will become more acces -
sible to the therapy rather than less. (For more about transference, see
Chapter 16.)
Table 13.1 lists a range of psychiatric symptoms that are associated
with some of the Axis I disorders in DSM-IV. If a patient’s ability to
function is substantially and repeatedly impaired by even a few of the
symptoms listed, we recommend a psychopharmacological evaluation in
conjunction with psychotherapy.
When I am prescribing medications for a patient who sees another
clinician for psychotherapy, I’ll ask both the patient and the referring
therapist for specific details about the recent increase in troublesome
symptoms as part of my assessment. The information may highlight
troublesome target symptoms and help me to choose the appropriate
psychotropic medication.
HOW PSYCHOTHERAPY MAY BE AFFECTED
BY THE INTRODUCTION OF MEDICATIONS
Elaine Barber, a new fictitious patient, will illustrate some of the clinical
dilemmas that may emerge when a psychotherapy patient is started on
medications. Elaine is a 32-year-old single high school English teacher
who only suffers from a few mild symptoms of depression when we first
start working together. We begin insight-oriented psychodynamic psy -
chotherapy once a week. As treatment progresses over a few months,
Ms. Barber experiences a progressive decline in functioning with an in -
crease in dysphoric symptoms. As her psychotherapy continues, it be -
comes necessary to reassess whether she may need psychotropic medica-
tions.
Example 13.1 exaggerates a mistake I made again and again before
I became comfortable acting as therapist and psychopharmacologist
Integrating Psychopharmacology 217
simultaneously. Early on, I’d worry that my therapy patient would feel
annoyed if I spent precious minutes running through psychopharmaco -
logical questions, even if it were clear that she would benefit from a
psychotropic medication. To return to a discussion of psychosocial is -
sues, I’d rush through my inquiry as quickly as possible.
EXAMPLE 13.1
The therapist does not complete a thorough
psychopharmacological evaluation for a psychotherapy patient
ELAINE: Dr. Bender, while I’ve enjoyed talking to you, I must admit that
I don’t think the therapy is helping me. I’ve been seeing you once a
week for a few months now, and over the last 3 weeks or so, I’ve
218 CHEMISTRY
TABLE 13.1. Target Symptoms That May Be Improved with Psychopharma -
cological Treatment
Mood disorders
Symptoms of major depression
Disturbances of sleep, interest, energy, appetite, concentration, with concurrent
depressed mood and/or irritability, and possibly suicidality
Symptoms of a variant of bipolar disorder
Distractibility, impulsivity, grandiosity, flight of ideas, increased activity, de -
creased sleep, and talkativeness
Thought disorders
Delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, disorganized behavior, or severe
withdrawal
Anxiety disorders
Panic attacks with or without agoraphobia, persistent inhibiting fear in social
situations, recurrent distressing obsessions or compulsions that affect the
patient’s ability to function
Posttraumatic stress symptoms including flashbacks, nightmares, avoidance of
stimuli associated with the trauma, general numbing of affect, hypervigilance,
or irritability
Eating disorders
Bulimia: binge eating followed by purging (self-induced vomiting or abuse of
laxatives)
Substance use disorders
Craving for or excessive consumption of alcohol or drugs
started to feel worse instead of better. I am only sleeping a few
hours a night now, and I am exhausted at work. I’m barely func -
tioning during the day.
THERAPIST: You have really been suffering. Is your appetite also af -
fected?
ELAINE: Not really. I just don’t feel hungry.
THERAPIST: I think we should discuss starting some medication that
could help you with these symptoms. It sounds like your symp -
toms have progressed over the last few months so they are now
consistent with a diagnosis of major depression. Here is a pre -
scription for paroxetine. Start taking one pill a day and you will
begin to feel better in a month or so. Now, let’s think together if
there are any stressors that could also be making things more dif -
ficult now.
E
LAINE: Well, in general, I feel lonely all the time. But wait, I’m not sure
I want to take a pill.
THERAPIST: Okay. You don’t need to start the medicine right away. We
can wait and see if you feel better as we learn more about the loneli-
ness. Can you tell me more?
In Example 13.1, I rush through the psychopharmacology evalua-
tion in order to talk to Elaine in more detail about her loneliness. The re-
view of psychiatric symptoms isn’t complete, and the risk of suicide is
overlooked. I also don’t inform Elaine of any of the risks, specific bene-
fits, and possible side effects that may occur with paroxetine treatment.
In fact, this evaluation borders on medical negligence.
Example 13.2 illustrates a more complete approach that balances a
psychopharmacological and a psychotherapeutic perspective.
EXAMPLE 13.2
How to talk to a psychotherapy patient about starting
medications
Elaine begins as in Example 13.1.
E
LAINE: Dr Bender. . . . I’m barely functioning during the day.
THERAPIST: It sounds like things have gotten more difficult instead of
easier. When did you notice the change?
ELAINE: Well, everything seems to have become just unbearable over the
last few weeks. I’m not sleeping at all any more. I’ve never felt this
horrible before.
Integrating Psychopharmacology 219
THERAPIST: Clearly, we need to pay special attention to these problems
right away. Any idea of what might be making things worse?
ELAINE: No, it is a mystery to me. I feel upset most of the time, and I
don’t even have a good idea why.
THERAPIST: I can imagine that would be very upsetting. Let’s take a little
time and see if we can try to understand this together.
Because you have been feeling so low, it is possible you may
have a major depression. May I ask you a few questions to get more
information about your current symptoms?
E
LAINE: That would be fine.
THERAPIST: You mentioned that your sleep has been troublesome. In
general, how many hours of sleep have you been getting?
ELAINE: Oh, I don’t know, not enough. Maybe 2 or 3 hours on average.
THERAPIST: It would be very difficult to function on such little sleep.
Have you missed any days of work?
ELAINE: Last week, I stayed home on Wednesday because I just couldn’t
manage to haul myself out of bed. That’s unusual though. In gen-
eral, I’ve been going to work.
T
HERAPIST:[ briefly screening for history of mania in case I hadn’t done
so during the consultation ] Have you ever experienced any time in
your life where you didn’t need much sleep but felt unusually ener-
getic and very productive at work?
E
LAINE: No, I’ve never had anything like that. I’ve always been very
sensitive to sleep deprivation. That’s why I am so exhausted these
days.
T
HERAPIST: During the last few weeks, has your appetite been affected?
ELAINE: I hadn’t really noticed this, but now that you mention it, I have-
n’t been very hungry lately. Food just doesn’t look interesting any-
more.
THERAPIST: Have you lost any weight?
ELAINE: I’m not sure, but my clothes do feel a little more loose. I didn’t
notice until you asked.
THERAPIST: Have you been able to concentrate at work even though you
have been feeling so badly?
ELAINE: Of course not! ( with an irritable tone ) It’s impossible to func-
tion adequately on so little food and little sleep. I don’t know if my
students have noticed that I am acting strangely, but I’m sure they
will soon. I used to feel energized when I left work, and now I’m ex-
220 CHEMISTRY
hausted before lunch time. I can’t cope with this much longer! I
don’t know what is happening to me.
THERAPIST: The symptoms you are suffering from are classic indicators
of an illness called major depression. As you are experiencing it,
major depression is very serious because its symptoms are so debili-
tating. Sometimes when someone is having such a tough time,
thoughts of suicide come up as well. Has this happened to you?
E
LAINE: Sure, sometimes I think about it, but I don’t think I would act
on it. Not at this point anyway.
THERAPIST: What do you think about?
ELAINE: When I am feeling very low, I imagine jumping in front of a car
or out of a window—something like that. But it’s just a passing
thought. I don’t think I could ever act on it, at least not yet. I still
have hope that I’ll feel better someday.
T
HERAPIST: I think there are a number of treatment options that may
help you, but first let’s talk a bit more about your safety. If you ever
have a change of heart and want to hurt yourself, would you call
me right away or find your way to the nearest emergency room if
we weren’t able to connect immediately?
E
LAINE: I think so.
THERAPIST: Do you promise?
ELAINE: Yes, yes, I don’t want to die. But I don’t want to feel like this
anymore either. Is there anything you can do to help me?
THERAPIST: Yes: prescribe medications. Major depression can be viewed
as a chemical imbalance in the central nervous system. Medications
can return the imbalance back to normal and alleviate a number of
distressing symptoms usually within about 2 to 4 weeks.
E
LAINE: Two weeks is a long time.
THERAPIST: It is a long time, especially since you have been feeling
poorly for a number of weeks already. Some of the symptoms, such
as your difficulty sleeping, might improve even sooner.
E
LAINE: But I heard that some of these antidepressants either act like a
happy pill and change your personality or work the other way and
make you suicidal. I don’t want a pill that affects how my mind
works.
T
HERAPIST: Can you tell me more about your concerns?
ELAINE: Well, is it true? I don’t want to turn into a Pollyannna and feel
happy about things that are upsetting, and I don’t want to become
Integrating Psychopharmacology 221
more suicidal than I already am. I’m not comfortable with the idea
that a drug might change the way I see the world.
THERAPIST: I am glad you bring up these questions. It is a common
worry that an antidepressant will change a person’s personality or
make her a “Pollyanna.” Luckily, this isn’t the case. The medica -
tions help diminish the symptoms I reviewed with you: trouble
sleeping, eating, concentrating, and feeling motivated. The very low
feeling and intermittent suicidal thoughts should also improve with
treatment, but the medicine won’t shield you from the ups and
downs of everyday life.
E
LAINE: But what about this news story I heard a long time ago that
these medications made some people suicidal?
THERAPIST: When the first of the new antidepressants came on the mar -
ket, there was concern that it might be associated with an increased
suicide rate. Since then, this claim has not been supported. In fact,
according to extensive research on the subject, none of these new
antidepressants have been associated with an increase in suicides.
On the contrary, antidepressant treatment reduces the risk of sui-
cide.
E
LAINE: I feel so low I think I am ready to try anything. You really think
it is a good idea?
THERAPIST: I do. You are suffering from symptoms that can usually be
treated effectively and safely. But, now, before I know which medi-
cine to recommend, I need to ask you a few more questions about
your medical history.
E
LAINE: Fine, but this whole process still makes me nervous.
THERAPIST: What makes you nervous about it?
ELAINE: I’m concerned what this might mean about my brain. Am I so
weak that I can’t tolerate the basic stressors of life?
THERAPIST: I think the best way to think about major depression is to
compare it to other diseases that sometimes require medication to
improve. If you had diabetes, high blood pressure, or asthma, you
probably would not consider your illness a sign of weakness. The
type of depression you have is also an illness. It’s different from the
blue mood people get when they had a bad day. In a way, you al -
ready know this because you can feel that this state is so different
from anything else you’ve ever experienced.
E
LAINE: I still feel very odd about taking a medicine that will change the
way my mind functions.
222 CHEMISTRY
THERAPIST: Research shows that when a person is depressed, the chemi-
cal balance in her brain is abnormally altered. The medications ac -
tually return these chemical changes and your brain function to
their normal predepression state.
ELAINE: It’s possible I have a weak character. Otherwise, I would be able
to make myself feel better.
THERAPIST: It is the depression itself that makes a person feel weak. The
illness isn’t a reflection on your character.
ELAINE: It’s true that I haven’t been feeling myself lately.
THERAPIST: It’s clear that it has been very hard on you to suffer like this.
ELAINE:( Nods tearfully.)
THERAPIST: Well, I think it is crucial that we continue to talk about this
openly and approach the problem as a team.
ELAINE: Okay.
My interview in Example 13.2 balances psychopharmacological
and psychotherapeutic approaches. Before I recommend a medication
trial, I complete a structured interview to clarify Elaine’s diagnosis and
to evaluate her safety. While my approach is more focused and cognitive
than during a typical therapy hour, I make sure to leave ample time to
discuss Elaine’s misgivings about psychotropic medications.
As Elaine lists a number of neurovegetative symptoms that are im-
pairing her daily ability to function (such as decreases in sleep, energy,
concentration, appetite, and ability to experience pleasure, accompanied
by an intensification of depressed mood, hopelessness, and suicidality),
it becomes clear that she is suffering from major depression. I confirm
once again that she does not have any history of mania. (Antidepressants
given to patients with bipolar disease might instigate a manic reaction.)
Antidepressants should provide her with substantial relief.
One might argue: “Maybe Elaine hasn’t had enough time to benefit
from therapy. If you just gave her more time to talk about the problems
in her life, her condition might improve without medications.” Elaine’s
symptoms may also improve with long-term therapy, but we believe that
she needs a more aggressive approach as her functioning declines and
her risk of suicide increases. A medication trial is clinically indicated.
Before writing out a prescription, I would inform Elaine of the ad -
verse effects and benefits of the recommended medication. I would re -
view the common side effects with her, as well as what to do if any of the
side effects occurred between sessions.
Note that the use of paroxetine as the medication mentioned in
Integrating Psychopharmacology 223
these examples does not represent a general clinical recommendation.
Paroxetine is a member of a class of antidepressants called selective sero-
tonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Other excellent, efficacious, and safe
members of this class include citalopram, fluoxetine, sertraline, and others.
INFLUENCES OF PSYCHOTROPIC MEDICATION
ON THE THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP
While psychopharmacological treatment will not hinder the psychother -
apeutic process, therapy does change with the introduction of a prescrip-
tion. If I am acting as both therapist and psychopharmacologist, I need
to balance the open forum of psychotherapy with the more structured
medical evaluation. Once the patient starts taking the medication, I need
to inquire about efficacy and side effects on a regular basis. Some clini -
cians formalize this arrangement as part of the treatment and set aside
some time each month or at each prescription refill to follow-up on psy-
chopharmacological issues.
With experience, it has become second nature to balance the two
clinical roles. As a novice therapist though, I found it difficult to juggle
the two approaches. Once I had prescribed medication for a patient, I
was at risk of attributing any future symptoms to dosages or side effects.
Example 13.3 illustrates how it’s possible for the psychopharmacologic-
al “hat” to get stuck on the prescribing therapist’s head.
EXAMPLE 13.3
The therapist becomes too medically oriented after the patient
starts taking a medication
Elaine has been taking paroxetine for treatment of a major depres -
sion for approximately a month.
E
LAINE: I’ve been feelng better since taking the paroxetine—until yester -
day that is.
THERAPIST:( concerned look) What happened?
ELAINE: Well, I was just thinking a couple days ago how I’ve been feel -
ing so much better the last few weeks. But, then yesterday, I was
unable to function again. I’m concerned that maybe the medication
isn’t working after all.
T
HERAPIST: This sounds upsetting. Can you tell me more about what felt
so bad?
224 CHEMISTRY
ELAINE: Last night I tossed and turned for hours. I think I only slept 3
hours last night.
THERAPIST: How is your appetite?
ELAINE: Well, it was a little better, but then last night I felt so nauseated
that I skipped dinner completely.
THERAPIST: Let me ask you a few more questions. We may need to in -
crease the medicine.
ELAINE: Oh, I was wondering about that also.
It is notable that Elaine had been feeling much better until the night
before our appointment. Usually, antidepressants don’t change efficacy
from day to day. In this example, I don’t ask many detailed questions
about Elaine’s change in mood, but prematurely jump to a review of her
current neurovegegative symptoms. This is an oversight. Maybe some -
thing upsetting occurred yesterday that can explain Elaine’s renewed dif-
ficulties.
It isn’t unusual for a patient who has just started on medication to
attribute any new emotional distress to “the depression,” ignoring any
psychosocial issues that may be involved. It’s easy to collude with this
approach, as I did in Example 13.3. Manipulation of medication doses
may be simpler for both parties than the empathic detective work neces-
sary to understand a psychological reaction.
Example 13.4 illustrates how Elaine’s concerns could be addressed
with a combined biological and psychological perspective.
EXAMPLE 13.4
When the psychotherapist incorporates both biological and
psychological perspectives
Elaine has been taking paroxetine for treatment of a major depres -
sion for about a month.
E
LAINE: Well, I was feeling better for a time, but now I feel worse again.
The medication is no longer working.
THERAPIST: It’s always difficult when things take a turn for the worse.
Can you tell me what happened?
ELAINE: Well, yesterday, the day seemed to be progressing fine but then
all of sudden, I just felt like crying.
THERAPIST: Hmm, any understanding of what could have made you feel
so sad?
Integrating Psychopharmacology 225
ELAINE: No . . . not really. I must need a higher dose of medication.
THERAPIST: I think it will be important to review your progress on the
paroxetine, but let’s try to understand when the terrible feeling
started.
E
LAINE: I think I was fine until lunch, and then all my energy seeped out
of me, and I left work early to go to bed. I felt exhausted. And then,
last night, even though I was extremely tired, I still couldn’t go to
sleep. Dr. Bender (voice becomes more panicked), I cannot return to
the way I was feeling before. Couldn’t you just increase the medica-
tion?
T
HERAPIST: We can consider that option together, but first can you tell
me what went on at lunch yesterday? Did anything upsetting hap -
pen?
ELAINE: Well, the talk I had with Agnes really upset me. I don’t know if
I’ve told you about Agnes before. She has worked as a teacher’s aide
in my classroom as part of an internship before she receives her
teaching degree. She has been just wonderful to work with.
She had heard some gossip from some of the other teachers
that she shared with me yesterday. We have a new principal this
year. She has been friendly, but no one knows what type of agenda
she might have.
According to Agnes, she wants to restructure the entire English
department. She feels the students need to have an understanding of
all the classic texts, and wants to emphasize this in a revamped cur-
riculum. I don’t like this idea, especially because my favorite class to
teach is Modern American Literature.
Then, Agnes told me that Irene ( the principal ) may want to
cancel my creative writing class as well. This is a class that I have
taught for over 5 years. The kids love it. I love it. I don’t know why
she would do that, but it would be a great loss for me. At this point,
this information is just gossip, so I don’t feel comfortable asking
Irene if it is actually going to take place.
T
HERAPIST: How did it affect you to hear this news?
ELAINE: I felt terrible. Up until now, I have felt so free and supported at
my school. If this is true, my whole experience at the school may
change in a fundamental way.
The writing class was my creation, and it is very popular among
the students. The class is my favorite hour of the day. I become very
close to the students. Teaching wouldn’t be as fulfilling if I’m not al-
lowed to offer this elective. If Agnes is right, this is very depressing news.
T
HERAPIST:( Nods, with encouraging eye contact with Elaine. )
226 CHEMISTRY
ELAINE: And this time of the year is especially heinous for me.
THERAPIST: How so?
ELAINE: Well, it’s November 2nd today. In just a few weeks it will be
Thanksgiving, and then Christmas is right around the corner.
THERAPIST: What feelings come up when you start to think about
Christmas?
ELAINE: Christmas has never been a happy time for me.
THERAPIST: What was last Christmas like for you?
ELAINE: Last year, I drove to Washington, D.C., to spend some time
with my father. It didn’t go very well. Since my mother died a
couple of years ago, he’s been a mess. He drank too much the en -
tire visit. Oh, I don’t want to go into the details right now, but it
was a disaster.
T
HERAPIST: A disaster?
ELAINE: Completely. But being alone is worse.
THERAPIST: And now the unexpected news that you might lose a class
you love to teach must certainly add to this distress.
ELAINE: Yes. You can see why I am feeling so depressed.
THERAPIST: Yes, I hope we can talk more about both topics, but it’s be-
ginning to make sense to me why yesterday was such a difficult day
for you. You were facing two very upsetting situations, just when
you were beginning to feel a tiny bit better.
E
LAINE: But maybe it is a medication issue.
THERAPIST: Well, let’s take a little time to review the symptoms that the
paroxetine should improve. Before yesterday, how were you sleep -
ing and eating?
ELAINE: Fine, both had improved. But, like I said, the last 24 hours have
been unbearable.
THERAPIST: Have your energy and concentration improved at all since
being on the paroxetine the last few weeks?
ELAINE: Before yesterday, I was doing much better overall.
THERAPIST: Before we started the medication, you would think about
dying or hurting yourself but didn’t have any intention to act on it.
How is that now?
E
LAINE: It had improved until yesterday. Now, I am thinking about
jumping out of the window again, but again, it’s just a thought. I
don’t plan on acting on it.
Integrating Psychopharmacology 227
But it bothers me that it even crosses my mind. I hadn’t thought
about it for a couple of weeks.
THERAPIST: How do you understand the fact that you were feeling so
much better before yesterday?
ELAINE: I don’t know. Maybe the medicine just stopped working. I also
know the lunch discussion upset me, as you mentioned.
THERAPIST: I think you are right that yesterday was difficult. The news
about the potential changes in the English department is very upset-
ting. It doesn’t help that the holidays are just around the corner. I
wonder if the combination might make it difficult for a while.
Overall, I think the medication is starting to help alleviate your
neurovegetative symptoms of depression. But the medicine doesn’t
prevent a person from feeling sorrow or pain about troubling expe-
riences.
E
LAINE: You think the medicine is working, but yesterday was so bad
because of my worries?
THERAPIST: It’s certainly a possibility. Yesterday sounds like it was a very
upsetting day. The disheartening news caused some increase in your
symptoms. To me, this doesn’t mean that you necessarily need more
medication, but that we need to talk more about your concerns re-
garding job stress and the holidays and how best to deal with them.
E
LAINE: You can’t just give me a pill to feel better?
THERAPIST: That’s a natural wish, but the paroxetine won’t protect you
from feeling upset about your class or about Christmas. It makes
sense that you have strong feelings about both of these issues.
Increasing the medicine might prove necessary in the future,
but right now, I think we need to concentrate on the situations that
are causing you quite a lot of pain. ( Pauses.)
E
LAINE:( Sniffles.) Yes, maybe it will be helpful to talk more about this.
Usually I try to ignore how I feel, because it is so uncomfortable to
talk about this stuff.
T
HERAPIST: So not only are the feelings very difficult, you have been
very alone with them as well.
ELAINE: Yes.
Elaine’s concern is a common point of confusion for patients who
have just started taking medication. While a medication increase is indi -
cated if neurovegetative symptoms are unrelenting, an increase in symp -
toms in response to a life stress is usually temporary. Psychotherapy is
the indicated treatment for these intermittent emotional crises.
228 CHEMISTRY
It is worth reconsidering whether Elaine might benefit from a higher
dose of the medication if her impaired sleep, appetite, or suicidal idea -
tion worsen in the ensuing days or weeks.
DIVIDING THE CARE
In many instances, it can be clinically necessary and/or beneficial to split
a patient’s psychotherapy and psychopharmacological care between two
providers. The most common treatment split occurs when a patient
starts psychotherapy with a nonmedical therapist and medication be -
comes necessary. It is almost always best for the patient to continue
psychotherapy with her therapist and to obtain medication from a
psychopharmacologist.
Sometimes medical issues impede the progress of a psychotherapy.
A patient who intensely focuses on medication concerns with a prescrib-
ing psychotherapist rather than observing how emotional stressors
impact mood may do better with two clinicians. In addition, if a patient
has very labile emotions, such as an individual with borderline personal-
ity traits who experiences volatile mood swings, or a patient with
rapidly cycling or mixed bipolar disorder, the appropriate medication
regimen may be complicated and may require frequent modification. If
the frequent focus on psychopharmacological issues starts to distract
from the psychotherapy, dividing care may allow both treatments the
time they deserve.
THE PATIENT WHO WOULD BENEFIT
FROM MEDICATIONS BUT DOESN’T
CONSIDER THEM A TREATMENT OPTION
Sometimes, even when a patient is not taking any psychotropics, the is -
sue of medications plays an important and recurring role within a psy -
chotherapy. I have encountered this situation when a patient repeatedly
refuses to start or to complete a medication trial even though she is
clearly suffering from symptoms that medications could alleviate. Often,
such patients believe that taking medications is a sign of character weak-
ness or that medications are chemical toxins that will cause multiple un-
bearable side effects. In either case, a psychotropic medication trial may
be doomed from the get-go.
If the therapist becomes too invested in a patient’s decision to take
medication, both individuals can become severely frustrated. I’ve found
that it is most therapeutic to view the patient’s refusal of medications as
another psychodynamic topic that deserves revisiting every once in a
Integrating Psychopharmacology 229
while. With this tack, the patient doesn’t feel pressured, and often, over
time (although it may be months or even years), the patient will recon -
sider medications as an option if her symptoms do not improve with
psychotherapy alone. Example 13.5 illustrates how I might discuss this
issue with Elaine if she completely refused a medication trial despite her
barrage of severe depressive symptoms.
EXAMPLE 13.5
Discussing medication as an option for a patient who refuses
psychopharmacological treatment although she would clearly
benefit from it
E
LAINE: Dr. Bender, my condition hasn’t improved over the last 6
months, even though we have been meeting twice a week. It’s be -
come unbearable. What do we do now?
THERAPIST: I think it is time to talk again about a trial of an antidepres-
sant to help you with these symptoms. The symptoms you are de-
scribing to me are consistent with an illness called major depression
which can be extremely debilitating—as you can see. With medica-
tion developed specifically to treat depression, over 2–4 weeks there
can be some improvement in sleep, appetite, interest and even in
hopelessness and suicidality.
E
LAINE: Oh, you know that I am not interested in medications. I’ve seen
friends go crazy on psychiatric drugs. It’s not a viable option for me.
THERAPIST: What did you experience with your friends?
ELAINE: Well, one of them was recently diagnosed with manic–depres -
sive illness, but they didn’t know this when they gave her medica -
tion for depression. After taking the pill for a week, she was unable
to sleep. Over the next few days, she started hearing voices. She had
to be hospitalized.
I’m not interested in going through that.
T
HERAPIST: It’s natural that you wouldn’t want that. It is true that a per-
son with manic depressive illness can have this reversible but very
scary reaction to an antidepressant, but we have no evidence that
you have this illness. For the vast majority of people, antidepres -
sants are well-tolerated and extremely helpful.
E
LAINE: I don’t care. I don’t want to put any new mind-altering medica-
tion in my body.
THERAPIST: Of course, that is your decision, but I hope that we can con-
tinue to discuss this over time.
230 CHEMISTRY
ELAINE: You can discuss whatever you want, but my mind is made up.
THERAPIST:( Nods, and waits to hear Elaine’s next association .)
ELAINE: I just hate feeling so alone every night.
THERAPIST: I can understand how it might feel particularly painful to
feel alone while you are already feeling so vulnerable. What is a typ-
ical evening like for you?
ELAINE: Well, . . .
One Month Later
ELAINE: Dr. Bender, I’m still feeling like I can barely make it to work ev-
ery day.
THERAPIST: Let’s review some of the symptoms you were struggling with
previously. How well are you sleeping and eating? How is your en -
ergy?
ELAINE: My appetite is a tad better, but I still have trouble sleeping every
night, and my energy has been gone for months.
THERAPIST: How about the hopelessness and suicidality? Have those
feelings increased, decreased, or stayed the same?
ELAINE: Well, I’m not thinking about suicide as much, but I am still
pretty hopeless.
THERAPIST: You really are suffering. I feel stuck in a certain way, be-
cause I believe a trial of an antidepressant could be so helpful for
you, but you have not even wanted to discuss it. Could we revisit
the issue?
E
LAINE: No! It’s not an option for me.
THERAPIST: The depression is taking a toll on your body over time with
just the decreased sleep. Would you be willing to discuss the option
of a sleeping medication at least to help you through these difficult
nights?
E
LAINE: I’ll have to think about that, but right now I am not interested
in taking anything.
THERAPIST: You have very strong feelings about this issue.
ELAINE: Yes, I do.
THERAPIST: Can you tell me more why medications don’t seem like a vi-
able option to you?
ELAINE: If I improve, I want it to be because I helped myself, not because
I popped a pill.
Integrating Psychopharmacology 231
THERAPIST: Taking a pill makes you feel like the improvement isn’t truly
earned, that it isn’t really yours?
ELAINE: I guess that’s true. That is how I feel.
THERAPIST: There appears to be a conflict. You want to feel better but
you reject some help that I’m offering. This method has left you iso-
lated, lonely, and with an unrelenting depression. Perhaps we can
try to understand together why some kinds of help are acceptable
and other are not.
In Example 13.5, I illustrate some strategies that may be helpful for
a patient who refuses to consider medication. First, I try to remain open
and interested in Elaine’s opinion and not to become too invested in the
idea that she needs to start medications immediately. Therapy alone can
be a great support to a patient. Increased resolution of one’s underlying
conflicts can sometimes diminish neurovegetative symptoms.
The next time Elaine openly complains about her distressing symp-
toms, I reopen the issue of medication. My understanding of Elaine’s
concerns is deepened as we continue to discuss the topic. Repeating this
pattern, a review of the medication issue and a clarification of her con-
cerns, might help Elaine reevaluate her stance over time. This scenario
also illustrates how resistance to medication can reveal a profound psy-
chodynamic conflict: aversion to help on one side and loneliness on the
other.
If a patient refuses to take medications and continues to suffer from
symptoms that could be easily targeted by psychotropics, our clinical
power and ability to intervene effectively is limited. As psychotherapists,
whether or not we prescribe, our job is to help patients to understand
their condition and to provide an environment in which recovery and
psychological growth can take place. Whether the patient takes advan -
tage of this opportunity is ultimately up to him or her. Meanwhile, our
task is to understand the process and to help the patient as much as she
will permit.
Key words: benefits, citalopram, diagnosis, fantasies, fluoxetine,
informed consent, integrative therapy, licensure, medicine,
neurochemistry, neuropsychiatry, neurotransmitters,
neurovegetative symptoms, paroxetine, prescribing practices,
psychoeducation, psychopharmacology, psychotherapy,
psychotropic, resistance, risks, selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs), sertraline, therapeutic alliance, therapeutic
contract
232 CHEMISTRY
Part IV
Therapeutic
Dilemmas
14
Management of Impasses
An impasse is a pause in the progress of a psychotherapy. The therapist must
gain an understanding of the dynamics of the impasse through careful listen-
ing, gentle inquiry, and empathic responsiveness. A resolution may be reached
by means of clarifications and interpretations.
When I started training, I found the process of psychotherapy both fasci-
nating and anxiety-provoking. When faced with a therapeutic dilemma I
hadn’t encountered before, I coped with my nervousness by adopting a
“fix-it” attitude. I dispensed lots of advice and direct guidance. “Coulds”
and “shoulds” would start to dominate my sentences. As Sallie’s thera-
pist, I might advise her to confront her mother directly about her career
concerns. She should find a new friend to replace Gwen. She could join
the school paper. And on and on.
Although my intentions were good, my instructive approach defi -
nitely impeded my patients’ therapeutic progress. It was rare that a
patient would follow my advice (If it were that easy, why would they be
seeing me in the first place?), and sometimes the therapeutic alliance
seemed to suffer after one of my overzealous interventions. As I started
to observe my behavior more closely, I tried to understand which situa -
tions triggered my directive stance.
With some supervisory guidance, I learned that I became more
preachy whenever I felt the therapy was at a standstill. My anxiety in -
creased as I listened to a patient share a few of her concerns repeatedly
without increased understanding or emotional relief. As a beginner, I
didn’t know that most therapies pass through some slow-moving stages.
Instead, I attributed the lack of progress to my inexperience, and I re -
acted by dispensing more and more advice.
235
Over time, I’ve learned a number of alternative techniques that help
a therapist and patient weather a therapeutic impasse. In this chapter,
we’ll illustrate several ways to respond to a slow-down in Sallie’s treat-
ment, modeling effective and ineffective techniques.
First, let’s review how Sallie’s therapy has progressed so far. Sallie
came to therapy seeking help after her breakup with her boyfriend,
Charlie. However, with time, as revealed in the last few chapters, it is in-
creasingly evident that her troubles are more complicated than they had
seemed.
While reviewing her family history, Sallie disclosed that her rela -
tionships with her mother and her brother, Tom, are sometimes difficult.
Tom has suffered from a chronic disease for years, and Sallie has alluded
(in Example 10.1) to Tom’s medical needs monopolizing their mother’s
attention.
On the college front, once Sallie recovered from the acute stress of
her breakup with Charlie, most of the therapy has focused on her rela -
tionship with her bossy friend, Gwen. It’s psychologically interesting
that Sallie has invested so much time and energy into this nonsupportive
friendship. Simultaneously, Sallie continues her studies in economics, the
major her mother chose for her, even though Sallie’s heart isn’t invested
in the subject.
Sallie spends multiple sessions discussing these issues repetitively.
Gwen is often mean, and Sallie is intensely sensitive to every rebuff.
When Tom is ill, Sallie’s mother is less available emotionally. Even
though Sallie doesn’t enjoy her current choice of study, economics, she
revels in her mother’s attention when they discuss her professional fu-
ture.
During Examples 14.1 and 14.2, Sallie talks about these topics once
again. Although beginning therapists may rely on responses like those
modeled in Example 14.1, these tactics are unlikely to advance a treat -
ment and may even undermine the therapeutic alliance.
EXAMPLE 14.1
The therapist employs ineffective tactics in response to an
impasse in the treatment
Sallie is talking about her studies in economics as well as her contin-
uing difficulties with her friendship with Gwen.
S
ALLIE: Well, I don’t have anything that new to say today, Dr. Bender. I
hate Economics 103. Hate it, hate it, hate it! And I thought it
couldn’t get worse after the intro courses. Well, I was wrong. An -
236 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
other great semester to look forward to, I guess. ( sarcastically)
Lucky me.
THERAPIST: What is it that you hate about Economics 103?
[I choose the direction of the session right away, instead of
helping Sallie to associate freely for the first 10–15 minutes of our
meeting.]
S
ALLIE: It’s just so boring. I know if I study the information, I’ll do fine,
but I just don’t like it.
THERAPIST:[ I feel frustrated because Sallie has been unhappy with her
studies for months now, but never seems to do anything about it .]
Well, you could change majors. Maybe that would help. [ I give ad-
vice in hope of promoting psychological change .]
SALLIE: Oh, that’s not an option at all. I need to be an economics major.
It’s a done deal.
THERAPIST: What if you make list of all the aspects of economics that
you like and dislike and we could review it together? [I assign a cog-
nitive task.]
SALLIE: Okay, I guess I could do that.
THERAPIST: So, what about your other classes? How are they? [I feel un-
sure how to help Sallie resolve these issues she talks about every
week, so I redirect the conversation in an attempt to talk about a
new topic.]
S
ALLIE: Well, I love my journalism class. I love writing the assignment
articles.
THERAPIST: Maybe you should join the school paper. [ I recommend ac-
tion, moving away from affect. I’m relying heavily on “should” and
“could,” a sign that I am feeling increasingly unsure how to help
Sallie.]
S
ALLIE: Oh, I’m not that serious about it. It’s a class for fun. Journalists
don’t make much money. It’s not a viable future option for me. But I
would like to tell you more about my latest tiff with Gwen.
Next Session
THERAPIST: So, did you make out your sheet listing the pros and cons of
studying economics?
SALLIE: Oh, I didn’t. I totally forgot to do it. My Mom was excited to
hear about my latest assignments, so I spent a lot of time talking to
Management of Impasses 237
her this week. She was really supportive, especially after Gwen was
such a turd.
THERAPIST:[ I minimize Sallie’s distress out of my own frustration.] Your
friendship with Gwen hits some trouble spots now and then, but
you look like you are handling it well.
S
ALLIE: Well, maybe I look okay, but I feel like crap. I know I should be
looking for new friends, and I’ve tried to spend less time with
Gwen. It’s hard though. When she’s nice to me, I don’t want to
spend time with anyone else.
I don’t get it. Sometimes she’s amazing and tells me that I am
the best friend she has ever had, and other times, she’s just mean. I
don’t know how she’ll act one minute to the next.
T
HERAPIST: It must be a great stress to be with a friend that makes you
feel like crap. Why don’t you find some new friends who treat you
well? [I stop minimizing, but recommend action instead in an at -
tempt to help .]
S
ALLIE: How can you say that? Even though the friendship is sort of up
and down, I still think of Gwen as my best friend. She’s all I have,
except for you, and I pay you to listen to me.
T
HERAPIST: You have been struggling with this for a while now. Do you
ever imagine your relationship with Gwen improving?
SALLIE:( Tears arise.) I don’t know. I’m just scared to do anything.
THERAPIST: I understand that you are scared, but you’ll keep suffering
unless you change something about this situation! Do you have any
idea why you stick with her?
S
ALLIE: Because she is special to me. That’s all I know.
THERAPIST: Can you say anything else about it? Think hard. [ I push for
cognitive understanding on an emotional topic. This tactic doesn’t
promote Sallie’s understanding of her actions.]
S
ALLIE: No. I don’t want to talk about this anymore. Can we talk about
something else?
THERAPIST:[ I confront the resistance head on .] If you never talk about
this, how can the situation ever improve?
SALLIE: Just forget it. I know it doesn’t make sense, but Gwen is special
to me, even though the friendship is so complicated. I wish you
could understand that. Maybe this therapy just isn’t working.
T
HERAPIST: I understand more than you think. For some reason, you
stick with Gwen despite the fact that she treats you so poorly. She
238 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
holds a lot of power over you, just like your mother does. [My ther-
apeutic hypothesis: Gwen doesn’t feel replaceable because she is an
emotional stand-in for someone unique in Sallie’s life—probably her
mother. Maybe that’s why she sticks with a friend who continually
hurts her feelings .]
S
ALLIE:( more tears) I don’t understand what you are getting at. Gwen
isn’t anything like my mother. But she is my best friend. Even if she
doesn’t treat me well lately, I can’t just give up on a friendship that I
have had for years.
Sallie misses the next session and doesn’t call or cancel.
My anxiety and sense of helplessness fuel my ineffective directive
approach illustrated in Example 14.1. If anything, Sallie becomes more
protective of her emotional status quo as I push for her to change.
At the beginning of the example, I direct the content of the session
prematurely rather than encouraging Sallie to associate more freely.
Next, I try to instigate change by suggesting how to “fix” Sallie’s situa-
tion (“Well, you could change majors.”) and organizing her thinking by
assigning cognitive homework (listing the pros and cons of an economics
major). While a cognitive approach can be extremely useful to calm and
to redirect a patient who is drowning in affect, it is not the best strategy
for Sallie who needs more help getting in touch with her emotions.
Next, I redirect the topic of conversation rather than following Sal-
lie’s lead (“What about your other classes?”), and minimize Sallie’s on-
going concerns about Gwen. (“Your friendship with Gwen hits some
trouble spots now and then. You look like you are handling it well.”)
Finally, as my frustration mounts, I aggressively confront Sallie’s resis -
tance and interpret her behavior in an unempathic manner. (“Gwen
holds a lot of power over you, just like your mother does.”)
These expressions of my internal frustration are examples of coun -
tertransference enactments. These particular enactments involve comple-
mentary identification: Sallie’s behavior evokes a domineering attitude in
me that is similar to the mind-set of Gwen and of Sallie’s mother. (For
more about countertransference, see Chapter 16).
Sallie reacts as many patients might. Her views of Gwen become
more entrenched rather than more flexible. From her perspective, this
makes emotional sense. If it has always been difficult for Sallie to exam -
ine her relationship with Gwen, a bulldozing confrontation will only in -
crease her resistance. Sallie manifests her intensified resistance by avoid -
ing the next session.
I would have been more effective if I had helped Sallie discover her
Management of Impasses 239
inner barriers to change instead of providing instruction. As Sallie’s self-
awareness slowly increased, she might find it easier to expand the lim -
ited range of life choices she currently allows herself.
Example 14.2 replays the previous example and employs a number
of tactics that may be more conducive to progress when therapy reaches
an impasse.
EXAMPLE 14.2
The therapist employs effective responses to the therapeutic
impasse
S
ALLIE: Well, I don’t have anything that new to say today, Dr. Bender. I
hate Economics 103. Lucky me.
THERAPIST:( Nods.)[ I am trying not to intervene too early in the session,
so I can hear how Sallie’s concerns develop .]
SALLIE: I guess I should be more interested in the class and not complain.
I heard that graduating business majors have their choice of jobs. I
have to keep reminding myself of this when I start to feel upset
about my classes.
T
HERAPIST:( Nods again.)[ While I am purposely staying quiet to allow
Sallie to talk freely and to reveal new material, I am staying emo-
tionally involved in the conversation nonverbally through body lan-
guage and frequent eye contact .]
S
ALLIE:( Continues to associate freely.) Sometimes I wonder what it will
be like to be in the business world after graduation. I guess it will be
fine.
T
HERAPIST: What do you imagine it will be like?
SALLIE: I don’t know. Maybe a little bit boring. I’m sure I’ll grow to love
it though.
THERAPIST:[ I try to learn more details that are affect-laden. Why does
Sallie chose to study a subject that she doesn’t really like? I wonder
whether emotional forces that she is unaware of prevent her from
changing majors.] Can you tell me any more about what you imag -
ine it will be like after graduation?
S
ALLIE: I’m sure it will be fine. It has to be.
THERAPIST: It has to be? What do you mean? [ I repeat a sentence that
doesn’t make logical sense but seems to have a lot of emotion be -
neath it.]
SALLIE: I need to get some work experience after I graduate and then go
on to get my MBA. It’s basically already decided.
240 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
THERAPIST: How was it decided?
SALLIE: It’s just the way it is. Umm, I don’t really feel that comfortable
talking about this, Dr. Bender.
THERAPIST: It doesn’t feel like a subject that you want to explore more
deeply?
SALLIE: Right. There is no use. Why talk about something that has al -
ready been decided?
THERAPIST: Can you explain to me how it was decided? [ I try one more
time to help Sallie investigate her decision in more depth .]
SALLIE: Well, I’ve told you how my mother has had a lot of influence on
my career decisions. She wants to make sure I don’t make the same
mistakes she did.
T
HERAPIST: What were those?
SALLIE: I don’t know. She always talks about her wish to open her own
business some day, but in the next sentence, she’ll say how glad she
is to have a flexible job so she can take care of her children. Tom’s
illness underlined this point. ( looks away)
Mom was an amazing student in college. But then she got mar-
ried and had us in her early 20s, so she didn’t pursue her career be-
fore we were born. In fact, she only started working in real estate a
few years ago. When we were little, she was at home full time. I
loved the time with her, but I wonder if she missed out on some of
her dreams.
Maybe she’s a little sad that she never had the chance to pursue
her ideal career. She’d never say that, but it’s easy to infer it by the
way she talks. Sometimes, I wonder whether she’d make different
choices if she could do it over.
T
HERAPIST: If she could do it over, what choice do you think she’d make
this time?
SALLIE: I think she’d really go for it when she was younger. I don’t know
how she’d resolve the work/children issue, but I think she would be
a great corporate executive. I can imagine her as the head of a
startup company. She’s a very smart woman.
Maybe it helps her to cheer me on instead. She always tells
me that it’s really important that I choose a profession that will
make me an empowered woman who is financially independent.
Business school seemed the best way to go about it. We decided
that together.
T
HERAPIST: How did you and your mother come to this decision? [I fol-
low the emerging theme to gain a deeper understanding of the issue.
Management of Impasses 241
I also think silently about the fact that Sallie’s directive approach to-
ward Charlie was very similar to her mother’s approach with her.]
SALLIE: Well, even before I started college, my mother started talking to
me about how to plan a profitable career. I don’t need to be rich,
but I want to be able to support myself easily and to pursue leader -
ship roles. My mother says these are the two key factors to look for
in a career.
How many daughters have mothers that take the time to dis -
cuss this stuff with them? I’m lucky, I think.
She thinks business, law, or medical school are the three best
choices. Law and medicine aren’t options for me. I’ve never been in-
terested in law at all, and I’m so squeamish that I had trouble with
dissections in high school biology. I couldn’t handle medical school.
Business school leaves me a lot of choices. It’s what we’ve decided I
should do.
So being upset about my classes is a waste of time. I don’t
know why I even bother complaining about it in here.
T
HERAPIST: How is it a waste of time?
SALLIE: Well, if it’s a done deal, why am I struggling against it?
THERAPIST: Part of our work together involves recognizing your feelings,
and sometimes feelings and thoughts are in conflict. What would it
feel like to consider a major other than economics and a future ca-
reer in something other than business? [ a strategic question that
asks Sallie about her feelings, but doesn’t suggest that she act any
differently]
S
ALLIE: I don’t know. I just don’t.
THERAPIST:( Nods empathically.)
SALLIE: I don’t know. I guess I’d feel overwhelmed if I started thinking
about changing the plan.
THERAPIST: What would feel overwhelming about it?
SALLIE: Umm, it just feels wrong. I don’t really want to talk about it.
THERAPIST: It gives me a sense of how wrong it must feel if even think -
ing about other options feels overwhelming. But thinking isn’t the
same as acting. What do you imagine your mother would feel if she
thought you had any misgivings about your major?
S
ALLIE: I think she’d be mad. College is a privilege, not a right. That’s
what she says to me all the time, and I appreciate my parents’ sup -
port. I don’t want to squander my studies on a major that doesn’t
have any potential.
242 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
THERAPIST: Which majors don’t have potential?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I guess journalism is the one I am thinking about
specifically. If I knew I would be successful at it, I might major in
journalism.
But I don’t really like to talk about this.
T
HERAPIST: What does it feel like to talk about this?
SALLIE: I feel nervous. Uneasy.
THERAPIST: Where do you feel it in your body? [ I help Sallie expand on
her feelings by describing her emotions in terms of other senses. ]
SALLIE: My stomach, I guess.
THERAPIST: How would you describe it?
SALLIE: I feel nauseous. Queasy.
THERAPIST: It’s clearly a tender topic. Sometimes it can be easier to learn
more about a troubling subject by using imagery. When you talk
about this does any particular image come to mind?
S
ALLIE: I feel like a little mole and I want to burrow back into my hole.
THERAPIST: It’s an interesting image. Can you tell me any more about
the mole?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I just feel confused, and it’s easier to hide out in a
little cave.
THERAPIST: Are you alone down there?
SALLIE: Oh yes, definitely. There’s not enough room down here for any-
one else.
THERAPIST: What does it feel like to be alone?
SALLIE: Okay actually. It’s safer than having to worry about any other
moles. (Grins as she is involved in the imagery and metaphor .)
THERAPIST:( Smiles back.) Hmmm, what would be your worry if there
were any other moles?
SALLIE: I’m not sure, but I like having my own space. I don’t have to
worry about anyone else, and I feel safe. I don’t feel squished, and I
don’t have to worry that the other mole would try to take over. It’s
all mine.
T
HERAPIST: Sharing is dangerous because the person might not just
share but also take over?
SALLIE: Yeah, now that you mention it, I do feel like that.
THERAPIST: The images are very powerful. Do they feel familiar to you?
Management of Impasses 243
SALLIE: Sort of. . . .
THERAPIST:( Raises eyebrows.) [nonverbal message: “Please go on.” ]
SALLIE: Ummm, when I really think about it, I feel this way fairly often.
THERAPIST: Can you tell me more?
SALLIE: Well, first at school, I feel it with Gwen. She takes over when she
bosses me around. I know it sounds stupid, but I worry she will also
take away my other friends. Does that sound stupid?
T
HERAPIST: It sounds fearful, not stupid. Have you felt this way in any
other places?
SALLIE: I sometimes feel this on trips home. Maybe sometimes with my
brother.
THERAPIST:( Nods.)
SALLIE: Don’t get me wrong. Tom’s a great person. When he’s healthy
he’s unstoppable. He’s popular, handsome, and smart. I’m just not
as interesting or talented as he is. When he’s in a room, people are
drawn to him. That doesn’t happen to me. And when he’s sick, peo-
ple are drawn to him because he’s ill, and he needs special care.
I understand that. I’m lucky to be healthy. I’m not jealous of
that type of attention.
I don’t know. I like the idea of having a safe place to hide out
that I wouldn’t need to share with anyone. ( Smiles.)
T
HERAPIST: Climbing down into your hole to stay safe and protect your
space?
SALLIE: Yes. Sometimes, I even resent the fact that Tom’s illness intrudes
into my therapy hour. Isn’t that horrible! I just like having you all to
myself. I want to talk about me, not him.
Anyway, when Tom is well, he’s better at most things than I
am. I’m good at sports; he’s great. I’m okay at math; it’s his favorite
subject.
T
HERAPIST: Talking about him feels like you have to share me with him?
SALLIE: In a certain way, it really does.
THERAPIST: Let’s look at the associations here. Maybe you have an idea
how to put them together. At first you talked about your mother
and about her concern about your choice of study. Your next associ-
ation and image involved the mole, and then Tom, and not wanting
to share anything or anyone with him. Do the two images seem re -
lated to you in any way? [I have an idea how they might be related,
but it would be much more effective and informative if Sallie were
able to tie the two together. ]
244 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
SALLIE: Well, maybe a little bit. Tom has never had to work for my
Mom’s attention. Even before he was sick, he was the more charis-
matic kid. He couldn’t help it, and my Mom and him always
seemed to have a special bond. I wasn’t really jealous. Well, maybe
just a little bit.
But then, when he got sick, all bets were off. He needed
Mom more, and she was always there for him. I shouldn’t be jeal -
ous of that. He was suffering. I’m glad she paid so much attention
to him.
But, I’ve got one thing on Tom. I’m the only daughter, and
Mom enjoys being my mentor. She’s always taken a special interest
in my studies. It’s one area that I have Tom licked. I hope you can
understand why I wouldn’t want to change anything. Mom and I
bond over this stuff at school.
T
HERAPIST: That makes a lot of sense. I can understand that you would
want to protect this special bond with your Mom.
SALLIE: I know, but for some reason, I still don’t feel good about eco-
nomics.
THERAPIST: That is really the dilemma. Your choice of classes continues
to bother you for reasons we don’t fully understand at this point,
but even discussing it feels uncomfortable, both emotionally and
physically. [ I verbalize Sallie’s dilemma without any expectation
that she will act any differently .]
S
ALLIE: That’s true. So what do I do?
THERAPIST: I think we need to search for greater understanding of the
problem.
SALLIE: Maybe so, but right now, I’d rather move on and tell you about
Gwen.
THERAPIST: Sure. Perhaps we can talk more about your classes and ca -
reer goals another time. [While I follow Sallie’s lead in changing the
subject, I make a comment about the unfinished business .]
Example 14.2 illustrates a number of effective procedures that may
help a treatment evolve beyond the therapeutic impasse. All the tactics
attempt to look at the same emotional material through a different lens
in order to understand old concerns in a new way.
At the beginning of the session, I remain relatively quiet to facilitate
Sallie’s associations, rather than to direct them prematurely. This ap -
proach can be very helpful to many patients who use the first 10–15
minutes of a session to “warm up” toward a troubling topic. Even
though I don’t talk much, my silence is an amiable one. While I avoid
Management of Impasses 245
any comments that might interfere with the gradual emergence of new
material, I use nonverbal cues to portray my interest.
If Sallie seemed uncomfortable with this approach, I might ask her
to describe how she experiences the silence. (“As we sit here together, I
am wondering what this silence is like for you?”) Learning how Sallie in-
terprets my less active approach may reveal some useful information.
As the session evolves, I ask Sallie a number of detailed questions
about her school concerns rather than assuming that we had exhausted
this recurring topic. Her replies slowly reveal how her choice to study
economics is tied to an understandable desire for her mother’s attention
and approval. Before Sallie will be ready to make any significant changes
in her career path, we need to appreciate her conflicting wishes and fears
in more detail.
As illustrated in Example 14.1, direct confrontation in this situation
may increase her resistance. In fact, if I insisted that Sallie choose an al -
ternative career path, I would be acting like her mother by directing Sal-
lie’s life according to my priorities.
Instead, I acknowledge and respect Sallie’s resistance by gently ask-
ing what it would feel like if she didn’t experience these internal limita-
tions. The question is worded very carefully. I don’t recommend that Sal-
lie change her perspective or act any differently. (“What would it feel
like to consider a major other than economics and a future career in
something other than business?”)
We discuss Sallie’s concerns in displacement, first focusing on where
she feels her distress in her body and then helping Sallie develop her im-
age of herself as a shy mole. Sallie mentions that her space will not feel
protected if it is shared. In response to open-ended questions, she is able
to relate her metaphor of the mole to her feelings about her brother and
mother.
Although Sallie is able to talk about her fantasy in detail, these
strategies may be useful even if her image had been less well-defined. If
Sallie’s image were more murky, (“I just see a grey fog”). I might ask
more questions to develop the image (“Does this remind you of anything
in particular?” or “What might be hidden in the fog?”). If I am open to
this creative venture, she is likely to follow. For a more aurally inclined
patient, I might ask, “Does this make you think of any type of music or
sound?” With an action-oriented patient, I may ask about impulses:
“When you talk about this, do you feel an impulse to do something?”
Many an emotion that cannot be tapped verbally can be explored
through a creative displacement or an affective equivalent.
At a certain point, I ask Sallie if she sees any connection between
her mole image and her concerns about Tom and her mother. She revisits
her emotional dilemma: In order to stay close to her mother, she doesn’t
246 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
want to assert an independent career choice. I empathize with her con -
cerns, (“That makes a lot of sense. I can understand that you would
want to protect this special bond with your Mom.”) and acknowledge
the emotional complexity of the issue (“Your choice of classes continues
to bother you for reasons we don’t fully understand at this point, but
even discussing it feels uncomfortable, both emotionally and physi -
cally.”).
Soon after, Sallie changes the topic back to Gwen. It isn’t unusual
for a patient to have a limited tolerance for an emotionally intense sub -
ject. In response, I note that it would be useful for us to continue our dis-
cussion about Tom and her mother in the future, and then follow her
lead to the next topic.
INTERPRETATIONS AND CLARIFICATIONS
In addition to careful listening, gentle open-ended questions, and non-
verbal encouragements, interpretations and clarifications can advance a
psychotherapy. Interpretations are comments that link the patient’s past
experiences with her present, for example, “Your boss’s self-centered
approach is so difficult for you to tolerate because he reminds you of
your father.” Clarifications are explanatory interventions that do not
necessarily include a historical or developmental perspective. (In Exam-
ple 14.2, my question “Sharing is dangerous because the person might
not just share but also take over?” is a clarification.) Both of these inter-
ventions help the patient to think, to feel, and to talk about very sensi-
tive subjects. They may be met by some resistance, the psychological
defenses a person may use to protect herself from emotional distress.
When I started psychiatric training after a year of internal medicine
replete with clear, objectively based diagnoses and algorithmic treatment
plans, I imagined interpretations and clarifications as verbal procedures
that could dissect emotional pain and immediately relieve distress. If I
could manage to “explain” the patient’s inner motivations, a sustained
cure would follow. I felt confident that a healing interpretation existed
for each patient. I just had no idea what it was or where to find it.
During my first few years as a psychotherapist, I tried to make this
fantasy come true multiple times. Many hours were spent offering vari -
ous epiphanies to my few psychotherapy patients, hoping beyond hope
that I had hit the therapeutic jackpot. Needless to say, it never worked.
Even if the patients were polite and acknowledged my attempt to
“solve” their problems, their conditions never seemed to improve after
my psychological sermons.
I reevaluated my method after one patient disappeared for 3 months
Management of Impasses 247
following one of my “enlightening” comments. In my haste to interpret
her distress, she may have felt misunderstand and emotionally exposed.
Finally, I realized that a psychotherapeutic cure cannot be distilled into
one or two beard-stroking interpretations.
Although the wish for curative interpretation is certainly under -
standable, psychotherapy is a lengthy process without any easy answers.
In fact, the therapist who can endure a problem’s ambiguity and avoid
pigeonholing the patient’s experience does her patient a much greater
service than the therapist who is overeager to reach a simplifying expla -
nation.
The following examples will illustrate how overinterpretation or
overclarification can flummox a treatment, while their careful use at the
right time can promote understanding.
CLARIFICATIONS: MISUSE AND USE
Example 14.3 illustrates how a well-meaning beginner may misuse the
art of clarification after hearing a patient’s dream.
EXAMPLE 14.3
Premature and inaccurate clarifications
S
ALLIE: Dr. Bender, I had the weirdest dream last night. Can I tell you
about it? I felt sort of shook up when I woke up this morning.
THERAPIST: Please, I’d like to hear about it. [I’m excited and nervous to
hear about the dream but feel some immediate pressure and respon-
sibility to understand and to explain its underlying meaning during
this session.]
SALLIE: Well, okay. I remember swimming in a deep, dark river. It was
warm and very comfortable, and I felt like a fish, which is funny be-
cause I’m not a very good swimmer. Instead of hands, I think I had
some fins that glowed in the dark. It was so calm and peaceful; the
river slowly crept along and I swam with the current. Then, I saw a
cave. I crept inside of it, and it was really dark but I could make out
this ledge on the side of the cave that had enough room for me to lie
down. All of a sudden I got really tired and didn’t feel strong
enough to keep going, so I went to sleep on the ledge. And that’s
when I woke up, feeling upset. . . .
T
HERAPIST:[ I am excited that I have thought of a clarification, and I in-
terrupt, happy that I have thought of something smart to say .]
248 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
Somehow you needed to escape the river; it wasn’t safe to continue
swimming by yourself.
SALLIE: Huh?
THERAPIST: I am just struck by the fact that the cave served as an escape
so you would no longer have to move forward alone in the river. As
you are in school and growing in independence, it’s scary. Some -
times you may want to find a cave that is safe to hide in.
S
ALLIE: Oh, is that what it meant?
THERAPIST: That is how I understand it, anyhow. [I feel a bit proud and
smug.]
SALLIE: That’s interesting. Umm, I wanted to make sure that I tell you
what happened in school yesterday. Gwen has been up to her usual
tricks.
T
HERAPIST:[ I nod but miss the fact that Sallie has chosen to change top-
ics rather abruptly.]
SALLIE: You know, I think Gwen might hate me! (Starts to cry, which is
unexpected by both of us .)
THERAPIST: What happened?
SALLIE: I don’t know. ( Chokes through sobs .) She’s ignored all of my
calls this week. I don’t know what I did wrong. I must have done
something to cause this. I feel so guilty.
T
HERAPIST:[ I feel an urgent need to relieve Sallie’s distress and jump to
explain Sallie’s behavior.] You feel guilty so easily. As you gain inde-
pendence, Gwen is shutting you out, and guilt is a much easier emo-
tion than anger.
SALLIE: Oh, I don’t feel angry at Gwen. She’s my closest friend. ( Be-
comes silent for a few moments.) I don’t like to criticize her. I have a
big economics test next week. It’s on a ridiculous amount of mate -
rial. I have no idea how I am going to prepare.
THERAPIST: Why the change in subject all of a sudden? Did I say some -
thing to upset you?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I am just sick of talking about this stuff all the
time. The situation with Gwen is really hard.
In Example 14.3, I try to make sense of the dream after hearing Sal-
lie briefly outline it only one time. In my fantasy as a novice psychother-
apist, this is Sallie’s cue to say something like: “Eureka! I finally under -
stand that I try to avoid making independent decisions because of a
Management of Impasses 249
complicated dynamic with my parents that I can just now understand.
Thank you so much. I know my life will be different now.” Example
14.3 is more reality-based. Sallie’s passive agreement is a common re -
sponse to an overzealous therapeutic approach.
When Sallie changes the subject to discuss her ongoing difficulties
with Gwen, I repeat my previous error and present another clarification
of Sallie’s behavior. (“Guilt is a much easier emotion than anger.”) Two
premature clarifications in a row reflect more on my internal state than
the patient’s. In this situation, it is a signal that I am probably feeling
anxious, insecure about my psychotherapeutic skills, and frustrated
about the patient’s slow progress.
Even though I have good intentions when I try to resolve Sallie’s dif-
ficulties, Sallie begins to cry after my comments. From her perspective,
my intervention may have felt more like an emotional assault. Yet, when
I ask her directly how she experienced our discussion, Sallie doesn’t tell
me how uncomfortable my comments made her feel. She blames her
emotional distress on the situation with Gwen.
The more therapeutic approach is less flashy and more humble.
Nowadays, if I think I understand something very quickly, I suspect that
I probably don’t understand it thoroughly, because most significant is-
sues are multiply determined. When a patient first reports a dream or a
difficult situation, I’ll ask more questions and withhold my opinion. I’ll
also try to elicit associations to some of the more salient elements of the
story. Basic queries such as “Let’s try to understand this together. Can
you tell me more about the dark cave? How does it feel to tell me about
it?” serve me well, and help the patient disclose details that she hadn’t
been aware of before.
After hearing about a patient’s dream, I may have a hypothesis re -
garding what it might reveal, but only further and deeper discussion
with the patient will show whether I’m even in the right ballpark. In fact,
I’ve found that it is rare that any dream or personal dilemma is fully un-
derstood during the session in which it is reported.
Example 14.4 illustrates how a therapist can use a dream as nour -
ishing fodder for discussion without jumping to clarify its meaning.
EXAMPLE 14.4
Using a dream to clarify the goals of therapy
S
ALLIE: Dr. Bender, I had the weirdest dream last night. Can I tell you
about it?
THERAPIST: Sure. ( waits patiently)
Sallie presents the same dream as in Example 14.3.
250 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
THERAPIST: It’s an interesting dream. Thank you for sharing it with me.
Let’s go through it again a bit more slowly. Can you tell me the be-
ginning again?
SALLIE: Okay. First, I just remember swimming in this slow relaxing
river. I was all alone, but I didn’t feel lonely. I felt very adventurous
instead of feeling scared. That is one of the weird parts because, like
I said, I’m usually not that comfortable in the water.
T
HERAPIST: What else did you feel during the dream?
SALLIE: Well, in the beginning, I mainly felt free and not tied down at all.
Before I climbed on the ledge, I felt that I could float or swim in the
river forever. Something bad seemed to be missing.
T
HERAPIST: Something bad?
SALLIE: It seemed like I didn’t feel bad about myself at all. Maybe that
part of me that is always so self-critical was missing. I’m not sure.
THERAPIST:( Nods.)
SALLIE: Now as I listen to myself I feel annoyed. My dream was all
about being free and feeling good about myself, but even as I talk
about it, I hear this aggravating voice in my head making critical
comments.
T
HERAPIST: What does the voice in your head say?
SALLIE: You know, it sounds like Gwen. I don’t know. She’d think of
some way to make me feel stupid about the dream. She’s expert at
that.
T
HERAPIST: A very critical voice in your head that sounds a little like
Gwen. . . .
SALLIE: Yes, and in the dream, it didn’t exist, at least while I was swim-
ming, and that felt really great.
THERAPIST: I can understand that it would feel great to be free of self-
criticism. What do you make of the river?
SALLIE: What do you mean?
THERAPIST: Well, did it remind you of any particular river or any partic-
ular place?
SALLIE: Umm, I don’t know if the river in the dream was a river I have
actually visited. The feeling of being free is a little bit familiar
though. I used to feel this way during our family’s summer trips to
national parks. I don’t think I’ve told you about this. We went to a
different one almost every year. I always looked forward to it.
My mother always made a ceremony of taking off her watch as
we drove through the park gates. She was more relaxed during these
Management of Impasses 251
weeks than any other time of the year. We even went the summers
that Tom wasn’t feeling well. The trip might be a little shorter, but
we always went.
As a kid, I loved those vacations. We all got along well, and it
felt so relaxed and free. All the everyday stress was gone. It’s hard to
explain how good it was.
I always give money to the national parks every Christmas. I
feel attached to them.
T
HERAPIST: It does sound like the parks have been a place of great free -
dom for you.
SALLIE: Yes, they were, but it doesn’t make a lot of sense that my dream
focused on swimming. I don’t like to swim very much. I do like to
hike, and we would do that together as a family, but I never manage
to make time for it these days. There’s actually a hiking club at
school, but I haven’t joined.
T
HERAPIST: Can you tell me what holds you back?
SALLIE: I don’t know.
THERAPIST:[ As I continue to review the dream in my mind, I remember
that Sallie also had a cave in her “mole” image from Example 14.2.
I continue to be silent to see if Sallie starts talking again spontane-
ously. When she doesn’t, I decide to ask a question.] The cave, can
you tell me how you felt in the cave?
S
ALLIE: I felt my old self creeping back while I was in the cave. I wasn’t
fearful during the first part of the dream, but in the second part it
became very dark, and I started to get scared. I feel sort of stupid
admitting it, but I actually get scared of the dark fairly often—when
I’m awake, I mean.
T
HERAPIST: Can you tell me more about this fear of the dark? When do
you feel it?
SALLIE: Mostly when I’m home alone, but I’ve also noticed that it defi-
nitely gets worse when I’m upset, like after a fight with Gwen.
THERAPIST: These observations are useful. They will help us understand
the fear better. How do you act differently when you feel this fear?
SALLIE: I just get nervous and I’ll check to see if the front door is locked.
Sometimes, if I am really wigged out for some reason, I sleep with a
light on. I just don’t feel comfortable all by myself.
T
HERAPIST: And during the last part of the dream, you felt differently.
SALLIE: Yes, for a short while, I felt okay being by myself doing what I
like to do, even if I wasn’t the best at it.
252 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
THERAPIST:( Nods empathically.)
SALLIE: It’s not like that in real life.
THERAPIST: The dream gave you a taste of what would it be like not to
feel so afraid or self-critical while you are awake.
SALLIE: Yes, do you ever think I could feel less afraid?
THERAPIST: I think we are working on that together, even by talking
about the dream. Over time, we may learn more about the dream
and what it tells us about fear and freedom. With increased under -
standing, you might begin to feel more like you did as you swam
down the river.
When Sallie slowly reports her dream the second time, I pay special
attention to her emotional experience during each section. The type of
exploration illustrated in Example 14.4 can also be used to facilitate any
discussion, whether about a dream or about a difficult situation that the
patient is struggling with during waking hours.
If I had more time to discuss the dream with Sallie, I would also ask
her about the events of her day prior to the dream to see if that helps us
understand more of the dream’s meaning. Daytime experiences that find
their way into a dream are known as the “day residue.” Other questions
such as “Does any particular part of the dream stand out to you? Are the
feelings in the dream familiar to you? Where have you felt them before?”
could further facilitate the discussion.
Once the discussion of the dream is finished, I’ll take special notice
of Sallie’s next associations. In contrast to Example 14.3, I don’t hazard
a soundbite clarification that would prematurely connect all the pieces
of the dream with the content of recent sessions.
Now and then my patient and I will discuss a dream in detail, and it
still won’t make any cohesive sense. While I often feel a pull to explain
and to tie up the loose ends, the dream remains available for future ex -
ploration if I refuse to simplify it with a quick and dirty interpretation.
Sigmund Freud would sometimes spend weeks reviewing a dream
with a patient. Because he was practicing psychoanalysis, he had the
time to delve deeply into a dream to understand its underlying conflicts
and its orgins. Once-a-week psychotherapy doesn’t have this luxury, but
dream material and the subsequent associations can be very valuable as
inroads to new understanding.
The discussion in Example 14.4 does highlight some patterns in Sal-
lie’s thinking that would be useful to discuss some time in the future. It is
noteworthy that Sallie is often fearful and is aware that this sensitivity
makes life unnecessarily difficult. Meanwhile, as I’ve commented before,
Management of Impasses 253
Sallie is rarely openly angry in her dealings in life in general and with
Gwen in particular. It’s possible that the two are related.
Maybe Sallie’s fearfulness has an unconscious purpose. A useful
procedure in psychodynamic thinking is to look for the feeling opposite
to the patient’s conscious emotional experience. Perhaps Sallie’s ubiqui-
tous fear keeps her aggression in check. It is unclear why aggressive and
angry impulses are unaccceptable to Sallie, but the recognition of this
conflict may form the the seed of future insight.
INTERPRETATIONS
Interpretations differ from clarifications in that they tie together a pa -
tient’s difficulties in the past and present in a meaningful way. To illus -
trate: Let’s say I start to work in therapy with a 30-year-old woman we’ll
call Martha, who wants to discuss her ongoing difficulties with her criti-
cal and reproachful mother. As a child, she was intimidated by her
mother’s inflexible attitude. Her mother would scold or punish Martha
if she didn’t follow her instructions to the letter. In response, Martha
learned to assert her independence covertly by withholding or delaying:
classic passive–aggressive behaviors. While living at home and attending
school, Martha wouldn’t start her homework that was due Monday
morning until late Sunday evening. Her mother would be aggravated by
these delaying tactics, but Martha would always manage to complete
most of the work on time. Although she might “forget” to relay an im-
portant message to her mother for a number of days, she would eventu-
ally share the information. Her mother became very annoyed by these
behaviors and responded with an even more rigid attitude. By the time I
met the patient, this cycle had been in place for years.
Martha might use similar withholding and delaying techniques in
her current life or with me within the therapy. She may finish work pro-
jects at the last minute, irritating her coworkers, or repeatedly pay her
therapy bill the week it would be considered overdue.
As the therapy progressed, I would try to help Martha connect her
current actions in her adult life with her old ways of coping as a child.
For this interpretation to be effective, we would need to discuss how this
ineffective coping mechanism evolved and talk at length about Martha’s
understandable frustration and annoyance at her mother. Martha must
feel that I understand the motivations for her past behavior before we
can fully examine her present difficulties in relationships. Over time, as
we maintain a nonjudgmental but curious approach, we may recognize
together how Martha is using obsolete (and replaceable) coping mecha -
nisms, possibly without conscious knowledge, in her current responsibil-
ities and relationships.
254 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
Example 14.5 illustrates how an interpretation can link a patient’s
current difficulties with emotional struggles from her past.
EXAMPLE 14.5
The therapist interprets a patient’s recurring difficulty with her
friend
SALLIE: Ugh. Sometimes I hate Gwen, Dr. Bender, even though she is my
best friend. Yesterday we had another fight. It ruins my whole eve -
ning when we battle.
THERAPIST: It is upsetting that these fights keep recurring with a friend
who is so important to you. What happened?
SALLIE: Well, you know how I always let Gwen choose how we are go -
ing to spend our time together. After our last session, I figured it
was time for a change, and last night I asked her to go with me to a
campus reading. A senior had just returned from a year in Africa,
and she wanted to talk and show slides about her experiences. I love
travel and journalism—I might consider it as a profession if I knew I
could make money at it—so I really wanted to go.
I was a little nervous asking Gwen to go with me, but I thought
she might be interested. Well, anyway, she had already planned to
go to a party in a nearby dorm, because a guy she likes was going to
be there. I asked if we could go to the party after the talk, but she
wouldn’t compromise. It wouldn’t have been a big deal if we could
have just gone our separate ways for the evening. I suggested that
idea, and she went completely ballistic.
T
HERAPIST: What did she say?
SALLIE: She said that I was a mediocre friend who couldn’t be counted
on, and joining her at the party after the talk just wouldn’t cut it. If
I really wanted to prove myself as a good dependable friend, I
needed to come with her and help her meet this guy and skip the
talk. Otherwise, her opinion of me had seriously declined, and I
wasn’t a true friend after all.
T
HERAPIST: How did it feel to you when she said this?
SALLIE: I felt horrible, so I skipped the talk and went to the party with
her, and it was awful. It was so bizarre. Once she got her way, she
was so grateful to have company. She said all these nice things to
me.
This time it didn’t make me feel any better. I kept reviewing the
fight in my head last night, so I hardly slept at all.
Plus, remember I told you that sometimes I have trouble relax -
Management of Impasses 255
ing in the dark? Well, last night I kept the lights on all night. I still
feel upset. ( Tears well up, and she reaches for a tissue. )
THERAPIST: It sounds like a very upsetting evening. You have tried so
hard to be a good friend to Gwen, but it is difficult when she
doesn’t allow you any leeway.
S
ALLIE: Yes! She really gets to me. But it was okay to have a separate
idea and want to go to the talk, wasn’t it?
THERAPIST: Of course it was, but the fact that you ask the question
shows me that you aren’t quite sure that it’s okay for you to express
a preference and still be a good friend.
S
ALLIE: Yeah. I do feel so unsure of myself with Gwen. Like I have to do
things her way in order to make sure she still likes me.
THERAPIST: That is a great deal of pressure for you because it doesn’t al-
low you to express any wishes you have that are different from
Gwen’s. How do you understand finding yourself in such a situa-
tion?
S
ALLIE: What do you mean?
THERAPIST: Well, have you ever experienced this type of relationship
pressure with anyone else?
SALLIE: I don’t know, maybe. I think I told you about my friends
Claudia and Dawn. They were my best friends growing up. They
were never as mean as Gwen, but sometimes they would be kinda
bossy in the same way. But it’s my fault, too. I just don’t feel com-
fortable standing up for myself.
T
HERAPIST: Have you ever felt this way with anyone in your family?
SALLIE: Not that I can think of. Oh, I don’t know.
THERAPIST: Well, I have an idea, but I don’t know if it will feel right to
you. Tell me what you feel about this.
SALLIE: Okay. What?
THERAPIST: Do you think the way you describe Gwen, Claudia, and
Dawn sounds a little bit like the way you describe your mother?
SALLIE: What do you mean?
THERAPIST: Well, we’ve talked about your mother’s influence on your
career choice. On the one hand, it is a special bond that you two
share, but your discussions don’t leave room for alternate career
choices.
S
ALLIE: And if my Mom got mad at me, I’d feel terrible.
256 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
THERAPIST: Terrible? Can you say more?
SALLIE: I just don’t want to get in a fight with her. It’s not worth it. I’m
sure she knows what’s best for me anyway. Economics isn’t too bad.
THERAPIST: It is a difficult situation. I can understand why you would
want to be able to talk to your mother more openly and share your
ideas, but you don’t want to risk her getting mad at you like Gwen
did.
S
ALLIE: Right.
THERAPIST: The difficulty arises when you feel that you must ignore
your own ideas and wishes to maintain an important relationship.
SALLIE: I know. I’m used to it though. My Mom and I get along the best
when I do things her way.
THERAPIST: That may account for how the behavior evolved. When you
were a child, it was easiest just to submerge your feelings and follow
your mother’s advice, but now that you are older, it is increasingly
difficult because you have your own independent ideas.
In Example 14.5, I hazard an interpretation, tying Sallie’s ongoing
difficulties with Gwen with her fears of asserting herself with her
mother. In fact, because Sallie has repeatedly chosen bossy friends who
tell her what to do, she may be experiencing a “repetition compulsion.”
This term was coined by Freud and refers to situations in which a person
tries to rework an old conflict through current relationships. It makes
sense that Gwen may be an emotional stand-in for Sallie’s mother. Gwen
feels irreplaceable, like a mother, which is probably a reason why Sallie
continues in the nonsupportive friendship.
I use several techniques to try to make the interpretation palatable
to Sallie. Prior to the interpretation, I reinforce our therapeutic alliance
by supporting Sallie’s tentative move toward independence with Gwen.
Then, before sharing my ideas, I first ask Sallie if she sees any similarities
between her friendship with Gwen and any other important past rela -
tionships. After hearing Sallie’s input, I strategically hedge the interpreta-
tion as a question. (“Do you think the way you describe Gwen, Claudia,
and Dawn sounds a little bit like the way you describe your mother?”)
With this approach, the discussion will evolve around Sallie’s agreement
or disagreement with my ideas. Either way, our understanding of the
topic deepens. Finally, as the conversation progresses, I explain my view
of Sallie’s behavior gently and with empathy for how it evolved over
time.
Example 14.5 avoids a number of common pitfalls. The interpreta -
tion is not humiliating or condescending. It does not attempt to be a
Management of Impasses 257
therapeutic epiphany. In fact, its power lies in the fact that it isn’t a great
surprise to Sallie. It reformulates information that Sallie has shared with
me over time. It is only a slight stretch for Sallie to acquire the new per -
spective.
As Sallie’s mother becomes the focus, Sallie might discover that she
has, without conscious awareness, resented the control exerted by her
mother’s giving and withholding of attention. It’s possible that much of
that resentment was turned against herself in the forms of self-reproach,
devaluing views of herself, impaired confidence, and unearned feelings
of guilt. As she allows herself to express her hostile feelings in the safe
arena of the therapy sessions rather than turning her anger inward, her
self-assurance may increase.
Over time, she may also gain the courage to imagine talking to her
mother, as one adult to another, about a career other than business. She
may begin to conceive of the possibility of maintaining her mother’s at -
tention and care while pursuing her own interests and developing her
own talents. If Sallie is game, mental imagery or rehearsals during the
therapy sessions could help her prepare for a talk with her mother.
As these therapeutic developments emerge coincident with Sallie’s
improved ability to communicate, her relationship with her mother may
improve. Even if they continue to disagree about Sallie’s career opportu-
nities, they may still feel closer if they are able to talk more openly and
honestly. As Sallie’s confidence increases and she realizes that ignoring
her own feelings doesn’t guarantee a fulfilling friendship, she might be-
come more open with Gwen. If Gwen cannot tolerate mutuality, Sallie
might start to search out new relationships.
While progress with such profound consequences may be triggered
or catalyzed by well-timed interpretations, a large part of these changes
will likely be mediated through the relationship between the patient and
the therapist. We illustrate how these processes occur in the next two
chapters.
Key words: affective equivalents, analysis of resistance, associations,
clarification, confrontation, countertransference enactment,
defense, dreams, imagery, impasse, insight, interpretation, passive-
aggression, psychoanalysis, psychotherapy, repetition compulsion,
resistance, sibling rivalry, working through
258 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
15
Empathic Lapses
An empathic lapse occurs when the therapist misunderstands the patient. If
the lapse is not acknowledged by the therapist, the treatment may suffer. If
the incident is recognized and discussed, the relationship and the treatment
may be revitalized.
WHAT IS AN EMPATHIC LAPSE?
As a novice psychiatrist during the first months of my training, I’d fanta-
size about my future as the most empathic therapist of all time: a thera-
peutic superhero. Eventually, I would learn how to create psychological
change in a single bound. I would cure long-standing emotional pain
that had been resistant to all previous treatment. I would understand ev-
erything.
After I gained some clinical experience, my perspective on empathy
underwent a fundamental change. Even if it were possible to do so, I’m
no longer interested in becoming the most empathic therapist on record.
Misunderstandings, as unpleasant as they can be, offer unique ther-
apeutic opportunities. Some patients avoid close relationships because of
the “baggage” that accompanies them: a fear of being misunderstood
and a fear of rejection. If I can model how to work through conflicts in a
constructive manner while maintaining an emotional connection, my pa-
tient’s trust in me and in her own capacity to bear intimacy will ulti -
mately increase. Rather than aim for perfection, I now work toward re -
lationship resiliency.
“Empathic failure” is the term used in the psychotherapeutic litera -
ture to describe an interaction in which the therapist misunderstands the
patient. From our perspective, it’s a harsh and inaccurate term. We’ve
259
employed the term “empathic lapse” as a replacement, promoting our
view that these are not failures but valuable opportunities for discussion
and learning.
A patient may respond to an empathic lapse in any number of ways.
She might laugh and pretend it didn’t happen, withdraw and cancel the
next session, or cry openly and express how hurt she feels. I’ve found the
angry patient the most challenging. It’s comparatively easy to listen to a
patient’s rage regarding her family or friends, but it feels entirely differ -
ent to have a patient’s fury directed at me.
REACTING TO AN EMPATHIC LAPSE
The unprepared therapist may feel at a loss when faced with an angry
patient after an empathic lapse. Example 15.1 illustrates how an inexpe-
rienced therapist might respond to this predicament.
EXAMPLE 15.1
An empathic lapse occurs between the patient and her
therapist. The therapist responds by becoming defensive,
focusing on the patient’s past, and then trying to repair the
misunderstanding too quickly
Midway into a Session with Sallie
SALLIE: I don’t know, Dr. Bender. Sometimes I feel so independent, and
other times I just want to curl up into a little ball and cry.
THERAPIST: So, sometimes you feel like an adult and other times you feel
like a little girl?
SALLIE:( Looks down at the floor and twists a tissue in her hands .) I
guess so.
Next Session
SALLIE: I don’t have anything to say today.
THERAPIST:( Nods, but does not say anything, hoping Sallie’s associa -
tions will emerge naturally. )
SALLIE: I am not a little girl! ( Blurts angrily.)
THERAPIST:( taken by surprise ) Huh?
260 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
SALLIE: Last session, you said this thing that just wasn’t true. Remember
when you said that I sometimes act like a little girl?
I don’t know. Is that how you see me? I don’t even know what
to say to you anymore if that’s the case.
I can’t believe that I have been confiding in you for months,
and you don’t understand me at all.
THERAPIST: I said what?
SALLIE: Last session, I told you this very personal thing, and you called
me a little girl.
You don’t even remember? Whatever. Just forget it.
THERAPIST: I think this is important to talk about. As I remember it, I
did not say you were a little girl. I said that sometimes you feel like
a little girl.
S
ALLIE: It only feels worse to hear you say it again! You know, I had no
idea you were this judgmental.
THERAPIST: I was not judgmental. I don’t think I said that you were
a little girl. I think you are remembering the interaction incor-
rectly.
S
ALLIE: Whatever . . . if you say so. . . . (Breaks eye contact, and looks at
the floor.)
THERAPIST: It seems this really upset you.
SALLIE: Well, sort of. You usually understand what I say. I don’t even
know what to do now. I feel shot down.
THERAPIST: I must have reminded you of your mother. You have told me
how alone you feel when your mother misunderstands something
important about you and doesn’t listen to your point of view.
S
ALLIE: Huh? ( Starts to cry .) I don’t want to talk about my mom. I
wasn’t even thinking about that.
THERAPIST: Can you tell me why you are crying?
SALLIE: Because you just don’t get it.
THERAPIST: Am I reminding you of your mom right now?
SALLIE: No, you are not. I don’t think you are like my mom at all. Just
forget it.
THERAPIST:[ I don’t know what to do, but I figure that validating Sallie’s
emotions can’t hurt. I decide to change tactics .] I can understand
how hard it could feel to begin to trust me and then to feel “shot
down.”
Empathic Lapses 261
SALLIE: I just don’t understand what you meant if it wasn’t a put-down.
THERAPIST: I definitely didn’t mean to put you down. Let me think for a
minute what I was trying to say.
I think I meant to say that you may have a part of you that
sometimes feels like a little girl, while other parts of you are func -
tioning like an independent adult. I am really sorry.
SALLIE: Well, I don’t like to think about it in those terms. It seems derog-
atory to me.
THERAPIST: I didn’t mean it in a derogatory way at all, but I can under-
stand how painful it might be if that is how it sounded.
SALLIE:( Looks uncomfortable.) Yeah, yeah. Let’s talk about something
else.
Example 15.1 illustrates a number of common, understandable, but
not very therapeutic tactics that a novice therapist might employ when
faced with an unexpectedly angry patient after an empathic lapse. I start
by defending my comment (“As I remember it, I did not say you were a
little girl. I said that sometimes you feel like a little girl.”) and Sallie re-
acts with agitation followed by withdrawal.
During my second defensive maneuver, I refer to Sallie’s family dy-
namics to escape a direct discussion of my actions. (“I must have re-
minded you of your mother.”) While my instinctual response to feeling
ashamed isn’t unusual, Sallie may experience the psychodynamic side-
stepping as attacking. It isn’t a therapeutically useful response.
By the end of the example, I become a bit more compassionate. I
stop trying to argue Sallie out of her feelings, and I’m open to the idea
that I could have hurt her unintentionally. Then I try to repair the misun-
derstanding in record time to alleviate the unease that has penetrated the
office environment. In certain subtle respects, this approach is also an
easy way out.
While some of my comments start with “I can understand . . . ” in
an attempt to show empathy for Sallie’s current state, my choice of
words doesn’t address the fact that we reached this impasse because I
hadn’t understood Sallie’s perspective originally. The use of mollifying
words forces a semblance of empathy. They don’t demonstrate a true
grasp and acceptance of Sallie’s angry and hurt feelings and of her cur -
rent need to express them.
In addition, my profuse apologies are so repetitive that they seem
automatic. I am too eager to regain Sallie’s good graces. By not encour -
aging Sallie to express a range of emotions in response to the incident, I
might give the impression that I can’t tolerate and survive her anger.
262 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
Apologizing for hurting the patient may be important, but first it’s
crucial to learn more about the misunderstanding. Example 15.2 illus -
trates how a more experienced therapist might respond to the empathic
lapse.
EXAMPLE 15.2
The more experienced therapist talks with a patient in detail
about a recent empathic lapse
SALLIE: Sometimes I feel so independent, and other times I just want to
curl up into a little ball and cry.
THERAPIST: So, sometimes you feel like an adult, and other times you
feel like a little girl.
SALLIE:( Looks down at the floor and twists a tissue in her hands .) I
guess so.
THERAPIST: What are you feeling? ( with a gentle look )
SALLIE: Nothing. I’m just thinking of the work I need to do tonight.
Next Session
SALLIE: I don’t have anything to say today.
THERAPIST:( Nods but does not say anything. I want to allow Sallie’s as-
sociations to emerge .)
SALLIE: I am not a little girl! ( Blurts angrily.)
THERAPIST: Hmm? ( quizzical and concerned look )
SALLIE: Last session, you said this thing that just wasn’t true. Remember
when you said that I sometimes act like a little girl?
I don’t know. Is that how you see me? I don’t even know what
to say to you anymore if that’s the case.
I can’t believe that I have been confiding in you for months,
and you don’t understand me at all.
THERAPIST: Feeling so misunderstood is upsetting. Can you tell me
more? What do you remember of what we both said?
SALLIE: Well, I’ve just started to feel totally comfortable talking to you. I
mean, before last week, I thought I could tell you anything, and
then boom!
T
HERAPIST: Boom?
SALLIE: Boom, you label me as a little girl! I am coming to therapy to
Empathic Lapses 263
help me grow up and deal with these types of problems. Maybe
sometimes I need a little extra help, but I’m not a kid.
THERAPIST: I agree that needing a little extra help doesn’t mean that
you are a kid. Do you remember any more about the interac -
tion?
SALLIE: Well, all week, I wondered if I should stop therapy. I’d thought
you were on my side, and then all of a sudden you start to be so
judgmental.
T
HERAPIST: My comment about feeling like a little girl felt like a judg -
ment?
SALLIE: Of course it did. I am trying so hard to act grown-up and mature
in my life. Then you label me with “little girl.” It shows me how lit-
tle you understand me.
THERAPIST: First, I am glad you can tell me this so directly. It sounds like
I really did miss the boat, as my mention of “little girl feelings” felt
insulting. Even though I did not mean it in an insulting way, my
choice of words didn’t reflect your efforts to master the problems
we have been discussing.
I think it’s important to add that I don’t see you as a little girl
at all. I see how hard you are working to find your path as an adult,
and my comment didn’t support that growth.
S
ALLIE: That’s true. It really hurt.
THERAPIST: I think you also mentioned wanting to curl into a ball and
cry during part of our discussion last week. I wish I had asked you
to describe that experience in more detail instead. Perhaps some
time you can tell me more about it.
It’s to your credit that you let me know how you felt about my
comment last week. I hope I won’t make such mistakes again, but if
I do, I hope you’ll tell me right away.
Example 15.2 illustrates procedures that a therapist can employ
when reviewing an empathic lapse with a patient. When Sallie starts to
relate her disappointment, I don’t immediately validate her feelings or
move on to another topic as quickly as possible. Instead, I ask her to re -
call the upsetting events in detail, with the questions: “Can you tell me
more? What do you remember of what we both said?”
As I learn about the prior misunderstanding in more detail, I do not
share the details of my personal perspective of the preceding event. I fo -
cus primarily on Sallie’s emotional position to understand why the inter-
action was so painful for her.
264 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
Meanwhile, I try to stay calm and nonjudgmental throughout the
experience. After I “get it,” I can provide, during the replay, the empathy
that was missing the first time around.
AN EMPATHIC LAPSE AS A RESULT
OF A THERAPIST’S COUNTERTRANSFERENCE REACTION
Sometimes an empathic lapse occurs when my countertransference—my
subjective reaction to the patient—interferes with my ability to respond
therapeutically. I find these empathic lapses especially challenging as I
need to respond to the patient’s needs while simultaneously analyzing
my own inner experience.
We’ve set up an example of a countertransference reaction leading
to an empathic lapse in Examples 15.3 and 15.4. When Sallie starts to
make some new friends other than Gwen, I’m surprised to find that I am
not as pleased as I might have expected. Maybe I feel unconsciously pos-
sessive of Sallie after working with her intensively for many months, and
I am reluctant to share my special niche as her confidant.
Occasionally I have felt pangs of jealousy when a young adult pa-
tient has found a special mentor in her life and has talked repeatedly
about how this person is so helpful, unusual, creative, and so forth. Al-
though my patient’s comments are evidence of emotional growth, some-
times it’s not easy to feel replaced.
I’m sharing this story to encourage you not to disregard these feel-
ings, unappealing as they may be. When these feelings are recognized
and processed, the therapy can be protected. They are most troublesome
when they are ignored.
When I don’t admit my feelings of jealousy to myself in Example
15.3, I unconsciously act on them by criticizing Sallie’s new choice of
friends.
EXAMPLE 15.3
The therapist’s countertransference reaction results in an
empathic lapse, and the therapist cannot immediately untangle
her own issues from those of the patient
S
ALLIE: I am so excited! I went to a campus forum sponsored by the
local newspaper, and I met some really neat girls. They all live to -
gether in a sorority on campus, and they invited me to dinner. I had
an amazing time.
There was one girl, Emme, who was especially neat. She was
Empathic Lapses 265
so nice to me. She’s also kinda interested in journalism, but she’s
actually done something about it. She writes for the campus pa -
per, and, if I get up the guts, I may start working there a little
too.
She seems so generous. I needed to get some stuff off campus
and she let me borrow her car. Wow! It’s hard to believe she might
become a new friend. I was so happy all week after meeting her.
She’s everything I could wish for in a friend. She’s incredible!
T
HERAPIST: Is she incredible on the inside as well? [I feel a little annoyed
at Sallie’s news, but I’m not able to recognize my feelings of jeal -
ousy. I formulate this question in response to my internal state. If I
had been able to process my own feelings independently, I would
have chosen a different question that was more protective of Sallie’s
emotional growth.]
S
ALLIE: What do you mean? Emme already seems so different than
Gwen. I don’t understand. I thought you wanted me to make new
friends.
T
HERAPIST: It just seems it is easy for you to idealize Emme when you
hardly know her. [ I am still unaware of any countertransference
feelings that are fueling this line of questioning .]
SALLIE: Dr. Bender, that seems like a weird thing for you to say. Are you
prejudiced against sororities?
THERAPIST: Do I sound that way to you?
SALLIE: Yes. I don’t know . . . I was so excited about this news. I thought
you would be also. Do you think the Greek system is bad?
THERAPIST: Well, let’s look at this together. What if I did have a problem
with it, and what if I didn’t?
SALLIE: I don’t know . . . I don’t know . . . I just don’t know what to say
now.
I thought you would be happy for me. Maybe you’re right. I
don’t really know Emme very well yet, even though we’ve talked ev-
ery night on the phone this week.
THERAPIST: It’s hard for you to hear me state an opinion.
SALLIE: I don’t know. I was feeling so happy about this. Now I just feel
upset. (Wipes her eyes .)
Usually you are happy for me when I am happy. I don’t think
you have ever acted critical like this before. I don’t get it. Did I do
something wrong?
T
HERAPIST: No. It’s fine that you have a new friend.
266 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
Sallie accurately picks up on my countertransference and is gutsy
enough to share her thoughts with me directly. While patients are rarely
able to share their thoughts so candidly early in a psychotherapy, we im-
bued Sallie with this attribute to illustrate this challenging clinical situa -
tion.
Unfortunately, while Sallie has the ability to confront me, I’m not
up to the challenge. My unconscious worry that Sallie’s new friends
might replace me fuels my slightly snide, insensitive, and counterthera -
peutic reactions. The therapy would be better off if I could recognize my
true feelings about Sallie’s news, and then process them independently of
Sallie, either alone or in supervision. A therapist’s own therapy is also a
haven for understanding countertransference enactments.
Example 15.4 illustrates how a therapist can process a counter -
transference reaction while simultaneously protecting her patient.
EXAMPLE 15.4
The therapist realizes that her countertransference reaction
resulted in some unempathic responses and accepts
responsibility for her behavior
S
ALLIE: I am so excited! . . . (See Example 15.3 for the full text.) . . . It’s
hard to believe she might become a new friend. I was so happy all
week after meeting her. She’s everything I could wish for in a friend.
She’s incredible!
T
HERAPIST: Is she incredible on the inside as well? [ I feel annoyed and
then notice that I feel a little jealous of Sallie’s new friends .]
SALLIE: What do you mean? Emme already seems so different than
Gwen. I don’t understand. I thought you wanted me to make new
friends
T
HERAPIST: Let me think for a minute. How did you hear what I just
said? [I notice after the words pop out of my mouth that my first
comment responded more to my own internal state than to Sallie’s
comments. I make a mental note to think about this more as I write
up my process notes at the end of the session .]
S
ALLIE: Well, I am so happy about this new group of friends, and Emme
seems especially nice. So far, I don’t feel stupid when I’m with
Emme, and that happens with Gwen all the time.
Haven’t we been working on this idea that I could have better
friends for a long time? I don’t understand why you said that.
T
HERAPIST:[ I hear Sallie’s point, and I don’t want to dismiss her anger.]
Empathic Lapses 267
It was a bad choice of words, actually. I agree that we have been
working on the idea that you could find more supportive friends.
My comment wasn’t supportive.
S
ALLIE: No, it wasn’t.
THERAPIST:[ I wait for a moment to allow Sallie to express her frustra -
tion.]
SALLIE: I don’t get it. It’s not like you to say something sort of mean. Did
I do something wrong? Are you mad at me?
THERAPIST: I’m not mad at you, and you certainly didn’t do anything
wrong. I think my first take on the news was off-base. I did not give
you enough credit for your good judgment. It sounds like you have
met some nice people who are worth getting to know better.
S
ALLIE: It is okay for me to talk about my new friends with you, isn’t it?
THERAPIST: Absolutely. I’m very interested in hearing about Emme and
any other new friend you want to tell me about.
It makes sense, though, that you might feel distrustful after the
error I made. If I make another such mistake, I hope you’ll let me
know about it.
S
ALLIE: I just don’t feel like talking about them anymore today.
THERAPIST: How do you feel about my having made this error and your
having to call it to my attention?
SALLIE: Whatever.
THERAPIST: Did I hurt your feelings?
SALLIE: No, it just was a surprise—that’s all. I don’t expect that type of
comment from you.
THERAPIST: I wonder if this has undermined your trust in me. ( sensi-
tively forthright)
SALLIE: I don’t know. Maybe a little. It’s just unexpected because we’ve
been talking for weeks about my need for more supportive friends. I
thought you would be excited for me.
I don’t know. I feel weird talking to you about this.
T
HERAPIST: What’s weird about it for you?
SALLIE: I don’t want you to feel bad, but I also didn’t like what you said.
THERAPIST: I’m glad you let me know your concerns, but, actually, I wel-
come your honesty. I think we can both learn a lot if we work this
out together.
SALLIE: I don’t know. I can’t think of anything to say. I’m sorry Dr.
268 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
Bender, but I don’t want to say something wrong, or have you say
something wrong again.
THERAPIST: You didn’t say anything wrong. I did. My comment was
hurtful. We have been talking about how nice it would be to find
some friends other than Gwen. I didn’t acknowledge how exciting it
feels to be getting to know Emme.
I misunderstood you, but I hope we can work it out. One of the
most important lessons in life is to learn how to resolve problems
when one person hurts another.
S
ALLIE: That sounds good, in theory. . . .
THERAPIST: Can you tell me what crossed your mind?
SALLIE: Well, I don’t think it is that easy to repair a relationship after a
fight. That has been my experience anyway.
THERAPIST: What has been your experience?
SALLIE: Well, when my mom and I fight, for instance . . .
THERAPIST:( Nods encouragingly.)
SALLIE: There always seems to be a major rift between us after all our
fights. Even the stupid ones.
THERAPIST: Can you give me an example?
SALLIE: Well, a couple weeks ago, I wanted to talk to her about my new
friends, and she said she was too busy. I got really angry and hung
up. I know I overreacted, but I was really upset at the time.
Anyway, she hasn’t called me since. And I don’t want to call
her, after she dissed me.
T
HERAPIST: It struck a very sensitive nerve when she wouldn’t provide
what you needed?
SALLIE: Well, yeah. She never seems too busy to do things for my
brother, but if I have a simple request, she has better things to do.
Now that we are in a fight, we may not talk to each other for a few
weeks. See what I mean? Fights hurt relationships. They don’t help
them grow.
T
HERAPIST: Well, I agree with you that the relationship may have trou -
ble growing when the fight stays unresolved. If you would like,
maybe we could talk more about your fights with your mother and
how they evolve.
S
ALLIE: I don’t know. How can I be sure you won’t insult me again?
THERAPIST: You can’t right now, but in my experience, a relationship
grows in trust if a misunderstanding is processed and resolved.
Empathic Lapses 269
SALLIE: You think so? I’ve haven’t really experienced that in my relation-
ships.
THERAPIST: I’ve seen it happen. I hope we can accomplish this together.
SALLIE: How do we start?
THERAPIST: Well, how are you feeling right now?
SALLIE: Kind of overwhelmed. I wish the session were over already.
THERAPIST: The first few times it can feel overwhelming to try to work
through a major misunderstanding. Can you tell me more about
how you are feeling?
S
ALLIE: Well, what happens now? I don’t really feel like talking about
my mother and our stupid fights. I’d rather tell you about this arti-
cle I agreed to help Emme with. It’s for the school paper, but you
probably aren’t interested.
THERAPIST: Actually, I am very interested.
SALLIE: You are? It’s not a big problem. It’s more of a success. Is that
okay to talk about too?
THERAPIST: Absolutely. I want to hear about anything that you would
like to share with me, your successes in addition to your struggles.
My first reaction during this session may have made it seem that I
wasn’t as interested in your achievement—finding Emme as a new
friend. I’m sorry for that.
S
ALLIE:( excitedly) Okay. Well, after Emme and I finish this article, I may
try to write one on my own. ( Eagerly shares more information
about her plans .)
THERAPIST:( Nods and smiles .)
In Example 15.4, I am able to identify my unhelpful countertrans -
ference reaction within the session. I can try to understand the details of
my reaction after the session is over. Meanwhile, I am able to repair my
lapse in understanding with Sallie during our session. While this is the
ideal, often the therapy doesn’t evolve so smoothly.
Example 15.5 illustrates how I might repair an empathic lapse 1
week after it occurred and effectively respond to Sallie’s insistent curios-
ity about the incident.
EXAMPLE 15.5
After responding unempathically to the patient in a previous
sesssion (Example 15.3), the therapist works through her own
270 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
countertransference reaction and, in the next session, talks with
the patient about the interaction
One Week after the Session in Example 15.3
Sallie is talking about her courses for the first 15 minutes of the ses-
sion. She seems to be avoiding any mention of her new friends.
THERAPIST: I would like to hear more about your new courses, but I
wanted to make sure we had a chance to get back to our discussion
last week about your new friends.
S
ALLIE: Oh, it’s okay. I have enough other things to talk about. It felt un-
comfortable talking about them last week anyway. Let’s just forget
it.
THERAPIST: Actually I think it is important to discuss. I can appreciate
that it was uncomfortable for you last week. As I thought about it
later, I realized that I may have missed the boat.
S
ALLIE: Huh? What do you mean?
THERAPIST: I think you may have felt uncomfortable talking about your
friends last week because my reaction wasn’t very understanding. If
you agree, I’d like to try to talk about it again.
S
ALLIE: Oh God, do we have to?
THERAPIST: What would it be like to reopen the topic?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I just felt like you weren’t supportive of my new
friends last week, and that was so weird. I thought that was our mu-
tual goal: helping me to find new friends. When I finally make some
progress, you didn’t trust my choices.
THERAPIST: You were reaching out to new people, and in effect I criti -
cized your growth and courage with a new group of friends. I was
wrong to do that.
SALLIE: It means a lot to hear you say that.
THERAPIST: What does it feel like?
SALLIE: Well, you made me so mad last week. I almost skipped this
week’s session.
I knew you didn’t understand, and then I wondered if you dis-
approved of me. You just couldn’t see my point of view. Like I said,
I almost cancelled our meeting today. I didn’t really want to come
back.
T
HERAPIST: It took self-discipline and courage for you to come to your
Empathic Lapses 271
session today. It was understandably hard to return after I disap -
pointed you.
I’m glad you made it. By coming, we have the chance to work
this out together.
SALLIE: Usually, you let me talk about what is important to me, but you
were so different last week. I don’t know what to talk about now.
THERAPIST: You are right. My intention is to talk with you about what -
ever feels important to you, and last week I didn’t do that. When
you brought up Emme for the first time, my response wasn’t very
sensitive or useful.
S
ALLIE: Yeah, you made things worse instead of better. That’s never hap-
pened before. Did I do something wrong? Why did you do that?
THERAPIST:[ Being fully open wouldn’t respond to Sallie’s needs .] You
did nothing wrong at all. My comments were off-base, and they did
make things worse intead of better. That is why I wanted to make
sure we talked about it today.
S
ALLIE: Yeah, you don’t usually make comments like this. It would just
help me to know why it happened.
THERAPIST: How would it help you?
SALLIE: I don’t know. I feel a little worried.
THERAPIST: Worried about what?
SALLIE: Well, are you okay? Did my problems upset you?
THERAPIST: Did I seem upset last week?
SALLIE: I don’t know. Maybe a little bit.
THERAPIST: Perhaps I may have seemed upset to you last week, because
my comments weren’t supportive. But it’s important for you to
know that I said the things I said because my focus was off. [Sharing
the details of my reaction wouldn’t be therapeutic. It had more to
do with me than with Sallie .]
Now I’m encouraged that you were able to tell me your feelings
so directly. You’re right. I wasn’t being very helpful last week.
S
ALLIE: Well, I don’t want our relationship to change because I’ve told
you that you did something wrong.
THERAPIST: The misunderstanding makes our relationship feel more ten-
uous?
SALLIE: Yeah, sort of.
THERAPIST: I think we’ll learn more over time about this concern, but I
272 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
view our relationship as stronger for weathering a troubling interac-
tion. If I ever misunderstand anything in the future, I hope you will
tell me as you did this time.
SALLIE:( beaming) Sure, you know it seems pretty brave to me that you
brought last week’s spat back up. I’m glad we talked about it.
THERAPIST: And you were brave too.
SALLIE: Yeah, I guess so. Maybe you are right.
Many individuals seek therapy because they have experienced a lack
of empathy from important figures in their life. One of the healing as -
pects of psychotherapy is the experience of feeling safe, affirmed, and
understood. This experience is fortified when a misunderstanding is
worked through rather than denied or deflected. Once Sallie has experi -
enced working through a misunderstanding with me, she might feel
more capable of talking openly and honestly after a disagreement with
other significant people in her life.
UNCOVERING A POTENTIAL EMPATHIC LAPSE
While Example 15.5 illustrates a potentially stressful situation, it is easy
in one respect: Sallie doesn’t deny that I made a hurtful comment. Rather
than being shy or indirect, she tells me exactly which of my statements
bothered her and why. Many patients aren’t this direct.
Sometimes, I wonder whether I committed an empathic lapse dur-
ing a session and missed the patient’s cues that my comments were
hurtful. In my early days in psychiatry I would often worry that I had
caused irreparable emotional damage when I critiqued my work after
the session was over. Even if my patient hadn’t seemed particularly
bent out of shape during the hour, I would start to worry about my
responses until I reached supervision to confess my most recent “mis -
takes.” Words that had felt direct and sincere at the time seemed judg -
mental and harsh when I reviewed my notes. Questions that had
appeared crucially insightful sounded like unnecessary, insensitive in -
terruptions. Now and again, a supervisor would also specifically criti -
cize a statement I had made, fueling my anxiety that I had hurt my pa -
tient emotionally.
Lucky for me, most of my supervisors were extremely supportive
when I started sharing my concerns. Here are some of their tips: First, if
a therapist makes a less than ideal comment during a session and the pa-
tient doesn’treact, it is impossible to assess how the patient experienced
the moment. (This is a situation different from Example 15.3, in which I
Empathic Lapses 273
misunderstand Sallie during the session, and she immediately expresses
disappointment.) Second, if the patient didn’t seem taken aback by my
comment when I made it, it is not therapeutic for me to confess to a pos-
sible empathic lapse at our next meeting. Since I don’t possess psychic
powers, I have no idea how last week’s statement was interpreted by the
patient. My patient may not even remember the comment I wish I had
never uttered.
If I’m really concerned, I might ask a patient at a natural pause in
the session how she experienced a certain part of last week’s meeting. If
she brushes it off, I follow suit. In my experience, the statements that I
wish I had never uttered are rarely the ones that my patients tag as
empathic lapses.
Another tactic is to listen carefully during the next session to see if
Sallie alludes to a potential empathic lapse from the previous meeting. If
Sallie shares her reaction directly, I am home free and can use the advice
outlined in the previous examples.
Let’s pretend that Sallie had not expressed her frustration when I
wasn’t very supportive about her new friendship with Emme. As I review
my notes in supervision, I start to wonder whether my comments could
have been upsetting to her. Example 15.6 illustrates how to handle the
situation in the following session if Sallie drops some subtle hints about
a prior empathic lapse.
EXAMPLE 15.6
The patient alludes to an empathic lapse in the previous
session, and the therapist helps her talk about it directly
S
ALLIE: So, I had a horrible week.
THERAPIST:O h( concerned look), what happened?
SALLIE: I don’t know really. I just felt lonely all week. I didn’t see any of
those new friends I told you about. Maybe I avoided them a little
bit.
T
HERAPIST: How did you avoid them?
SALLIE: Well, I didn’t hang out where I thought I might see them. I just
felt so exhausted. You know, normal college burnout.
THERAPIST: Do you have an understanding of what might be burning
you out?
SALLIE: Not really. I just feel very out of it this week.
THERAPIST: Did anything happen in our last session that made your
week more difficult?
274 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
SALLIE: Not really. . . . I don’t know.
THERAPIST:( Quiet, encouraging look )
SALLIE: Well, I did wonder about one comment that you made.
THERAPIST: Could you tell me about it?
SALLIE: Well, remember I told you that I had met this really nice girl,
Emme, and I was really excited to have a new friend?
THERAPIST:( Nods.)
SALLIE: Well, you said a weird thing.
THERAPIST: What was the weird thing?
SALLIE: Well, you said something about how Emme might be superficial.
I don’t really remember the words.
THERAPIST: Do you remember my comment specifically?
SALLIE: Yes, it was something that Emme might just look good on the
outside. I got this feeling that you didn’t want me to be friends with
her.
T
HERAPIST: As I think back on it now, I can see how my comment might
have felt upsetting. How did it affect you?
SALLIE: Well, I respect your opinion. You’re probably right that Emme
isn’t that great. I was just really excited after I met her.
THERAPIST: While I appreciate that you respect my opinion, I think my
comment was misguided. If you were really excited after meeting
Emme, she is someone worth getting to know better.
S
ALLIE: You really think so?
THERAPIST: I do, and I’m sorry that I wasn’t able to express this message
first and foremost.
SALLIE: I am too, but it means a lot that you told me this.
During the first part of the session in Example 15.6, Sallie alludes to
her disappointment in vague, derivative terms. My open-ended question
acknowledges that the therapy could have contributed to her distress,
and Sallie slowly starts to talk about her discontent.
What should I do if Sallie does not attribute any of her current dis -
tress to the previous therapy session? I could repeat a couple of com -
ments such as “I wonder if anything in the therapy could have contrib -
uted to your stressful week?” but if Sallie doesn’t respond, I would not
pursue the topic. Forcing an issue is not therapeutic. First, I can’t be cer-
tain that Sallie’s distress is a result of an interaction that occurred in the
Empathic Lapses 275
therapy. While the therapy hour is a significant part of a patient’s life, it
is only 1 hour in a busy week. I need to avoid overemphasizing its im -
portance. Second, Sallie may not be ready to talk about the misunder -
standing so directly. If this is the case, it is enough that I express my in -
terest in talking about our interaction. I can hope that sometime in the
future she may be ready to express her feelings more openly. In the
meantime, we can focus on the issues that Sallie feels comfortable talk -
ing about in more detail.
Empathic lapses are challenging, especially for the beginning thera -
pist. As we have indicated, an honest approach of reviewing the inci -
dent, responding to the replay empathically, and taking responsibility as
indicated may ultimately result in a therapeutic experience for the pa -
tient. Again, the goal is not to pretend to be the perfect and invariably
sensitive therapist. The best therapists try to help the patient work
through misunderstandings as part of the emotional growth process.
The therapist can also evolve and mature through these often dis -
tressing experiences. She can learn to keep cool in the face of hostility in-
stead of acting in an offensive or defensive manner. She can learn to ac-
cept that empathic lapses occur and that they needn’t be the end of a
psychotherapy. Finally, situations in which we are insufficiently empath-
ic can serve as indicators, pointing us toward facets of our own inner life
that need attention.
Through our own efforts at introspection or with the help of col-
leagues, supervisors, or our own therapists, we can develop strength
where there had been vulnerability. Over time, the recognition of our ar-
eas of limitation can help us develop greater maturity, serenity, and skill.
Key words: countertransference, empathic failure, empathy, impasses,
intersubjectivity, misunderstanding, psychotherapy, rapport,
therapeutic alliance, trust
276 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
16
Transference and
Countertransference
As human beings, we learn from our experiences with others. We transfer ex-
pectations based on important relationships to new individuals that we meet.
This phenomenon is called transference. One feature of emotional health is the
capacity to revise expectations of relationships appropriately as we expand our
experiences with people.
Sometimes unconscious transference can impair psychological function-
ing. When transference enters the psychotherapeutic relationship and is dis-
cussed openly by therapist and patient, profound learning and maturation may
result.
Therapists can also transfer their own expectations to their patients. They
also react to their patients emotionally (countertransference). Courageous rec-
ognition of those feelings combined with constructive examination can dimin -
ish obstacles to the patient’s therapeutic progress. In many instances, such in-
trospection may reinvigorate the psychological treatment.
Transference is a form of social memory. Experiences with primary peo-
ple from our childhood, usually our parents, teach us how to relate to
others outside the immediate family. Either consciously or uncon -
sciously, we transfer expectations that we carry from past interactions
onto new relationships. This transference effect may be subtle or dra -
matic. For example: A patient with a supportive family may expect au -
thority figures to be helpful and comforting. A patient who has experi -
enced neglect and abuse on the homefront may assume that this
experience will continue in other venues, personal and professional.
When a therapist divulges very little information about herself and
doesn’t make any personal demands, the transference from patient to
277
therapist is more easily observed than with many other relationships.
With an empathic approach, the therapist can use the transference to in-
crease the patient’s understanding of herself.
Naturally, therapists also respond emotionally to their patients.
This phenomenon is called countertransference. Countertransference re -
actions can be intense and may feel distracting to a novice therapist who
is trying to pay attention to her patient’s concerns. If understood, these
reactions may inform the treatment rather than pollute it, providing
emotional data that would be otherwise unobtainable.
TRANSFERENCE IN THE FIRST MEETING
While a patient’s transference toward her therapist tends to deepen as
the therapy progresses, it may begin with their first contact. For in -
stance, during a first session, a patient may have a strong emotional re -
action—favorable or unfavorable—to a personal feature of the therapist,
such as gender, age, or skin color. Since the patient has just barely met
the therapist, her opinion is probably a transference reaction, because it
is based on past experiences. If the reaction is favorable—for example,
the patient wanted to see a young female therapist and the therapist is
young, female, and reminds the patient of her comforting sister—it is un-
likely that the issue will ever need to be discussed. On the other hand, if
the patient has a strong aversive first impression of the therapist, the
treatment will benefit if this issue is addressed as soon as it becomes evi-
dent.
Example 16.1 illustrates how a therapist can attempt to forge a
therapeutic alliance with a new patient who has an aversive transference
reaction during the first session.
EXAMPLE 16.1
The therapist responds appropriately to a patient with a
strongly aversive first impression
First Meeting
THERAPIST: Hello, I am Dr. Bender.
SALLIE: My goodness, you are so young!
THERAPIST: What?
SALLIE: I expected someone older. You don’t look older than 25. I’m
sorry. I was just hoping for someone with some more experience.
278 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
THERAPIST: More experience?
SALLIE: Well, you sounded older over the phone. I just wanted to see a
therapist with more life experience than I have. You know, with
wisdom—no offense, I hope.
T
HERAPIST: No offense taken. I can imagine it is quite a disappointment
meeting me if you were hoping for someone older. [Although I want
to tell Sallie that I am older than I look, I resist the urge. ]
SALLIE: Yes, it is. Could I switch to someone else in the clinic?
THERAPIST: It might be possible to arrange that. If I know a bit more
about what you are looking for and what brought you to therapy in
the first place, I can make a more informed referral.
How would you feel about meeting with me for a session or
two to talk about these issues? Then, I can use this information to
find you a clinician you may feel more comfortable with.
S
ALLIE: Okay, but I’m pretty sure I’ll want to switch after the first few
meetings.
THERAPIST: I can understand your concern. It is important to try to find
a therapist you feel comfortable with, so he or she can be helpful to
you.
In Example 16.1, I don’t take Sallie’s comments personally. Her
preference for older clinicians predates her meeting with me and may be
in response to previous interactions with younger and older helping fig-
ures in her life. The offer of the extended consultation followed by a re-
ferral to an older clinician is empathic and clinically strategic. The plan
validates Sallie’s wish for an older provider, while the future meetings
give us the opportunity to work together briefly. While some unfavor -
able initial transference reactions are formidable, a large percentage dis -
sipate once the patient feels validated, respected, and understood. It is
possible that once we get started, our therapeutic alliance will evolve and
the referral to another clinician will be unnecessary.
TRANSFERENCE IN AN ONGOING TREATMENT
Usually, transferential issues, when the patient expects that the therapist
will act like a previously encountered important person in her life,
emerge as the treatment evolves. Great therapeutic gains can be made if
these matters can be discussed openly and sensitively. The therapist can
also use her own feelings toward the patient, the countertransference, to
inform this discussion further.
Transference and Countertransference 279
The interaction requires some clinical finesse. First timers may be
subject to some of the common difficulties outlined in Example 16.2.
EXAMPLE 16.2
The therapist experiences a transference reaction as a personal
attack and responds countertherapeutically
SALLIE: I’ve been thinking about the possibility of changing majors, but
like I’ve said before, I’m too scared to disappoint my mother. I don’t
know what to do.
T
HERAPIST: Can you say more about what you are scared of?
SALLIE: Well, I want my mother to be proud of me. That isn’t abnormal,
right? I’m her daughter who might get rich after graduation. I’m her
future CEO. You should see her beam when she talks about this.
I don’t want to mess with it. It means so much to me that she
cares.
T
HERAPIST:( Nods.)
SALLIE: I don’t want to talk to her about the fact that I might be sort of
interested in becoming a journalist.
THERAPIST: Hmm-mm. ( Nods in understanding .)
SALLIE: Dr. Bender, I just don’t feel comfortable talking to her about this,
no matter what you say.
THERAPIST:[ I hadn’t felt a need to force Sallie to confront her mother,
and I feel miffed that she would assume that I would be so direc -
tive.] You can do what you want. It’s your life. I don’t feel the need
to direct your life.
SALLIE: Umm, I know. I just thought you might want me to be more di -
rect with her about my feelings.
THERAPIST: Well, you don’t have to worry about that with me. I am
more interested in helping you find the direction that feels best to
you.
Next Session
SALLIE: I felt really terrible this week. I didn’t sleep well at all last night. I
kept the lights on at night. I think I told you that I do this some -
times when I’m feeling stressed.
Don’t ask me why I’m feeling down. I have no idea, and I know
that is your next question.
280 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
THERAPIST: This one is hard to figure out?
SALLIE: Yeah. I don’t get it. Don’t get mad at me though. That would
make it feel worse.
THERAPIST: Do you feel that I’m mad at you?
SALLIE: Well, you don’t seem mad now, but I thought you might have
been a little aggravated at me last week.
THERAPIST: Aggravated? Why would I be aggravated? [ I did feel a little
aggravated last week, but I have no idea how to address this with
Sallie.]
S
ALLIE: Well, I know you said that you didn’t care if I talked with my
mother about my career worries, but I guess I don’t really believe
you. I know that it would be in my best interest to talk to her. I feel
sort of stupid that I just complain to you about my problems with
her but never talk to her about it directly.
T
HERAPIST: Can you say more?
SALLIE: Well, I kind of worry that I might be disappointing you because
I’m too scared to talk to her. Meanwhile, you must be bored of
hearing me come in here and obsess about the fact that I don’t like
my major.
T
HERAPIST:[ I remember now that I was annoyed last week when Sallie
made a similar statement. I still don’t understand why she thinks I
would be as directive as her mother when I have tried so hard to
help her find her own way. I start to worry about my ability as a
therapist.] Yes, I know you feel that, but I don’t understand why. I
am more interested in helping you find your own direction, not
choosing it for you. ( frustrated tone)
S
ALLIE: I’m sorry. I know you said that last week also. I just still feel a
little worried about it.
THERAPIST:[ I suddenly understand Sallie’s reaction in terms of transfer-
ence. To assuage my increasing feeling of insecurity about my thera-
peutic prowess, I present my next comment with great authority .]
Why of course! You feel like I have expectations of you just like
your mother does!
S
ALLIE: What do you mean?
THERAPIST: Well, you feel that your mother wouldn’t care for you unless
you follow her agenda. Now you feel that about me too! It all
makes perfect sense. [I feel less helpless after I’ve made my interpre-
tation. I don’t have an understanding of my own countertransfer -
ence, and how it is fueling my current insensitive approach .]
Transference and Countertransference 281
SALLIE: Umm, well, maybe a little bit.
THERAPIST: I think we have figured this out. So can you tell me what it
would be like to talk to your mother about changing your major?
SALLIE: I just don’t want to. I hope that’s okay. (Seems timid.) I don’t re-
ally get what you are saying anyway. I know that you aren’t my
mother.
THERAPIST: Yes, of course, but since you’ve experienced your mother as
making demands on you, you’ve started to feel that way with me as
well. [I feel proud of my theory and don’t notice Sallie’s increasing
discomfort.]
S
ALLIE: No, not really. ( Averts her eyes.)
THERAPIST: Well, just think about how much sense it makes. It’s very
hard for you to assert yourself with confident women, but that’s
okay. We’ll work on that.
S
ALLIE:( Seems embarrassed.) Umm, whatever you say. I guess you know
best. You are the doctor.
THERAPIST: This sounds familiar to me. With women in authority posi-
tions, you always assume they know best rather than listening to
yourself. It is your way of trying to maintain a connection, but it
means you always have to be in the subservient role. [ I still don’t
notice Sallie’s increasing withdrawal.]
S
ALLIE:( Tears arise, and she doesn’t say anything.)
Sallie’s expectations that I will act in a directive manner like her
mother are an example of transference. When I don’t recognize this phe-
nomenon early in Example 16.2, my understanding of Sallie’s insecuri -
ties is limited: [“I hadn’t felt a need to force Sallie to confront her
mother, and I feel miffed that she would assume that I would be so direc-
tive.”].
As the example continues, I identify Sallie’s expectation (or transfer-
ence) that she needs to follow the guidance of woman in authority to
maintain the relationship’s emotional connection. My confrontational
manner is an attempt to assuage my own feelings of inexpertise. Even if
my interpretation may be factually correct, my method of presentation
combined with bad timing is more of an emotional assault. Sallie doesn’t
gain emotional understanding from the interaction. Instead, she with -
draws during my subsequent line of questioning.
My comments in Example 16.2 also illustrate two important psy -
chological phenomena: countertransference enactment and complemen -
tary identification. Sallie becomes a target of a countertransference en -
282 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
actment when my unresolved insecurities are expressed outwardly in a
way that affects her. The complementary identification occurs when I in-
advertently mimic Sallie’s mother’s authoritative female role after all.
Example 16.3 illustrates a more therapeutic intervention in re -
sponse to Sallie’s concerns.
EXAMPLE 16.3
The patient’s transference reaction is used to inform and to
advance the therapy
SALLIE: I’ve been thinking about the possibility of changing majors, but
like I’ve said before, I’m too scared to disappoint my mother. It’s
such a difficult situation.
T
HERAPIST: Can you say more about what you are scared of?
SALLIE: Well, I want my mother to be proud of me. That isn’t abnormal,
right? I don’t want to mess anything up. It means so much to me
that she cares.
T
HERAPIST:( Nods.)
SALLIE: I don’t want to talk to her about the fact that I might be more in-
terested in journalism.
THERAPIST: Can you say any more?
SALLIE: I just don’t think you understand that talking to her is too
risky.
THERAPIST: Do you feel that I want you to talk with her?
SALLIE: Maybe. You’ve pointed out that I’ve never talked to her about
my worries, and I figured you wouldn’t have said that unless you
thought it was a good idea. I know you want what’s best for me,
but I’m just not up to it.
T
HERAPIST:[ I feel annoyed that Sallie would think I would act in such a
directive way, but then decide to understand this response as an in -
formative piece of countertransference. It is interesting that Sallie
would assume that I would be directive, as her mother is. Her as -
sumptions are incorrect because I hadn’t been thinking that Sallie
should confront her mother. Could Sallie be misunderstanding her
mother as well? Food for thought .] How long have you felt that I
wanted you to talk with your mother?
S
ALLIE: I don’t know. Maybe the last couple of weeks or so, since I’ve
been telling you more about my mom. I just assumed that you
would want me to confront her if it bothered me so much. It must
Transference and Countertransference 283
be annoying to hear me complain without actively trying to change
the situation. I’ve just been a little worried about it.
THERAPIST:[ With supervision, I had felt comfortable continuing to ex -
plore Sallie’s concerns rather than pushing her to act. Sallie’s as -
sumptions about my reactions continue to be inaccurate. I suppress
a desire to correct her impression that I have a covert agenda. There
is more information to be gained if I continue to learn more about
Sallie’s perspective.] Can you tell me more about your worries?
S
ALLIE: Well, I’m worried about what you’ll think if I don’t do what you
want, even if it is the best thing for me. I respect you so much, and I
don’t want to disappoint you.
Last week you asked me something about following my dream.
I don’t know. It made me feel weird. But, I don’t want you to feel
bad about it. I know you just want the best for me. I just felt sort of
pushed after you said that. That’s my fault though. I’m the spineless
jellyfish here.
T
HERAPIST: You are letting me off the hook here. It might feel easier
to blame yourself rather than to stick with your gut reaction: that
the comments I made last week felt directive and weren’t helpful.
[I’m trying to respond in a way that validates Sallie’s experience
without overtly expressing an opinion about my wishes for her fu-
ture.]
S
ALLIE: Yes. I’m worried you might get upset if I don’t follow your ad-
vice and do things your way.
THERAPIST: If we had different approaches to an issue, would that feel
worrisome to you?
SALLIE: Well, sure. I like you and I want you to like me.
THERAPIST: Do you feel that I might not like you if our opinions dif -
fered?
SALLIE: Umm, well maybe. You might get mad at me if I didn’t follow
your advice.
THERAPIST: Mad at you?
SALLIE: Maybe. Well, I don’t know. Like I said, I’m mainly worried that
you would be upset at me if I don’t meet your expectations.
THERAPIST: Are you worried that I would be upset at you if you follow
your own beliefs?
SALLIE: Yeah, but it’s not a new feeling for me. It’s my life with Gwen. I
always do what she wants me to do. Otherwise, she’s not as inter -
ested in spending time with me.
284 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
THERAPIST: Do you experience this feeling with anyone else?
SALLIE: No. Not really with anyone that I can think of.
THERAPIST: Do you ever feel this way with anyone in your immediate
family?
SALLIE: Umm, well maybe with my mother.
THERAPIST: How so?
SALLIE: Well, you know that I worry about disagreeing with my mother
about my future career because I don’t want her to be disappointed
in me.
T
HERAPIST: To maintain the closeness, you bury your own wishes?
SALLIE: Yes, but that’s just the way it is. I need to learn to deal with it.
THERAPIST: I understand that it is quite a dilemma. Tell me if I am un -
derstanding it correctly. You try to ignore your own wishes with
your mother because the relationship feels less secure when there is
a disagreement. Does that fit to you?
S
ALLIE: Yes, but it’s not that simple.
THERAPIST: Tell me more. What part doesn’t feel right to you?
SALLIE: Well, I do worry that my mom might get angry if I disagree with
her. But that’s not the whole story. I also love the attention I get
from her when we do agree about important things. I’m not just
avoiding something that feels scary. I also don’t want to mess with
something that feels so right.
T
HERAPIST: That makes sense. Thank you for clarifying this for me.
Your mother’s attention is understandably so valuable to you.
SALLIE:( Nods.)
THERAPIST: Perhaps mine is too.
SALLIE: You mean that your attention is valuable to me?
THERAPIST:( Nods.)
SALLIE: Umm, I guess so, otherwise I wouldn’t be so worried about us
having different opinions.
THERAPIST: I think it’s important that you know that I’m not a bit mad
at you for anything. I think it’s fine that you’ve chosen not to talk to
your mother about your interest in journalism at this time. Our goal
is to enable you to figure out what feels right for you.
S
ALLIE: It helps to hear that.
THERAPIST: I’m glad, but even if it helps to hear that, your fears of dis -
Transference and Countertransference 285
agreeing with me may not disappear right away. I hope we can keep
discussing any worries you might have. We’ll see what we can learn
together by talking about it openly.
Example 16.3 illustrates how an explanation of transference can
flow naturally from a discussion of the patient’s concerns. First, Sallie
and I talk extensively about her fear that I am disappointed in her. Grad-
ually, we understand how her worries about my reaction are derived
from her prior experiences with her mother.
Ultimately, the resolution of our personal conflict will probably
have a highly therapeutic impact. By modeling empathic and open com -
munication, I want Sallie to experience firsthand how to work through
difficulties within a relationship.
A single conversation won’t put Sallie’s worries to rest. To work
through this issue, we will need to talk about it repeatedly in slightly
varied contexts from different emotional angles. It will probably take
time before there is any substantial emotional change.
WHEN TALK OF TRANSFERENCE IS DESTABILIZING
In general, a psychotherapy evolves as the therapist and patient focus to-
gether on the patient’s transference reaction. With some patients though,
namely those with impaired reality testing, talking openly about the
transference may precipitate a decrease in functioning rather than an in-
crease in insight. As illustrated in Example 16.4 with Candice Jones, I
change therapeutic tactics if a patient’s reality testing becomes impaired
during a transference discussion.
EXAMPLE 16.4
The therapist moves the focus away from the tr ansference
when the patient becomes paranoid
In previous sessions, Candice described her father as manipulative
and devaluing.
I have taken down a framed poster in the office after it cracked,
without providing any replacement art.
C
ANDICE: Oh, you decided to remove the picture of the water lilies by
the doorway. . . .
THERAPIST: Yes.
286 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
CANDICE: The walls seem so naked to me now. I do understand the pur-
pose of the change, though. It’s not lost on me.
THERAPIST: What?
CANDICE: Well, I know we don’t have an egalitarian relationship. You
are the one with the power, because I am coming to you for help.
Without the art, it is even more obvious that I am the patient. It’s a
rather antiseptic move, Dr. Bender. Even if you are trying to be more
professional, it felt much safer when you actually decorated your
office.
T
HERAPIST:[ Candice’s comments are increasingly disorganized and
paranoid, but I think it can’t hurt to validate her experience .] So it
feels less safe and less equal without the poster?
CANDICE: Oh, it’s not that big a deal. I know this is part of your work in
order to help focus all the attention on me and all my failings. I can
handle it. But you should know this for your other patients. They
may not be able to tell you their feelings so openly. But I know this
is all part of your treatment plan.
T
HERAPIST: My treatment plan?
CANDICE: Well, empty walls help patients have trauma flashbacks. The
new decor will help you get material.
THERAPIST:[ Candice is clearly decompensating as she transfers expecta-
tions from some other relationship onto my change in office decora-
tion. Her associations are less reality-based and more paranoid with
each open-ended question. I move to a more reality-based and cog-
nitive approach .] Actually, I don’t have those intentions. The
poster’s frame cracked, and I am trying either to replace it or to find
another poster to take its place.
C
ANDICE: You don’t have an ulterior motive with your new sparse deco-
rating scheme?
THERAPIST: No. No ulterior motive at all. But your point is well taken
that the office looks a little bare without the poster to brighten it
up. [ I support the part of Candice’s opinion that is more reality-
based.]
C
ANDICE: Yes, I really did like that picture. [ The paranoid associations
cease.]
Transference explorations are relatively unstructured and can be
emotionally evocative. For patients with a poor grasp on reality, this ap-
Transference and Countertransference 287
proach can be disinhibiting and destabilizing. For patients like Candice
Jones, a more cognitive approach is appropriate to maintain the thera -
peutic connection and to maximize emotional functioning.
COUNTERTRANSFERENCE AND AUTOGNOSIS
Countertransference reactions range as widely as their transference
counterparts. Some of them are challenging. Feeling angry, saddened, or
helpless in response to a patient’s dilemma may be difficult to tolerate
and to process. A novice clinician may be inclined to suppress the reac -
tion. While this is an understandable emotional response, the unan -
alyzed feelings may subtly alter the therapist’s perspective of the patient’s
concerns. In turn, the therapy may be affected detrimentally. On the
other hand, if the countertransference feelings are understood, the ther -
apy may benefit. “Autognosis” refers to this kind of self-knowledge.
The therapist’s favorable transference to the patient may also affect
the treatment. For example, I might look forward to working with one
patient in particular because she reminds me of my best friend from ele-
mentary school. This response of mine might lead me to underestimate
the patient’s vulnerabilities and difficulties.
Often, countertransference reactions are subtle. Sometimes within a
session I become aware of an unexpected feeling that comes on quickly
and powerfully. The patient may be unconsciously manipulating the sit-
uation to induce me to share her emotional experience, an occurrence
known as concurrent identification. If I can recognize this, I can use this
information to shape my intervention.
EXAMPLE 16.5
The therapist notes her own increasing feeling of helplessness
in the session and uses the experience to shape her next
intervention
S
ALLIE: Dr. Bender, I really don’t think this therapy is helping at all. I un-
derstand my dilemma now. Like you said, it feels overwhelming to
assert myself with my mother when I am afraid of losing her ap -
proval. But so what? I don’t feel any better. I’m no expert, of course,
but I don’t see where this therapy is going.
THERAPIST:[ All of a sudden, I feel at a loss for words.] Umm, well, how
long have you been feeling this?
SALLIE: Oh, I feel it every now and then. Sometimes I feel like I am get -
288 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
ting better, and then other times I just don’t see the point. So I sit
here and talk about my problems. Whoop-de-do. I can talk about
my problems forever. That doesn’t mean that my problems are go -
ing to change.
T
HERAPIST:[ I feel helpless as Sallie talks about her experience. I wonder
if we may be experiencing the same emotional state. I use this infor-
mation to guide my next line of questioning.] With all the work you
have been doing, do you feel rather helpless with the slow improve-
ment?
SALLIE: Yes, I guess I do.
THERAPIST: Do you have any understanding of why the helplessness is so
prevalent right now?
SALLIE: Well, it’s nearing the end of the school year, and next year I’ll be
a senior. I guess the issue we are talking about is really coming to a
head. After I graduate, I plan to go to business school, and the
whole idea makes me feel nauseous.
T
HERAPIST: It’s so difficult to feel stuck between your mother’s wants
and your own.
SALLIE: It is. I don’t know what to do about it. I know I need to make a
change in order to feel better, but I haven’t figured out what that
will be yet.
T
HERAPIST: The conflict has been with you for a long time, so it’s not
surprising that we’ll need more time to find a resolution. [ offering
reasonable hope]
A concurrent identification occurs in Example 16.5 when my feel -
ings of helplessness mirror Sallie’s emotional state. I use my experience
to guide my approach with Sallie. After validating her feelings, the con -
tent of the session deepens. As it turns out, Sallie’s true concerns center
on her dilemma involving her mother more than the efficacy of the treat-
ment.
For a therapist, it’s not always as clear-cut and easy to tolerate one’s
internal emotional state as it appeared in Example 16.5. For example,
anger at a patient may not evaporate after a private acknowledgment
that it exists.
In such a circumstance I try to express my emotions internally with-
out hurting the patient. Directed fantasy is one way to dispel difficult
emotions during or after a difficult interaction with a patient. For in -
stance, if I feel very angry at a devaluing and narcissistic patient, I might
imagine yelling or fighting with the patient to express my frustration. By
Transference and Countertransference 289
expressing my feelings in fantasy, it may be easier to act professionally
and appropriately during trying clinical moments.
It takes knowledge and experience to process one’s emotions while
simultaneously attending to the patient. I may postpone the fantasy for a
private moment to make sure none of the content from my internal im -
agery trickles inadvertently into the treatment. The use of fantasies is
strategic; using my imagination makes it less likely that I will act out my
suppressed anger.
Now and then, a therapist’s internal reactions to a patient are too
intense to be contained simply with a directed fantasy. In these situa -
tions, a therapist can access supervision and her own therapy if her reac-
tions toward a patient are infecting a treatment rather than informing it.
Supervision is nearly always provided by training programs. Relation -
ships with supervisors can sometimes be continued after graduation. If
one moves to another city after training has been completed, competent
supervisors can be recommended by professional organizations or by
local training institutions. Therapists for the therapist can also be
recommmended by these sources.
In order to process the complicated emotional reactions that are a
regular part of being a psychotherapist, the clinician needs to take spe-
cial care of herself. By supporting one’s self emotionally, an individual’s
ability to focus on others will increase. Emotional resilience increases if
one takes time to think through difficult situations independently or
with supervision. Taking meaningful time in mutual relationships with
friends, partners, or relatives, and spending time in activities that bring
satisfaction and joy are necessary to maintain psychological health.
Knowing one’s self well and maintaining one’s inner health must be
given high priorities in order to preserve one’s ability to listen to others
carefully, empathically, and effectively.
Key words: autognosis, complementary identification, concurrent
identification, countertransference, countertransference enactment,
defensiveness, directed fantasies, directed imagery, ego boundaries,
empathy, enactment, expectations, fantasies, here and now,
idealization, illusions, interpretation, intersubjectivity, patterns of
relationship, premature interpretations, psychotherapy, reality
testing, tranference, unresolved problems
290 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
17
Termination
Termination is the ending phase of therapy. A mature termination is one in
which the goals of therapy have been attained. Premature terminations occur
when therapy must end for other reasons. Like other separations in life, the
ending of therapy may evoke strong feelings, both in the clinician and in the
patient. Skillful conduct of this part of therapy can have an emotionally
strengthening effect on the therapist as well as on the patient.
It wasn’t easy saying good-bye to all of my patients during the last 4
weeks of my training in adult psychiatry. Even though the therapeutic re-
lationships were professional, the separations evoked myriad feelings.
Two parallel processes emerged. I would talk at length with my pa-
tients about their experience of the treatment’s ending and then rush off
to supervision to express how I was coping with it. The extra emotional
support was necessary. Until I had independently processed my own per-
spective, I couldn’t fully concentrate on my patient’s concerns. Similarly,
in this chapter, we pay equal attention to both the patient’s and the ther-
apist’s needs as we review the process of termination.
WHEN DOES TERMINATION OCCUR?
Patients who drop out of therapy without warning are quitting treat -
ment, not terminating care. (For an approach to a patient who leaves
treatment abruptly, see Chapter 10.) When a therapy has had time to de-
velop, its ending, known as a termination, takes on a whole new mean -
ing. In the best circumstances, a mature termination begins when a pa -
tient and I realize that she has resolved the main difficulties that brought
291
her to therapy. The parting doesn’t feel forced, because the patient is
ready to apply independently the emotional knowledge and competence
that she has acquired. Although each person’s rate of progress in therapy
is unique, it takes time—often years—to accomplish the clinical gains
necessary for a mature termination.
Since training blocks for psychotherapists usually run for 2 or 3
years, many clinicians won’t complete a long-term dynamic psychothera-
py as a trainee. Geographical moves or graduations (by the trainee or by
the patient) actually make premature terminations the norm early in
one’s career. Patients deserve to hear this information. We recommend
that trainees inform their patients when they will be leaving the clinic at
a treatment’s onset, as we have illustrated in Example 3.5.
Our first examples consider how to discuss a premature treatment
termination with the patient if it is initiated by the clinician’s circum -
stances. The subsequent examples illustrate how the treatment might
end if a geographical move by the patient necessitates an early ending to
the therapy. Much of the information presented can be applied to ma-
ture terminations as well.
THE THERAPIST’S LEAVING LEADS
TO A PREMATURE TERMINATION
While I was tempted to keep “forgetting” to tell my patients that I
would be leaving the clinic in a few months at the end of my residency,
the delay would have been a therapeutic error. Many patients appreciate
the time to prepare for a good-bye. It often feels even more painful to be
faced with an unexpected separation with no time to process the event.
If the therapy must end prematurely because I need to leave the pa -
tient, I share the news approximately 6 months ahead of time. Knowing
the exit date may allow the patient to identify and to solidify gains made
in the therapy. We’ll have ample time to discuss the range of feelings that
emerge as the ending approaches.
It’s easy to feel guilty about leaving a patient. Example 17.1 illus -
trates the subtle and not-so-subtle ways in which the ambivalent thera -
pist may overcompensate during the remaining treatment time.
EXAMPLE 17.1
The therapist is unable to maintain a focus on the patient and
steps out of her professional role after announcing that she will
be leaving the city in 6 months
292 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
15 Minutes into the Session
THERAPIST: I have some news I need to tell you today.
SALLIE: Oh, what?
THERAPIST: Well, in July I will be leaving Boston.
SALLIE: Oh, okay. (nonchalance) So when is your last week here exactly?
THERAPIST: I will be leaving the last week in June.
SALLIE: Where are you going?
THERAPIST: I will be moving to Florida. I know it’s unexpected news. I
hope you can feel free to share any reactions you may have in the
upcoming months.
S
ALLIE: Oh, I don’t need months to tell you how I feel. I don’t care that
much. People move on; I understand that. I can see someone else at
the clinic, can’t I?
T
HERAPIST: Yes, I can set you up with a referral to continue therapy af-
ter I leave. But what about us?
SALLIE: What do you mean?
THERAPIST: Well, we’ve worked together for almost 3 years now. What
will it be like to stop?
SALLIE: I already told you. I wish you well, but I won’t crumble or any-
thing without you.
Something interesting did happen at school today though. . . .
(Voice trails off.)
THERAPIST: Moving away from the fact we will be stopping?
SALLIE: What?
THERAPIST: I just think it might be easier to talk about school than the
fact that our relationship will be ending.
SALLIE: No. Six months is far, far away. I probably will be ready to stop
then anyway.
THERAPIST: Is it so easy for you to give up on our relationship?
SALLIE: Whatever. . . .
THERAPIST:[ I feel guilty about leaving Sallie, and then uncomfortable
with Sallie’s indifference. I decide to share my own personal feelings
about the termination as it might help Sallie open up.] I do feel very
bad about leaving the area, as we can’t continue to work together. I
know it is disruptive for me to leave you just as you are making
Termination 293
progress with the issues that have been concerning you. I will really
miss working with you.
SALLIE: Oh, you don’t need to say that. You are paid to work with me. I
knew that you would leave sooner or later anyway. You told me
that you were in training during one of our first meetings.
In Example 17.1, Sallie reacts to our unexpected upcoming termina-
tion date with a veil of denial and indifference. Her response may be
both emotionally protective and retaliatory.
I don’t recognize that her reaction may be a defense against possibly
intolerable feelings of abandonment and loss. Instead, I repeatedly move
the topic back to my upcoming exit. I try to induce Sallie to express a set
of emotions that is more in tune with my own feelings. The fortitude of
Sallie’s defenses, basically the “I-don’t-care” stance, is strengthened.
Then, because Sallie’s indifference is so unexpected, and because I
feel so guilty for ending the therapy prematurely, I interject my own per-
sonal emotions about the upcoming termination. My comments may
make it even more difficult for Sallie to explore any mixed feelings she
has about my news. Her comments become even more distant.
It is rare for a patient to be able to process her feelings about a ter-
mination immediately. This is one of the reasons we recommend an-
nouncing the termination date far ahead of time. After a while, Sallie
may be able to express fear, anger, or sadness about the upcoming part-
ing. My job is to tolerate whatever emotions she is experiencing at the
moment and to help her to understand her feelings—and the defenses
against them.
EXAMPLE 17.2A (the Indifferent Patient)
The therapist announces that she will be leaving the city in 6
months and listens carefully to her patient’s reactions
15 Minutes into the Session
THERAPIST: I have some news I need to tell you today.
SALLIE: Oh, what?
THERAPIST: Well, in July I will be moving out of Boston.
SALLIE: So I won’t be able to see you anymore?
THERAPIST: That’s true. Our work together will need to end before I
leave.
SALLIE: Oh, okay. (nonchalance) So when is your last week here exactly?
294 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
THERAPIST: I will be leaving the last week in June.
SALLIE: Where are you going?
THERAPIST: I will be moving to Florida. But I know this unexpected
news affects our work together. What is it like to hear it?
SALLIE: Oh, I don’t care that much. People move on. I can see someone
else at the clinic, can’t I?
THERAPIST: Yes, if you wish. I can set you up with a referral to continue
therapy after I leave. ( Nods encouragingly.)
SALLIE: Okay, that’s fine. One therapist is as good as another, I guess.
THERAPIST:[ I wait quietly, but I don’t nod in agreement to Sallie’s last
comment. I remember that my supervisors predicted that some pa -
tients would respond to my announcement with nonchalance, and I
try not to take Sallie’s response personally. While I feel hurt that
Sallie, a patient I have enjoyed working with, is reacting this way, I
try to listen carefully to her next association .]
S
ALLIE: I’m not a big fan of endings so I just ignore them.
THERAPIST: How do you ignore them? [ This is an interesting lead .]
SALLIE: I just don’t think about them at all. It makes it easier than get-
ting all choked up.
THERAPIST: Choked up isn’t easy.
SALLIE: No, of course, it sucks. I don’t want to think about it. I’d rather
tell you about the latest stuff at school.
THERAPIST: Okay. We can leave this for now. Maybe we can talk about
it some more another time.
EXAMPLE 17.2B (the Upset Patient)
15 Minutes into the Session
THERAPIST: I have some news I need to tell you today.
SALLIE: Oh, what?
THERAPIST: Well, in July I will be leaving Boston.
SALLIE: You will— what?!
THERAPIST:( sensitive look) I will only be working in the clinic until June
30th.
SALLIE: That is horrible news! I can’t believe it—and I was just begin -
ning to feel comfortable working with you. Where are you going?
THERAPIST: I will be moving to Florida.
Termination 295
SALLIE: Well, that is fine and nice for you, I guess. I’m glad one of us will
be happy, while I continue to struggle along here in “balmy”
Boston.
T
HERAPIST:[ I notice but don’t react outwardly to the sarcasm in the pre-
vious comment.] It’s difficult news for you to hear.
SALLIE: It’s horrible. You know, I was just starting to think that maybe
you cared about our work together. I guess I was wrong about that
one.
T
HERAPIST: As I am leaving you at a sensitive time, it feels like I don’t
care about you.
SALLIE: That’s right. (Starts to cry.) I don’t know what to do now.
THERAPIST:[ I sit quietly with Sallie crying for a few moments .]
SALLIE: So now what?
THERAPIST: Could you share with me the words behind the tears?
SALLIE: I don’t know. Nothing and everything, I guess.
THERAPIST: It makes sense that news that I’ll be leaving brings up a
whole host of feelings. I do want to hear about them.
SALLIE: Whatever. I just feel in shock right now.
THERAPIST: What do you mean when you say “shock?”
SALLIE: I don’t want to think about it anymore. I think I’ll go to the gym
and work out.
THERAPIST: Separations, especially when they are a surprise, can feel
shocking.
Examples 17.2A and 17.2B illustrate two common reactions in re -
sponse to an unexpected termination date: an emotional withdrawal or
an intense expression of feeling. In the withdrawal example (17.2A), I
tolerate my own distress at Sallie’s indifference. Then, I learn that Sallie’s
attitude is her modus operandi when faced with a sad good-bye. In Ex -
ample 17.2B, I avoid diminishing Sallie’s intense reaction to my news
and try to affirm it instead. Since some patients react self-injuriously to
an impending loss of a therapist, I gently asked Sallie what it means for
her to “feel in shock.” Her response is reassuringly healthy and adap -
tive.
In both cases, I do not push Sallie to delve deeply into her feelings
right after my announcement. There will be plenty of time to discuss her
reaction in more detail during future sessions.
296 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
A PATIENT’S DECOMPENSATION
CENTERED ON TERMINATION
Once I set the date of the last session with a patient, I can anticipate a
variety of responses during the process of saying good-bye.
Some patients may start flooding each remaining session with a bar-
rage of new material, pushing themselves to discuss previously avoided
problems in view of the new time limitation.
Others may have more trouble with the impending separation. Pa -
tients who were always on time may start coming late to sessions or
missing them altogether. Others may become more openly hostile as the
date of the last session approaches. For them, it might be easier to leave
in an angry state rather than to work through the sadness of ending.
Patients with a fragile adaptive capacity and a limited support sys -
tem outside of therapy may be at risk for an increase in regressed behav-
ior or even a decompensation. A previously stable patient may stop tak -
ing her medications and become morose, depressed, and even suicidal. If
the termination has been announced months in advance, there may be
ample time to work through the crises before our final meeting.
Whatever the instigating stressor, preserving the patient’s safety is
always the first priority at any stage of treatment. As the termination
date approaches, patients who need increased emotional support can ac-
cess additional treatment via self-help or therapeutic groups, psycho-
pharmacological consultations, adjustments of medications, or contacts
with appropriate religious or social organizations. If the patient’s safety
is at risk, a day program or an emergency hospitalization during the ter-
mination period may become necessary. (For more details on how to
help a suicidal patient, see Chapter 9.)
I might handpick the new therapist who will take my place for pa -
tients who need to continue treatment without a break. Overlapping my
last sessions with the first few consultation sessions with the new thera -
pist can be immensely comforting to a patient who relies on therapy to
support her everyday functioning.
In Example 17.3, Candice Jones has trouble coping with our up -
coming termination.
EXAMPLE 17.3
The patient decompensates after the therapist announces the
date that treatment will end
C
ANDICE: Dr. Bender, since you told me that you were going to leave, I
have been feeling very odd. I haven’t slept well at all the past couple
Termination 297
of weeks. (Starts to cry.) Now and then, I feel as bad as I did when
we first met!
THERAPIST: It sounds like you have really been suffering.
CANDICE: Sometimes I don’t even know if it is worth continuing the
struggle. I know I will feel so lost without our sessions. I don’t
know what will happen to me. ( Grabs for many tissues .)
T
HERAPIST: Have you been thinking of death?
CANDICE: Now and then. Yes, to tell you the truth, I have. I feel so lost.
I’m not sure where to turn.
I complete a thorough evaluation of suicidal risk as outlined in
Chapter 9. Candice’s actual risk of hurting herself is very low.
THERAPIST: Feeling lost after you had been feeling better is very distress-
ing. Let’s think together how to provide what you need so you can
weather this tough time safely. [I take a supportive, problem-solving,
cognitive stance because Candice is already overwhelmed by her
feelings.]
C
ANDICE: I need you, Dr. Bender, not a baby-sitting plan. Therapy helps
me manage.
THERAPIST: It is not easy to lose a therapist. I know it doesn’t take the
pain away, but I do want you to know that I have a great deal of
trust in Dr. Powell. I feel confident that she will be able to help you
during this transition time. [ Dr. Powell is the new therapist I have
found for Candice .]
C
ANDICE: That helps a little bit, but you know that it is incredibly diffi -
cult to start working with someone new. ( Sniffs.)
THERAPIST: It is difficult.
CANDICE: Yes, and I still feel overwhelmed.
THERAPIST: It is troubling news that I will be leaving and that you will
have to start anew.
Right now, it may be difficult to recognize the progress you
have made since we started working together. Over the months to
come, you and I will have time to plan for the extra support that
you might need.
In Example 17.3, Candice has trouble coping with her conflicting
feelings of dismay, yearning, and anger that she feels about our parting.
She regresses, losing the ability to calm herself and falls back on old
298 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
faulty coping mechanisms. To shore up Candice’s more mature adapta -
tions, I employ a cognitive approach. She will also do better during this
stressful time with additional therapeutic supports that attempt to mini -
mize regression and to maximize adaptive psychological functioning.
THE PATIENT SETS THE TERMINATION DATE
Patients end therapy in a variety of ways. There is a large group of peo -
ple who never truly terminate because they prefer to drop in for inter -
mittent therapy sessions (“tune-ups,” as some patients have called them)
depending on their need. When this group of patients starts to feel better,
they often taper their session frequency (for instance, from once a week
to once a month.)
Sometimes, a patient will plan a longer break away from treatment
without scheduling a future session. While I’ll let the patient know that I
will welcome her return, I can’t guarantee that a weekly spot will be im-
mediately available if she wishes to resume at this frequency. I can usu-
ally fit intermittent as-needed sessions into my schedule with some no-
tice. While a break for a number of months isn’t a true termination, I’ll
encourage a review of the therapy in the little time we have left before
the separation.
Premature terminations (often necessitated by a geographical move)
or mature terminations are more definite. Interestingly enough, similar
psychodynamic issues emerge whether the therapist or the patient initi-
ates the termination.
SALLIE GANE’S TERMINATION
In order to discuss termination issues in Sallie Gane’s therapy, we need to
fast-forward her treatment past the transference discussions that began
in Chapter 16. To resolve her emotional conflicts about her career and
family, many more sessions would need to follow, focusing on Sallie’s
difficulties with her female peers and with her mother. During this pro -
cess, I could continue to use information gleaned from the transference
to increase our understanding of these issues.
This process could be very slow. Psychodynamic psychotherapy is
not a microwaveable process; it cooks along more like a crockpot. In or-
der for Sallie to sustain long-term emotional change, her core emotional
issues would need to be examined jointly multiple times from many dif -
ferent perspectives. (In the psychodynamic literature, this process is
known as working through.)
Termination 299
Both the experience of feeling validated and the increased under -
standing of her conflicts and motivations will be therapeutic for Sallie.
She will gain insight that her controlling behavior toward Charlie was
an identification with her mother. With this awareness, she may choose
to behave differently in future relationships. Slowly, she may foster
friendships with people, like Emme, who appreciate and support her
strengths and individuality, unlike Gwen.
Eventually, Sallie might gather the courage to plot her own career
course and to discuss this plan with her mother. We’ll say she decides to
pursue journalism as a profession after all. After completing her college
courses and finishing her therapy with me, she decides to move to New
York City to start her graduate studies. Again, remember that every sen-
tence in this paragraph reflects hours of therapy, using many of the tech-
niques outlined in our previous chapters.
Eventually, the time to say good-bye would approach. Our termina-
tion would become another therapeutic opportunity. As we review our
work together, we’ll discuss aspects of the therapy that have been helpful
as well as those that have been disappointing. Again, even in its ending,
therapy can model a relationship that is resilient enough to weather con-
structive criticisms as well as compliments.
In Example 17.4, Sallie announces her upcoming move to New
York to pursue graduate school in her chosen profession. This vignette
also illustrates another typical termination pattern—when a patient
copes with an upcoming termination by ignoring it. Even though it may
feel easier to collude with this process, it is my responsibility to refocus
the treatment intermittently on our impending separation.
EXAMPLE 17.4
The patient announces her forthcoming move and then tries to
ignore the upcoming separation from the therapist
S
ALLIE:( In April) Dr. Bender, I have amazing news!
THERAPIST: Let’s hear it!
SALLIE: Well, you know how we have talkedad nauseum about the fact I
am more interested in journalism than business? And, you know
how we talked about how my mother was surprised to learn this
but was not anywhere near as upset as I had imagined?
T
HERAPIST: Yes. (Nods encouragingly.)
SALLIE: Well, I didn’t tell you this because it felt sort of scary, but after
one of our sessions I filled out an application to a university in New
York that has a great journalism department. The only people who
knew about it were the teachers I needed to ask for letters of recom-
300 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
mendation. It felt like such a gamble. I didn’t want to let people
know, because I didn’t think my chances of getting in were very
good.
Umm, well, guess what? I’m in! I can’t believe it. They took
me! I just received my acceptance letter this morning. After I gradu-
ate this spring, I’ll need to move to New York City right away to get
settled. That is if I am brave enough to go through with this. I can’t
believe it.
T
HERAPIST:( supportive tone and smiling) Why not? This is very exciting
news. What do you think you want to do?
SALLIE: I think I might do it. It just sounds so amazing. But, I keep
pinching myself. I can’t believe this is happening to me!
As the weeks progess, Sallie relates her plans to move to New York
but does not mention anything about the impending termination. She al-
most acts as if I will be moving away with her.
SALLIE: So I am leaving Boston July 15th and starting at my new school
on the first of September. I have so much to do. I need to find hous-
ing. I need to find a roommate. ( Eyes widen .) It still doesn’t feel
real.
T
HERAPIST: And we will be saying good-bye.
SALLIE: Well, maybe I’ll stay in Boston until late August, so we won’t
have to stop for a few more months.
THERAPIST: What will it feel like to stop meeting?
SALLIE: Oh, I am just trying to ignore it.
THERAPIST: Is there a way that I can help you to notice it?
SALLIE: What do you mean?
THERAPIST: Well, I think it is important for us to talk about the fact that
our work together will be ending.
SALLIE: Why?
THERAPIST: I think the ending of our meetings is an important part of
the therapy. It can solidify what we’ve worked on together. Also,
learning how to say good-bye in a meaningful way is a skill in itself.
S
ALLIE: Well, if I don’t say good-bye, it doesn’t feel as complete or as
sad. It’s more like a “see-you-later.”
THERAPIST: “See-you-laters” are easier than complete good-byes?
SALLIE: Yes, I’ll really miss you, and I just don’t want to think about it.
THERAPIST: Can you tell me what is hard about thinking about it?
Termination 301
SALLIE: I feel so excited to be doing something just for me. This is what
we have talked about for months. You know, following my dream,
not my mother’s. But it is also scary to be ending therapy. You’ve
been a really important person in my life. I don’t like to think about
giving you up. It makes me nervous.
T
HERAPIST: The nervous part detracts from the exciting part. Maybe if
we talk about it together, you may feel a little less nervous.
SALLIE: I doubt it. I’d rather just ignore it for now. It feels to weird to say
good-bye to you forever. What if I get to New York and freak out? I
just get scared thinking about it.
T
HERAPIST: Maybe it would be useful to think about how I could be
most supportive of the move. If it would help, we could touch base
by phone, or even schedule a phone session as you get settled in
New York. If you would like to continue psychotherapy in New
York, I can try to help you find a new therapist.
S
ALLIE: That does make me feel better. The idea of never talking to you
again is scary to me.
THERAPIST: After we’ve worked together so closely, it can feel scary to
end our weekly meetings, and I hope we can talk more about this.
But, I’m still interested in your well-being, and would be happy to
touch base by phone, as I mentioned.
If Sallie tries to ignore our impending separation, it is my responsi-
bility to remind her gently, fairly often, of how many sessions we have
left. If the ending of therapy is dealt with in an honest, direct, and genu-
ine manner, Sallie might be able to use this experience to strengthen her
ability to cope with other separations throughout her life. Morbid or
pathological grief reactions may be partially due to unresolved partings,
so an increased ability to process good-byes may even prevent future
psychological distress.
Brief phone conversations or a few scheduled phone sessions may
be a great support to Sallie during her transition. I try to balance my of -
fer of phone availability with a continued focus on the ending of the
face-to-face weekly treatment.
THE PATIENT WHO DISAPPEARS
AS THE TERMINATION APPROACHES
Now and then, a patient might feel so threatened by the upcoming loss
that she may stop attending sessions weeks before the termination date.
302 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
Because it can be so easy to under- or overreact when a patient disap -
pears, it is useful to have a protocol in place for this type of situation.
(See Chapter 10 for more details.)
If Sallie unexpectedly missed a session as her termination date ap -
proached, I would call her at a time that I expected her to be at home. If
I am unable to talk to her directly, I might leave the following message,
worded carefully to preserve confidentiality: “Hello, this is Suzanne
Bender calling for Sallie Gane. I was concerned when I did not see you at
your scheduled appointment today. Please call me to confirm our ap -
pointment for next week at our regular time.”
This message encourages Sallie to be in touch with me regardless of
whether she plans to return for her next appointment. Sometimes after
one missed session a patient will return to her regularly scheduled ses -
sion without difficulty. We’ll then have ample time to discuss the upcom-
ing termination. Other times the first missed session might be a harbin -
ger of repeated absences with numerous excuses, all in preparation for
our future separation.
In response to Sallie’s hypothetical disappearance, I would follow
my billing protocol for last-minute cancellations or missed sessions.
(Please see Chapters 8 and 10 for more details.) I might also consider
writing a letter inviting her back to treatment. (See Figure 17.1.)
If Sallie returns to treatment after she receives my letter, I will ad-
Termination 303
[Professional letterhead]
Date
Sallie Gane’s address
Dear Ms. Sallie Gane:
I am sorry that I have not received a response from you since our last phone call
on April 8th. Since I have not heard from you, I do not know how you are doing, but
I hope you are doing well.
I am still available to meet with you to conclude our work together before you
leave. I hope that we shall have this opportunity. If I do not see you before you leave,
I want you to know that I wish you the best. If you desire to schedule a meeting any
time in the future, please feel free to call me.
Sincerely,
Suzanne Bender MD
My office phone numbers
FIGURE 17.1. Letter inviting the patient to return to treatment.
dress her repeated absences midway through our reunion meeting. As
Sallie’s disappearance obviously endangers the possibility of a thoughtful
termination, it deserves immediate attention.
It’s possible that Sallie may deny that her repeated missed sessions
have any emotional meaning. If so, there isn’t much I can do but follow
her lead. Termination is like every other part of therapy. The treatment
proceeds at the patient’s pace. Topics can be introduced, but forcing the
discussion will rarely produce any useful results.
A PATIENT EXPRESSES HER APPRECIATION
DURING THE TERMINATION
Interestingly enough, sometimes a patient can be better at expressing her
gratitude at the end of treatment than a therapist may be at accepting it.
I was caught off guard the first time a patient sincerely expressed how
much I had helped her and how much she would miss me. I had to learn
how to acknowledge a patient’s compliments just as I had to learn how
to listen to her complaints.
While it isn’t useful for me to lead with my own feelings about a ter-
mination, I have an opportunity to share my own feelings when a patient
expresses her appreciation.
EXAMPLE 17.5
The patient expresses her gratitude toward her therapist, and
the therapist responds
S
ALLIE: So today is our last session.
THERAPIST: Yes.
SALLIE: I’ll really miss you.
THERAPIST: I will miss you too.
SALLIE:( Smiles.) That is so nice to hear. I know you aren’t supposed to
feel connected to your patients or anything. Rules of the trade, I
guess.
T
HERAPIST: Does it feel like I couldn’t feel connected to you because of
the rules of the therapy?
SALLIE: Sort of. You have so many patients. I can’t imagine that I mean
something special.
THERAPIST: Why not?
304 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
SALLIE: I don’t know. I don’t want to set myself up for disappointment.
Anyway, I have learned so much in here. It has been a good experi -
ence.
THERAPIST: I have learned as well. I admired seeing how you mastered
many of your difficulties with your mother and found a new group
of friends who are more supportive.
S
ALLIE: Really?
THERAPIST: Really.
SALLIE: That is so nice. The therapy actually really helped me. There
were times I was sure my life would never improve, but in fact, it re-
ally has.
THERAPIST: You have worked very hard. It has been very gratifying for
me to be a part of this process.
SALLIE: Wow. It really means so much to hear you say that.
THERAPIST: It comes as a surprise?
SALLIE: I just never imagined that I was affecting you as well.
THERAPIST: Any idea why not?
SALLIE: I never felt that important.
THERAPIST: How do you feel to hear that you are?
SALLIE: Scared, but really happy also.
THERAPIST: Scared?
SALLIE: I don’t want to do anything wrong to disappoint you. I’m not
perfect, you know.
THERAPIST: Do you feel that I’ll be disappointed if you are not perfect?
SALLIE: A little bit. I don’t want to mess it up. I don’t know. I still feel
this way sometimes with friends too. You know, same old thing.
THERAPIST: You have an increased awareness and understanding
about it, but it still might feel like a lot of pressure for you to
endure.
S
ALLIE: Yeah, I guess it is.
THERAPIST:( Nods.)
SALLIE: I’m sorry that I can’t just savor our last meeting, and we have to
talk about this uncomfortable stuff.
THERAPIST: It feels like you’ve used up your time to talk about more un-
comfortable stuff? ( empathic look)
Termination 305
SALLIE: Maybe.(Smiles.)
THERAPIST: It can be difficult to say good-bye when there are issues that
remain that you would have liked to work on. [ I had mentioned in
previous meetings that Sallie could always seek further therapy in
New York if she thinks it could be useful. During our last session I
keep the focus on Sallie and me rather than punting the issue to a
future therapist.]
S
ALLIE: Exactly! I’ll really miss how you make things feel okay instead of
overwhelming.
THERAPIST: We have done good work together, and it makes sense that it
feels hard to stop.
SALLIE: If I ever move back to Boston, can I give you a call or set up a
special session?
THERAPIST: Sure, I would be glad to know how you are doing.
SALLIE: Okay. That makes me feel better. I guess it is time to stop now.
THERAPIST:I ti s .
SALLIE:( Stands up.) Thanks for everything.
THERAPIST: You are very welcome. I wish you the best.
In Example 17.5, Sallie and I express our mutual appreciation for
one another. The parting is sweet and sour, as many are. While Sallie rec-
ognizes how much she has grown during the therapy, she can also iden-
tify some remaining issues that might require future attention. She may
also be bringing up these difficulties in the final session as a way of re -
connecting with me before she leaves. With this possibility in mind, I do
not jump to refer Sallie to a therapist in New York for work on these re-
maining issues but instead keep the focus on our separation.
Is a termination forever? Historically, terminations were viewed as
permanent endings. Once a patient had finished psychoanalysis, for in -
stance, it was not considered therapeutic, by some analysts, for the pa -
tient to return to treatment even if she ran into future emotional difficul-
ties. Since then, therapists’ views have become more flexible. While it is
important to view a therapy’s termination as a completion of a piece of
work, this does not mean that future meetings cannot occur. While ther-
apists who are ending practice, moving, or finishing training are notable
exceptions, many clinicians explicitly invite their patients to call them in
the future. It might be helpful to meet again if setbacks occur or to re -
port progress or further success.
Sallie may leave for New York to attend journalism school but then
return to Boston the following summer and request a few sessions. It
doesn’t make sense to refuse her these sessions merely because she termi-
306 THERAPEUTIC DILEMMAS
nated a year earlier. It might be fruitful for Sallie to meet for a short
time, if only to review her experience during the academic year. Because
I know Sallie so well, the therapy can carry on rather nicely once she has
filled me in on the recent details. It is also possible that Sallie may move
back to Boston when her education is completed. She may wish to get
some help with a subsequent phase of her development. Again, leaving
the door open for future work can be highly beneficial.
What if Sallie is seeing a new therapist in New York but spends the
summer in Boston and calls to see me for a few sessions? Should I see
Sallie even if she is in formal treatment with someone else in New York?
This dilemma should be approached gingerly, trying to keep Sallie’s best
interests in mind. It might be best if she could schedule phone sessions
with her current therapist in New York. If this isn’t possible (for exam -
ple, if the therapist is on vacation), I could serve as the interim therapist.
It wouldn’t be right to leave Sallie without any treatment, especially if
her problem is urgent.
Having two therapists might feel confusing to Sallie, so my very lim-
ited treatment of Sallie should address her current distress while sup-
porting her resumption of treatment in New York at the end of the sum-
mer. Involving the therapist in New York in the treatment plan would
help Sallie reconnect with her local clinician when she returns.
Therapy is an exceptional experience in many ways. While the ther-
apist and patient work together closely, the ultimate goal is for the pa-
tient to complete the work and to end the relationship. A therapist must
play successive roles: being available to the patient during therapy and
being ready and willing to support the patient’s leaving when the treat-
ment is over.
Inner strength and equanimity combined with an emotionally ful -
filling life can help a therapist weather the partings with her patients.
Knowing oneself and connecting with family and friends reduce the like-
lihood of the therapist clinging to her patients emotionally.
Meanwhile, with each ending of therapy, I learn something new
about myself. Partings with people we care about are experiences we
work on throughout our lives and not always with as much forethought
and autognosis as we bring to the therapeutic encounter. The more we
can be in touch with the feelings that emerge in separations, the more we
will mature as people and as therapists.
Key words: artificial termination, bereavement, decompensation,
forced termination, grief reaction, interruption of therapy,
maturation, mature termination, natural termination,
psychotherapy, regression, separations, separation anxiety,
termination, therapeutic alliance, therapeutic goal, working
through
Termination 307
Epilogue
The field of mental health continues to advance and to expand. With
new developments in psychopharmacology, neuroscience, and neuroim-
aging, we have a deeper understanding of the interaction between
human biology and psychology. Innovative treatments are producing
huge benefits for suffering patients. But no matter how much we
discover about brain function, it can never replace the power of under-
standing and being understood. The work of a psychotherapist is unique
and will be needed for the imaginable future.
The journey to become a psychotherapist is complicated but
enriching. While the beginning of training may feel challenging, over
time, the confusion abates, and it becomes clear how to conduct a treat-
ment. Eventually, the trainee realizes that she knows enough to start,
continue, and end a treatment independently. Equally important, she
knows when and where to access help if she needs it.
We have tried to impart the skills that beginning therapists will
need to practice effectively. Use them with compassion—for your patients
and for yourselves.
309
Glossary
ADD Attention-deficit disorder: The former and now obsolete name for at-
tention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
ADHD Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A persistent condition that
begins prior to age 7 and that causes impairment in functioning at home
and at school or at work through patterns of inattention and/or hyperactiv-
ity and/or impulsivity.
Adjustment disorder A condition that involves impairment of social, occupa-
tional, or academic functioning with symptoms that arise within 3 months
of one or more recognizable psychosocial stressors.
Affect The outward expression of emotion through vocalization, facial ex -
pression, or other nonverbal behavior.
Affective equivalent A symptom that substitutes for an emotional expres -
sion, for example, a pain in the neck (or elsewhere).
Agoraphobia An irrational dread of open spaces or public places.
Alliance, therapeutic The collaboration between a patient and a clinician in -
tended to accomplish the goal(s) of treatment.
Anorexia nervosa An eating disorder that features voluntary reduction of
food intake to keep well below (85% or less) expected body weight.
Association A word, thought, image, feeling, or other experience that arises
spontaneously in response to an internal or external stimulus.
Association, free An association that arises without either internal or exter -
nal prompting.
Autognosis Knowledge, with understanding, of one’s self.
Automatic thoughts Ideas that arise without conscious intention or control.
Autonomy Independence, freedom from external control.
311
Axes I–V Five categories of information employed by clinicians to design a
treatment program appropriate for each patient. This approach is advo -
cated by DSM-IV.
Axis I: Psychiatric disorders or problems.
Axis II: Disorders of personality or mental retardation.
Axis III: Medical conditions or problems.
Axis IV: Problems in the patient’s psychosocial and environmental
aspects of the patient’s life.
Axis V: An estimate of how well the patient functions.
Blank slate A metaphor often used to describe therapists who disclose little
about themselves in order to permit freer fantasies and transferences by
their patients.
Boundary The limit to personal or social contact between clinician and pa -
tient.
Bulimia nervosa An eating disorder that features a pattern of food intake in
binges and followed by efforts to compensate with self-induced vomiting,
intestinal purging, or other means in an attempt to keep weight from rising.
Cardiac dysrhythmia Irregular heartbeat.
Chief complaint The main symptom or problem that a patient reports to a
clinician.
Clarification An explanation by the therapist intended to enlarge the pa-
tient’s understanding of current subject matter. It does not necessarily in-
clude a historical or developmental perspective.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy A form of psychosocial treatment based on the
relearning of beliefs, concepts, attitudes, and/or actions.
Cognitive restructuring The process of altering a subject’s beliefs, attitudes,
expectations, or concepts about her experiences.
Comorbid The relationship between two or more disorders that afflict a per-
son at the same time.
Confidentiality The secrecy of information revealed to a mental health clini -
cian that is protected by ethical principles and law.
Conflict Mutual opposition, usually referring to wishes, goals, or purposes.
Confrontation The process in which a clinician calls the patient’s attention
to ideas or other information.
Conscious memory See Evocative memory.
Consent, informed Permission regarding an offered procedure given by a pa-
tient, without coercion, and based on adequate knowledge of benefits,
risks, costs, duration, and other factors.
Contract An agreement, usually spoken although sometimes written, be -
tween a patient and a clinician, about specific behaviors related to a treat -
ment. For example, a patient may promise to call the clinician or to go to
the nearest emergency room when suicidal intentions increase, as a contract
for safety.
312 Glossary
Contraindication A factor or circumstance that makes a particular treatment
or procedure undesirable or fraught with unnecessary danger.
Counterresistance Behavior by the clinician, usually outside her awareness,
that opposes the progress of treatment.
Countertransference Subjective responses of a clinician toward a patient.
Countertransference enactment Expression of feelings or attitudes of the
therapist in response to the patient, which are partly or wholly outside of
consciousness.
Crisis, developmental A time in a person’s life in which her role changes
markedly, such as puberty, marriage, parenthood.
Crisis, normative Situations or events that commonly occur in human lives
which lead to substantial role changes, such as the death of a loved one,
loss of a job, promotions, injuries, and so on.
Day residue Portions of recent experiences that appear in a dream.
DSM-IV The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth
edition (see the entry in the Bibliography.), a detailed and descriptive cata -
logue of mental disorders generally accepted as authoritative in the United
States, Canada, and other countries.
Duty to report A legal requirement,which overrides confidentiality, that a
clinician inform governmental authorities when she learns of such matters
as current or intended abuse of children, the disabled, or the elderly. Duties
vary among jurisdictions.
Dysphoria An unpleasant emotional state.
Eating disorder A condition in which behavior related to eating is so extreme
that it interferes seriously with personal or occupational functioning, and
endangers health.
Ego boundary The mental function that enables a person to distinguish be -
tween stimuli that originate outside herself from those that originate inside
herself, for example, the ability to distinguish between an actual voice and
a hallucination.
Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT) The use of a weak electric current applied
to the sides of a patient’s head (bilateral) or to one side and the top of her
head (unilateral). This treatment is offered to patients suffering from disor-
ders such as severe depression or mania, usually after multiple trials of
medication have not provided relief. The treatment is conducted with brief
general anesthesia aided by muscle relaxants under the care of a trained an-
esthesiologist with full resuscitation equipment.
Empathic lapse A misunderstanding of the patient by the therapist ( see also
Empathy).
Empathy The attempt to recognize another person’s subjective state cogni -
tively and/or emotionally.
Enactment The interpersonal expression, through speech or movement, of
ideas, emotions, attitudes, or other internal (intrapsychic) experiences.
Glossary 313
Ethics Considerations of what is good or bad, right or wrong, acceptable or
unacceptable in human behavior.
Evocative memory The ability to call up or to bring to consciousness an
event, image, or experience as desired. Also known as explicit memory or
conscious memory.
Explicit memory See Evocative memory.
Extraparietal Outside the walls (of the office, clinic, or hospital).
Fantasy That which is imagined.
Fantasy, directed Something that is imagined intentionally, with a purpose or
design.
Fiduciary Someone who is entrusted with power for the benefit of someone else.
Formulation A systematic appraisal of an individual’s biopsychosocial con -
dition, often including hypotheses about its development and about how to
improve it.
Frame The limits or boundaries of the relationship in which psychotherapy
is conducted.
Generalized anxiety disorder Worry and anxiety that are difficult to control,
for a majority of days over a period of 6 months or more, that cause signifi-
cant distress and impairment of functioning in social, occupational, or
other important areas.
Genogram A diagram of a family tree.
Group psychotherapy Any form of psychosocial treatment in which a thera-
pist or leader works with more than one patient.
Hatred Extreme hostility.
Here and now The current relationship of the therapist and the patient.
Hostility An attitude of antagonism or animosity. It is like hatred if it in -
cludes a desire to do harm. Its emotional quality tends to last longer than
anger.
Iatrogenic Caused by a physician (or other health care professional or insti -
tution).
Idealization A defensive process in which someone or something is thought
of as perfect or as having extremely favorable qualities.
Ideas of reference A belief that one is the object of special attention, mes -
sages, or meaning. For example, someone named Tom might see a sign with
the letter “T” advertising the public transportation system and believe it is
a message meant for him individually.
Identification A process by which a person believes or assumes that she has
the qualities or features of someone else. The person may be aware to some
extent of this process.
Identification, complementary The experience by the therapist of emotions
and/or attitudes similar to those experienced by significant people in the pa-
tient’s personal life.
314 Glossary
Identification, concurrent The experience by the therapist of emotions and/
or attitudes similar to those experienced by the patient.
Imagery A mental likeness of a person, place, situation, or story, actual or
fanciful.
Imagery, directed A mental likeness of a person, place, situation, or story, ac-
tual or fanciful, created with a conscious purpose.
Impasse A position from which there is, or appears to be, no way out; a
deadlock or a dilemma.
Insight Understanding one’s emotional processes and experiences with a
combination of feelings and intellect.
Interpretation An explanation offered by a therapist to help the patient un -
derstand her inner experience in a way that includes her feelings as well as
thoughts, and that links her experiences in the past with those in the pres -
ent.
Intersubjectivity The effects that the emotional experience and attitudes of
the patient have on the emotional experience and attitudes of the therapist
and vice versa.
Latency The period of a child’s life from about the age of 5 or 6 until the on-
set of puberty.
Learning disability A condition in which a child of average or above average in-
telligence experiences specific difficulty in learning (see alsoLearning disorder).
Learning disorder The term used in DSM-IV to signify learning disability.
Litigation A lawsuit and its related procedures.
Mania A condition characterized by elevated or irritable mood, persisting
for at least 1 week, accompanied by at least three of the following: de-
creased need for sleep, flight of ideas, tangential and/or pressured speech,
increased pleasurable activity, motor agitation, and others. It is sometimes
accompanied by psychosis. It must interfere with social or occupational
functioning.
Manipulation The process of influencing someone, often without that per -
son’s awareness of what, how, or why it is being done.
Mentor A trusted advisor and educator.
Mood Emotion felt inwardly.
Narcissistic injury An insult to someone’s pride.
Neurochemistry The science that deals with properties and interactions of
substances important to the nervous system.
Neuropsychiatry The medical subspecialty that deals with mental and emo -
tional disorders and their relationship with the nervous system.
Neurotransmitters Chemical substances that mediate communication be -
tween nerve cells.
Neurovegetative Refers to basic life functions controlled by the nervous sys -
tem such as appetite, sleep, energy, and motion.
Glossary 315
Objectivity A condition of being unbiased and not affected by one’s personal
feelings, attitudes, or goals.
Osteoporosis A condition in which the density of bones, and therefore their
strength, is reduced and the possibility of fractures is increased. Patients
suffering from anorexia nervosa complicated by amenorrhea are at risk for
this condition.
Peer supervision Mutual teaching and learning between colleagues.
Personal therapy Psychosocial treatment, including psychoanalysis, under -
gone by a trainee or a graduate clinician.
Personality disorder A condition consisting of a lasting set of inner experi -
ences and outward behaviors that impair social, occupational or academic
function or that produce intense subjective distress. It begins in early adult-
hood and tends to be inflexible.
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) A condition persisting for more than 1
month with symptoms such as recurrently distressing recollections, hyper -
vigilance, avoidance, startle responses, nightmares, or emotional dulling,
following an event in which the patient experienced horror and helplessness
when exposed to a threat of death, to dire injury to oneself, or to the death
or mutilation of others.
Privileged communication Information provided by a patient to a clinician
which must be kept secret, in accordance with laws and ethical principles,
unless the patient authorizes disclosure.
Process notes Records kept by a clinician that can include descriptions of in-
teractions and nonverbal communications as well as the clinician’s reac-
tions and perceptions.
Psychoeducation Teaching about mental, emotional, or interpersonal condi-
tions or disorders.
Psychological review of systems A series of questions posed by a clinician to
a patient about the possible presence of symptoms related to the main cate-
gories of mental disorders such as anxiety disorders, mood disorders, sub -
stance-related disorders, psychotic disorders, and others.
Psychomotor agitation Excessive motion that is unproductive, tends to be re-
petitive, and is accompanied by inner feelings of tension.
Psychomotor retardation A general slowing of motion and speech often ac -
companied by apathy or unhappy mood.
Psychopathology The study of mental disorders based on scientific research.
Often used to refer to mental abnormality.
Psychopharmacology A subspecialty of medicine that deals with medications
for mental and emotional disorders.
Psychotherapy Any treatment of a mental or emotional disorder that relies
on communication between patient(s) and clinician(s) without the use of
medicine.
Psychotropic Mind-affecting. Commonly refers to drugs, both legal and illegal.
316 Glossary
Rapport A harmonious mutually accepting relationship between two people.
Reliability The consistency with which a test or other measuring method will
show closely similar results when employed repeatedly under similar condi-
tions.
Repetition compulsion The impulse to reenact previous developmental expe-
riences with people in one’s current life.
Resistance Any behavior over which the patient has some influence that in -
terferes with the progress of treatment.
Reversal of roles A situation in which a person, who is under the care of an-
other, is induced to provide care to the original caretaker.
Review of systems A series of questions posed by a clinician to a patient
about the possible presence of symptoms related to the major physiological
systems, such as the cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, neurologi-
cal, and others.
Sadism Pleasure or enjoyment in inflicting suffering.
Subpoena A document that summons witnesses, documents, or other evi -
dence before a court or other official body.
Supportive intervention A procedure in psychotherapy in which the clinician
reinforces the patient’s most adaptive coping mechanisms or introduces
more effective ones.
Stalking Pursuing someone in a predatory manner. Unwelcome, threatening,
intimidating contacts or communications persisting despite the quarry’s
wishes.
Termination The ending phase of treatment.
Thought broadcasting A belief or subjective experience that one’s thoughts
are converted into sound and can be heard by others.
Thought insertion A belief or subjective experience that others can put
thoughts into one’s mind. The “inserted” thoughts are experienced as not
one’s own.
Transference The conveyance of feelings, attitudes, yearnings, or ideas about
one person to another person. A patient may transfer feelings or attitudes
toward a parent to the therapist.
Validity The degree to which a test or other measuring method truly mea -
sures what it is claimed to measure. For example, an intelligence test
printed in Japanese administered to subjects who can read only English
would have extremely low validity, because correct answers would occur
only by chance (random guessing).
Working through A process, which leads to insight, based upon a person’s
examination of her problems multiple times and from various points of
view.
Glossary 317
Bibliography
Alonso A, Swiller H. Group Therapy in Clinical Practice . Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Press, 1993.
American Medical Association. Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) . Chi-
cago: American Medical Association, 2001.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fourth Edition. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Associa-
tion, 1994.
Anfang SA, Appelbaum PS. Twenty years after Tarasoff: Reviewing the duty to
protect. Harvard Review of Psychiatry 1996; 4: 67–76.
Basch MF. Doing Psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books, 1980.
Beck JS. Cognitive Therapy: Basics and Beyond . New York: Guilford Press,
1995.
Bibring E. Psychoanalysis and the dynamic psychotherapies. Journal of the
American Psychoanalytic Association 1954; 2: 745–70.
Bremner JD. Does stress damage the brain? Biological Psychiatry 1999; 45(7):
797–805. (Review)
Bromfield R. Doing Child and Adolescent Psychotherapy: The Ways and Whys.
Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1999.
Bruch H. Learning Psychotherapy: Rationale and Ground Rules . Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1974.
Ciraulo DA, Shader RI, eds. Clinical Manual of Chemical Dependency. Washing-
ton, DC: American Psychiatric Press, 1991.
Ewing JA. Detecting alcoholism: The CAGE questionnaire. Journal of the Amer-
ican Medical Association 1984; 252: 1905–1907.
Faber A, Mazlish E. How to Talk So Kids Will Listen and Listen So Kids Will
Talk. New York: Avon Books, 1980. (A clear book that teaches empathic
listening.)
Falk WE. DIG FAST: A mnemonic for mania. Presentation, MGH postgraduate
course: Psychopharmacology, Boston, personal communication, 1984.
Fraiberg, S. The Magic Years: Understanding and Handling the Problems of
Early Childhood. New York: Scribner, 1959.
319
Gaylin W. Talk Is Not Enough: How Psychotherapy Really Works . Boston:
Little, Brown, 2000.
Gutheil TG, Gabbard GO. Misuses and misunderstandings of boundary theory
in clinical and regulatory settings. American Journal of Psychiatry 1998;
155: 409–14.
Hales RE, Yudofsky SC, Talbott JA, eds. Textbook of Psychiatry, 3rd ed. Wash-
ington DC: American Psychiatric Press, 1999.
Hirschfeld RMA, Russell JM. Assessment and treatment of suicidal patients.
New England Journal of Medicinie 1997; 337: 910–915.
Hyman SE, Arana GW, Rosenbaum, JF.Handbook of Psychiatric Drug Therapy.
Boston: Little, Brown, 1995.
Kaplan HI, Sadock BJ. Synopsis of Psychiatry , 8th ed. Baltimore: Williams &
Wilkins, 1997.
Klerman GL, Weissman MM, Rounsaville BJ, Chevron ES. Interpersonal Psy-
chotherapy of Depression . New York: Basic Books, 1984.
Langs R. The Technique of Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy , Vols. 1 and 2. New
York: Jason Aronson, 1974.
Lewis JM. To Be a Therapist: The Teaching and Learning. New York: Brunner/
Mazel, 1978.
Lewis M, ed. A Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Comprehensive Textbook, 2nd
ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1996.
Lifson LE, Simon RI, eds. The Mental Health Practitioner and the Law: A Com-
prehensive Textbook. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998.
Linehan MM. Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment of Borderline Personality Disor-
der. New York: Guilford Press, 1993.
Linehan MM. Skills Training Manual for Treating Borderline Personality Disor-
der. New York: Guilford Press, 1993.
Messner E. Resilience Enhancement for the Resident Physician. Durant, OK: Es-
sential Medical Systems, 1993.
Messner E, Groves JE, Schwartz JH, eds. What Therapists Learn About Them -
selves & How They Learn It: Autognosis . Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson,
1994.
Miller NS. Principles and Practice of Addictions in Psychiatry . Philadelphia:
W.B. Saunders, 1996.
Miller WR, Rollnick S. Motivational Interviewing: Preparing People for Change,
2nd ed. New York: Guilford Press, 2002.
Mitchell SA, Black MJ. Freud and Beyond: A History of Modern Psychoanalytic
Thought. New York: Basic Books, 1995.
Nemeroff CB, Schatzberg AF. Recognition and Treatment of Psychiatric Disor -
ders: A Psychopharmacology Handbook for Primary Care . Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Press, 1999.
Phelan TW. All about Attention Deficit Disorder, 2nd ed. Glen Ellyn, IL: Child
Management, 2000.
Platt FW, Gordon GH. Field Guide to the Difficult Patient Interview . Philadel-
phia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999. (Though written for physi -
cians, much of this book may be useful for nonmedical therapists as well.)
320 Bibliography
Stern TA, Herman JB, eds. Psychiatry Update and Board Preparation . New
York: McGraw-Hill, 2000.
Stern TA, Herman JB, Slavin PL, eds. MGH Guide to Psychiatry in Primary
Care. New York: McGraw-Hll, 1998.
Storr A. The Art of Psychotherapy . New York: Routledge Press, 1979.
Waldinger RI. Boundary crossings and boundary violations: Thoughts on navi -
gating a slippery slope. Harvard Review of Psychiatry 1994; 2: 225–227.
Bibliography 321
Acknowledgments
Many individuals helped us bring this book into being.
Our editors at The Guilford Press, Kitty Moore and Jim Nageotte,
provided remarkably astute ideas and sustaining encouragement through-
out this process. We also want to thank senior production editor Laura
Patchkofsky; art director Paul Gordon; marketing director Marian Rob-
inson; and copy editor Jeanne Ford.
We are indebted to Ronald Schouten, MD, JD, Carolyn Wood, JD,
and Marilyn McMahon, JD, for their input on psychotherapy issues re-
lated to the law and Scott Rauch, MD, for assistance with our neuro-
scientific questions.
Randy King, MD, PhD, Aimee Bender, and David Bender, MD,
were directly helpful to both of us, providing insightful suggestions as
the book evolved.
(S. B.): It takes a village to cultivate a professional. I am very grate -
ful for the input, support, and expertise from the accomplished psychia -
trists and psychotherapists who supervised me during my training. Their
ideas and wisdom provided the guidance I needed. At the University of
California, San Francisco: Drs. Jeanne Burns, Mary Margaret McClure,
Lynn Ponton, and Chris Wallis. At Harvard, and Massachusetts General
Hospital (MGH): Drs. Robert Abernethy, Steve Ablon, Anne Alonso,
Eugene Beresin, Joseph Biederman, Jeff Bostic, Barbara Breslau, Susan
Brown, Thrassos Calligas, Edwin Cassem, Ginger Chappell, Lee Cohen,
Don Condie, Cornelia Cremens, Patricia Doherty, Jim Ellison, David
Gastfriend, Edye Geringer, Donald Goff, Paul Hamburg, Patricia Har -
ney, David Henderson, John Herman, David Herzog, Elyce Kearns, Mi -
chael Jellinek, Elizabeth Marks, Bruce Masek, John Matthews, Martin
Miller, Steve Nickman, Jacqui Olds, Miriam Ornstein, Susan Penava, Pa-
tricia Pickett, Mark Pollack, Joseph Schwartz, Ted Stern, Kathy Sanders,
323
Elizabeth Shapiro-Powers, Judy Teicholz, Jennifer Rathbun, Paula Rauch,
Bob Reifsnyder, Jerrold Rosenbaum, Gary Sachs, Larry Selter, Lois
Slovik, Tom Spencer, Andrew Stromberg, Tim Wilens, Jonathon Worth,
and Janet Wozniak. Marilyn Schwartz, Carolyn Sprich, Alice Curnin,
Genevieve Coyle, and Liza Schneiderman provided insight from the so -
cial work perspective. The list is long, but it reflects the breadth and
depth of the Boston psychiatric community.
My great colleagues enrich my work. I am a better psychiatrist be -
cause of Drs. Donna Chen, Deborah Kadish, Julie Newman-Toker, Ruta
Nonacs, Alicia Powell, Michael Rater, and Steve Schlozman.
My patients teach me a great deal. I am grateful for the opportunity
and privilege to work with them so closely.
My family deserves special mention. My mother has served as an
example of an inspired working mother. She bolstered my creativity
when I couldn’t find it. Karen taught me the power of storytelling and
paved the way. Aimee’s unrelenting encouragement and courageous ex-
ample made it possible for me to persevere. And my father, my first men-
tor in this field, provided me with the inspiration to become a psychia-
trist, with gentle and wise oversight all along the way. Last, and so
crucial: my husband, Randy. His insight, strength, and character inspire
me. I wouldn’t be who I am today without his support and love.
324 Acknowledgments
Index
Academic problems, psychotherapy for,
90
Acculturation problems, psychotherapy
for, 90
Advice
avoiding giving, 58
offering, 235
patient’s soliciting of, 26–27
Aggression, containing, 254
Agoraphobia, 80
screening for, 78–79
Alcohol abuse. See also Substance
abuse
screening for, 75–76
Alcoholics Anonymous, 209, 210
Allergies, medication, 56
Alliance. See Therapeutic alliance
Anger
patient, 260
therapist’s response to, 260–265
therapist, 289–290
Anonymity. See also Confidentiality
protecting, 20
Antidepressants, 53. See also Psycho-
pharmacology
contraindication to, for patient with
mania, 85
educating patient about, 221–222
evaluating effects of, 227–228
explaining adverse effects of, 223
Antisocial behavior, substance abuse
and, 211–215
Anxiety
assessing, 43–44
of substance abuser, 197–198
therapist, 9–10, 28–29, 235
Anxiety disorders, 80
psychopharmacology in treatment of,
218t
screening for, 78–81
Appointments. See also Late arrivals;
No-shows
cancelling, 113
missed, 13–14
Appreciation, patient’s expression of,
304–306
Autognosis, therapist, in countertrans-
ference, 288–290
Automatic thoughts, 89
Aversion, patient, 167
Avoidant behavior, 160–166
patient, 167
Behavioral guidelines. See Frame
Beliefs, irrational, 89
Bereavement, psychotherapy for,
90
Billing, 120–131. See also Fees
discussing, 121, 122–124
explanations of, 111
late payment of, 121–131
outlining method for, 120–
121
sample, 133
Bingeing, assessing for, 45–46
Bipolar disorder
mnemonic for assessing, 85
psychopharmacology in treatment of,
218t
screening for, 81–85
Body language, 21
therapeutic use of, 245–246
325
Boundaries. See also Limit setting
therapist, 136–141
violations of, 105–107
Bulimia. See also Eating disorders
assessing for, 45–46
CAGE questionnaire, for assessing sub -
stance abuse, 76–77, 85, 200–
203
Cancellations
insurance and, 170
letter regarding, 169
policies for, 169–171
recurrent, 166–169
Case conferences, disclosures at, 177–
178
Chemical dependence. See Substance
abuse
Childhood events, significant, 68–69
Chronic illness, suicide risk in, 151
Citalopram, 224
Clarifications, 247–254
appropriate use of, 250–254
defined, 247
premature/inaccurate, 248–250
Cognitive-behavioral therapy, 88
focus of, 3, 89–90
inappropriate use of, 238–239
with termination-related
decompensation, 298–299
in transference reactions, 287–288
Collection, referral to, 121
Communication
modeling, 42
nonverbal, 21
Complementary identification, 282–283
Conferences, case, disclosures at, 177–
178
Confidence, therapist, 28–29
Confidentiality, 36–38, 174–193. See
also Privacy
avoiding problems with, 16
disclosure to supervisors and, 175–176
and disclosures at case conferences,
177–178
and disclosures to colleagues, 178–
179
and disclosures to other clinicians, 176
insurance and, 113, 114–116
note taking and, 179–181
protecting, 19–22
and requests for information about
patient, 185–186
and risk of self-harm or harm to oth -
ers, 188–193
subpoenas and, 187–188
with subsidized patients, 110
Confrontation
increased patient resistance and, 246
by patient, 267
by therapist, during transference
reaction, 282–283
Consultation, 4, 8–101. See also
specific aspects of
assessing safety during, 26–39
assessing suicidality during, 35–36
collecting information during, 36–39
cultivating therapeutic alliance dur -
ing, 34–35
versus evaluation, 27–28
explaining process of, 18
first contact in, 9–18
first interview in, 29–34
identifying substance abuse during,
198–202
information needed during, 31–32
initial visit for, 19–25
initiating alliance during, 26–39
length of, 28
listening skills and, 34–35
purpose and procedure of, 26–29
questionnaire for, 60–66
summary of, 86–87
with supervisors, confidentiality and,
176
transference during, 278–279
Coping mechanisms, 145–146
assessing, 42
nonregressive, 144
obsolete, 254–258
substance abuse as, 76
Countertransference, 281
autognosis and, 288–290
defined, 277
effects on therapy, 278
in process notes, 181
psychopharmacology and, 216–217
therapist
empathic lapse due to, 265–273
working through, 270–273
Countertransference enactment, 146,
282–283
Crisis intervention, appropriate, 139–
141
Data gathering, 36–39, 42. See also
Psychiatric/medical history
Decompensation, 287
patient, termination-centered, 297–
299
Defensiveness, avoiding, 25
Dependency
avoiding, 23–24
chemical. See Substance abuse
326 Index
discouraging, 139–144
therapist’s role in, 135–138
Depression, 168. See also Major de-
pressive disorder
balanced biological/psychological ap -
proach to, 225–229
mnemonic for assessing, 47–48
neurovegetative symptoms of, 47
psychopharmacology in treatment of,
218t, 219–224, 230–232
psychosis and, 81–85
suicidality and, 35
Developmental history, 67–73
concern-focused, 69–73
sequential approach to, 69
Diagnosis. See also Consultation; Psy-
chiatric/medical history;
Psychosocial history
deciding on, 89
dysphoria in, 47–48
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders,8 0
diagnostic criteria in, 89
simplifications of, 91
V codes in, 90
Diagnostic criteria, DSM-IV, 89
Diagnostic sessions.See also Consultation
free associating during, 30
DIGFAST mnemonic, for assessing bi-
polar disorder, 85
Disclaimers, 91
Dishonesty, assessing and confronting,
211–214
Diuretics, 46
Documentation, legal issues in, 181
Dreams
inaccurate interpretation of, 248–249
as means for clarifying therapy goals,
250–254
usefulness of, 94
Drug abuse. See Substance abuse
Drug counseling, 15, 211–212
Drug testing, 213–214
Dysphoria
assessing, 47–48
diagnoses consistent with, 47
E-mail, confidentiality and, 179
Eating disorders
assessing for, 45–46, 48–51
psychopharmacology in treatment of,
218t
in remission, treatment plan for, 91–94
treatment of, 90
Emergencies
assessing, 140–141
guidelines for handling, 38
phone calls pertaining to, 146–152
responses to, 144–145
Emergency coverage systems, 135
Emergency services
abuse of, 136
appropriate use of, 136–137
indications for, 144
Emotional state, assessing, 42
Empathic lapses, 259–276
defined, 259–260
due to therapist’s countertransfer-
ence, 265–273
potential, 273–276
reacting to, 260–265
Empathy, 34–35
modeling, 286
Evaluation, versus consultation, 27
Family history, 52–53, 68
collecting, 54–57
questionnaire for, 63–64
Fantasies
as coping mechanism, 145–146
directed, for dispelling difficult emo-
tions, 289–290
exploring, 246–247
Fatigue, assessing, 55–56
Fees, 109–120. See also Billing
for cancelled sessions, 167, 170
clinical advantages of, 110
discussing, 15, 112–113
failure to discuss, 111–112
negotiating, 105, 116–120
nonpayment of, treatment withheld
due to, 126
protecting patient from, 108
reduced, 114–116
and revelations about secret mone -
tary resources, 116–120
renegotiated, reneging on, 127–129
setting, 110–120
therapist discomfort about, 110–112
Finances, patient’s, withholding infor-
mation about, 116–120
First contact, 9–18
framing during, 17–18
phone call in, 9–13
scheduling during, 13–17
Fix-it approach, 34–35, 235
Fluoxetine, 224
Focus, maintaining, 53
Frame, 105–108
confidentiality and, 174–193
defined, 105
with hand-on-the-doorknob phenom -
enon, 157–159
for meeting time, 105
Index 327
Frame (continued)
minor alterations in, 107–108
no-shows, late arrivals, and, 153–173
patient requests for changes in, 183–
184
and therapist’s late arrival, 173
violations of, 108
Framing, during first visits, 17–18
Free association, 29–30
during diagnostic sessions, 30
introducing concept of, 93, 94
Frustration, therapist, 239
coping with, 145–146
Grief, psychotherapy for, 90
Ground rules, 4. See also Frame
Group psychotherapy, 88–89
indications for, 91
Guidelines. See Frame
Guilt
of free-care patients, 110
patient, 110, 117
therapist, 151
about fees, 111
about leaving patient, 292–293
Hallucinations, screening for, 84
Hand-on-the-doorknob phenomenon,
156–157
chronic, 159
nonaccommodating response to,
157–159
Handshakes, avoiding or accepting, 21
Health care, free, 110
Health Insurance Portability and Ac -
countability Act, documentation
requirements of, 181
Helplessness, therapist’s feelings of,
288–290
Homicidality
assessing, in high-risk patient, 191–
193
assessment chart for, 190f
risk of, confidentiality and, 188–193
Hospitalization, history of, 51–53, 54
Hospitals, free therapy provided by,
110
Hostility. See also Anger
patient, 166
patient-evoked, 145–146
Ideas of reference, screening for, 84
Identity, protecting, 19–20
Identity problems, psychotherapy for,
90
Illness, chronic, suicide risk in, 151
Impasses. See Therapeutic impasses
Information
collecting, 36–39
requests for
confidentiality issues and, 185–
186
from insurance companies, 186–
187
Initial visits, 19–39
first moments of, 23–24, 23–25
framing, 17–18
introductions during, 19–22
setting up office for, 22–23
Insights, patient, 300
Insurance
cancellation policies and, 170
confidentiality and, 113, 114–116
discussions about, 111, 112–113
payment by, 114–116
for psychotherapy, 109–110
Insurance companies
misuse of information by, 186
and requests for information, 186–
187
Interpersonal loss, as suicide risk factor,
150
Interpretations, 254–258
versus clarifications, 254
defined, 247
of repetition compulsions, 257
techniques for presenting, 257
Interview
cognitive and emotional components
of, 42
directive approach to, 43–44
initial, 29–34
overstructured approach to, 30–32
passive stance during, 29–30
Intrapsychic forces, therapist’s focus on,
2
Introduction, and protection of patient
confidentiality, 20–22
Irrational beliefs, 89
Journaling, as coping strategy, 142
Laboratory tests, for identifying sub -
stance abuse, 206
Late arrivals, 98–100, 107–108, 153–
166
dealing with, 98–100
reactions to, 154–159
overaccommodating, 154–157
repeated, 108, 160–166
by therapist, 171–173
Laxatives, abuse of, 46–47, 49–51
Learning difficulties, screening for,
81
328 Index
Legal issues
in revealing medical records to
patient, 184–185
with suicidal/homicidal high-risk
patient, 192–193
Liability insurance, subpoenas and,
187
Life phase problems, psychotherapy for,
90
Life stressors, suicide risk and, 151
Limit setting, 136–139. See also
Boundaries
for dependent patient, 144–145
and emergence of underlying issues,
119–120
and inappropriate requests for infor -
mation, 185–186
for phone calls, 141–145
Listening, empathic, 34–35
Loss
interpersonal, as suicide risk factor,
150
patient’s experience of, 32–34
of relationships, 99
Lying, assessing/confronting, 211–214
Major depressive disorder, 47. See also
Depression
mild, treatment plan for, 91–94
as suicide risk factor, 150
Managed care
effects on psychotherapy, 115–116
payment through, 114–116
Mania, screening for, 81–85
Maternalism/paternalism, avoiding, 23–
24
Medical history. See also Psychiatric/
medical history
questionnaire for, 60–62
Medical records
consultation summary for, 86–87
psychotherapy. See Psychotherapy
medical records
Medications
abuse of, 75. See also Substance
abuse
allergies to, 56
evaluation for, 47–48
questionnaire for, 62
Meeting time, establishing, 105
Memories
positive, 68–69
traumatic, 189–190
Misunderstandings
therapeutic opportunities in,
259
working through, 269–270
Mnemonics
CAGE, for assessing substance abuse,
76–77, 85, 200–203
DIGFAST, for assessing bipolar dis -
order, 85
SIGECAPS, for assessing depression,
47–48
Money. See also Billing; Fees
discomfort about, 109, 131
patient attitudes about, 116–120,
123–124
Mood disorders, psychopharmacology
in treatment of, 218t
Motivations, patient, 2–3
Narcotics Anonymous, 211
Neurovegetative symptoms, 223
overemphasis of, 225
No-shows
letter regarding, 169
recurrent, 166–169
termination-related, 302–304
Note taking, 28, 96–97. See also
Process notes
confidentiality and, 179–181
example of, 180
legal issues in, 181
shadow files for, 180–181
supoenas of, 181
Obsessive–compulsive disorder, 80
screening for, 79
Obstruction, versus resistance, 160
Occupational history, questionnaire for,
65
Occupational problems, psychotherapy
for, 90
Office
decorating, 23
setting up, 22–23
Opening statements, effective/
noneffective, 23–25
Panic attacks, 89–92
screening for, 78
Panic disorder, 80
Paranoia
screening for, 81–84
transference in patient with, 286–
288
Parents, patient’s, 71–72
Paroxetine
classification of, 224
evaluating effects of, 227–228
Passivity, therapist, 29–30
Paternalism/maternalism, avoiding, 23–
24
Index 329
Patient
advice solicited by, 26–27
angry, 260
therapist’s response to, 260–265
appointments missed by, 13–14
bad matches with, 17–18
checking reactions of, 39
defensiveness of, 42–43, 46
finances of, withholding information
about, 116–120
functioning of, assessing, 44–45
hostility of, 166
insights gained by, 300
late arriving. See Late arrivals
questions asked by, 16
therapist’s reaction to, 95–96
therapist’s unwillingness to treat, 94–
96
verifying name of, 15–16
Payment agreement. See also Billing;
Fees
form for, 132
renegotiating, 116–120
Payments. See Billing; Fees
Phone calls. See Telephone calls
Physical contact, appropriate, 21
Posttraumatic stress disorder, 80
screening for, 79–80
Preaching, avoiding, 58
Privacy. See also Confidentiality
patient’s concerns about, 176–177
protecting, 11, 20–21, 36–38
Process notes, 97–101
abbreviation of action in, 98–101
formulating questions in, 98–101
legal issues in, 181
subpoenas for, 188
Psychiatric/medical history
assuming incorrect information
about, 48–49
current symptoms in, 44–48
directive approach to, 43–44
eliciting, 40–66
personal/family information in, 49–
54
personal/family medical information
in, 54–58
Psychiatric/medication history, 53
Psychoanalytic medical records, subpoe -
nas of, 187–188
Psychoanalytic psychotherapy, 88
Psychopathology, minimizing potential
for, 49
Psychopharmacology, 88, 216–232
appropriate evaluation for use of,
219–224
concerns about, 216–217
educating patient about, 221–222
effect on therapeutic relationship,
224–229
effects on psychotherapy, 217–224
focus of, 3
inadequate evaluation for use of,
218–219
patient beliefs about, 229
patient concerns about, 222–223
patient rejection of, 229–232
separate administration of, 229
target symptoms improved by, 218t
Psychosis, screening for, 81–85
Psychosocial history, 67–73
Psychotherapy, 88
advantages of, 93
effects of psychopharmacology on,
217–224
explaining process of, 92–94
goals of, 1–2
group, indications for, 91
indications for, 90–91
integrated with psychopharmacology.
See Psychopharmacology
managed care’s effects on, 115–116
medical issues as impediment to, 229
note taking during, 28
pace of, 28
Psychotherapy medical records
legal means of protecting, 184–185
patient’s request to review, 181–185
Psychotherapy trainees, strong points
of, 10
Psychotic symptoms, screening for, 81–
85
Psychotropic drugs, 53. See also
Psychopharmacology
Purging, assessing for, 45–46
Questionnaires
CAGE, 76–77, 200–203
for consultation, 60–66
patient, 39
Questions, leading, 48–49
Rapport. See Therapeutic alliance
Reference, ideas of, screening for, 84
Referrals, indications for, 94–96
Rejection
fear of, 259
patient’s feelings about, 96, 106–107
Relationship problems, psychodynamic
psychotherapy for, 90–91
Relationships
avoidance of, 259
concerns about, 98–100
loss of, 99–100
330 Index
of patient’s parents, 71–72
personal, between therapist and
client, 105–107
repetition compulsion in, 257
Religious problems, psychotherapy for,
90
Repetition compulsion, 257
Resistance, patient, 160–166,
246
Review of systems, 73
Safe sex, 56–57
Safety. See also Emergencies;
Suicidality, assessing
assessing, 26–39, 221
methods for ensuring, 144
phone assessment of, 146–152
with potentially suicidal/homicidal
patient, 190, 192
termination and, 297
Scheduling, 13–17
School history, 68
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors,
224
Self-disclosure, therapist, 105
Self-harm. See also Suicidality
risk of, 54, 151
confidentiality and, 188–193
Self-mutilation, history of, 52, 54
Sertraline, 224
Sessions
establishing time for, 105
extending time for, 154–159
frame for. See Frame
initial. See Initial visits
length of, 39
note taking during, 96–97
review of, 67–68
second, 40–66
closing, 58–59
strategy for, 44–58
third, 67–87
Sex, safe, 56–57
Sexual history, 57–58
Sexually transmitted diseases, protec -
tion against, 56–57
Shadow files, 180–181
Sibling rivalry, 159, 244–245, 269
SIGECAPS, for assessing depression,
47–48
Silence, therapeutic use of, 245–246
Sleep patterns, assessing, 45
Social relationships. See Relationships
Spiritual problems, psychotherapy for,
90
Statements, fix-it versus empathic, 34–
35
Stress
assessing, 66
coping mechanisms for, 208–209
substance abuse for relief of, 207–208
Stressors, life, suicide risk, and, 151
Subpoenas
confidentiality and, 187–188
for process notes, 181
Substance abuse, 197–215
antisocial behavior and, 211–215
CAGE questionnaire for assessing,
76–77
confronting patient about, 202–206
in early stages of recovery, 206–211
educating client about, 205, 209
identifying, 198–202
identifying events that trigger, 210
medical evaluation of, 206
psychopharmacology in treatment of,
218t
screening for, 73–77
Suicidality
assessing, 29, 32–36, 47, 52, 54,
221, 231
chart for, 190f
in high-risk patient, 191–193
by phone, 146–152
thoroughness in, 151–152
confidentiality and, 188–193
refusing to treat, 95
termination and, 298
Suicide
incidence of, 146
male versus female, 151
risk factors for, 150
Supervisors
disclosing information to, 175–176
telling client about disclosures to,
175–176
Symptoms, alleviation of, with
cognitive-behavioral therapy,
89–90
Systems, review of, 73
Tardiness. See Late arrivals
Telephone calls, 134–152
clarity in, 12
confidentiality and, 179
dependency, 137–139
emergency, assessing validity of, 140–
141
emergency evaluation by, 146–152
initial, fees/billing discussions during,
112–113
potential problems with, 11–12
setting limits on, 141–145
therapist’s response to, 9–13
Index 331
Termination, 291–308
follow-up sessions and, 306–307
mature, 291
patient disappearance and, 302–304
patient expression of appreciation
during, 304–306
patient ignoring of, 300–302
patient-determined, 299
patient’s decompensation centered
on, 297–299
premature, 299
due to therapist’s leaving, 292–
296
timing of, 291–292
unexpected, patient reactions to,
294–296
Therapeutic alliance, 26–39
establishing, 23–25
fostering, 29–30, 32–35, 40–66,
163–165, 184, 186, 257
with aversive transference reac -
tion, 278–279
Therapeutic impasses
clarifications of, 247–254
defined, 235
effective responses to, 240–247
ineffective strategies for, 236–240
management of, 235–258
Therapeutic relationship
effect of psychopharmacology on,
224–229
leaving, 292–293
personal friendships and, 105–107
premature/inaccurate clarifications
and, 248–250
problems with. See Countertransfer-
ence
questions about, 106
Therapist
anxiety of, 9–10, 28–29, 235
availability of, 38, 135–136. See also
Dependency, therapist’s role in
beginning difficulties of, 29–30
confidence of, 28–29
directive approach by, 236–240
emotional support for, 290
excessive medical orientation of,
224–225
first patients of, 10–11
formality and, 11
guilt of
about fees, 111
for leaving patient, 292–293
late arrival by, 171–173
passivity of, 29–30
and personal relationships with
patient, 105–107
psychological orientation of, patient’s
questions about, 16–17
reaction to termination, 291
safeguarding time of, 14–15
self-disclosure by, 105
training of, telling patient about, 37
Therapy
as collaborative effort, 35
ground rules of, 4
length of sessions for, 39
resistance to, 160–166
terminating, 53
Third-party payers. See Insurance;
Managed care
Thought broadcasting, screening for, 84
Thought disorders, psychopharmacol -
ogy in treatment of, 218t
Thought insertion, screening for, 84
Thoughts, automatic, 89
Transference, 277–288
cognitive approach to, 287–288
countertherapeutic response to, 280–
283, 286–288
defined, 277
during first meeting, 278–279
introducing concept of, 93, 94
during ongoing treatment, 279–286
as social memory, 277
therapeutic use of, 283–286
Trauma. See also Posttraumatic stress
disorder
assessing, 80
memories of, 189–190
Treatment
letter inviting patient to return to,
303
withholding, nonpayment and, 126
Treatment plan
diagnostic formulation and, 89
for disorders that respond to psycho -
dynamic psychotherapy, 90–91
for disorders with targetable
symptoms, 89–90
formulating, 88–101
for major depressive disorder, 91–92
for specific disorders, 90
for substance abuser, 198
Treatment strategies, 3
Trust, reestablishing, 269–270, 271–
273
Violence, assessing for history of, 190
332 Index
