Therapeutic Relationship
Keith S. Dobson, University of Calgary
This article addresses the important role of the therapeutic relationship in cognitive- behavioral therapy (CBT). As has been
noted from the inception of CBT, there are critical features of both the therapist and the relationship that optimize the like-
lihood of therapeutic success, and this article brieﬂy describes these features. It is further argued that a successful thera-
peutic relationship in CBT is not static but is ﬂexible and adaptive both across and within clients, as their needs and
concerns vary. A positive therapeutic relationship is viewed within CBT as a necessary but insufﬁcient condition for
change, as the relationship serves as a foundation upon which interventions are scaffolded, but that the client’s response
to various interventions itself shapes the interactions between therapist and client. Finally, it is argued that the key ther-
apeutic ingredients of CBT are largely teachable, and the article provides several suggestions to promote an effective ther-
apeutic relationship in CBT.
T
HIS ARTICLE addresses the important role of the
therapeutic relationship in cognitive-behavioral
therapy (CBT). As has been noted from the inception
of CBT and the seminal work of Aaron Beck and col-
leagues ( Beck et al., 1979 ), there are critical features
of both the therapist and the relationship between
the therapist and client that optimize the likelihood
of therapeutic success. After a brief review of the com-
mon features of a positive therapeutic relationship in
psychotherapy, this article brieﬂy describes these fea-
tures as found in CBT and the work of Aaron Beck,
in particular.
The therapeutic relationship has been a matter of
discussion since the inception of psychotherapy. As
early as the work of Sigmund Freud, there was a recog-
nition that although the successful resolution of psy-
choanalytic therapy related to uncovering
unconscious processes, this process rested on a
dynamic interplay between the human encounter
involved in a therapeutic relationship as well as the
judicious use of techniques such as free association
or dream analysis ( Balint, 1950 ). Existential psycho-
analysis reﬂected this same recognition:
Apart from ... exceptional circumstances, the two
extremes, encounter and technique, seem to be a mat-
ter of theoretical importance only. Live practice hovers
between the extreme poles. Neither should be looked
upon contemptuously or disparagingly. ( Frankl, 1961,
p. 81 )
In somewhat of a contrast to the above arguments,
and in a partial response to the developments of behav-
iorism in the period following the Second World War,
Carl Rogers wrote a highly inﬂuential article in which
he argued that the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions
for therapeutic change included a congruent therapist,
the therapist experiencing unconditional positive
regard for the client, the therapist experiencing an
empathic understanding of the client, and the commu-
nication of these experiences to the client ( Rogers,
1957). In a further and more direct expression of these
same ideas, he wrote:
The warm, subjective encounter of two persons is more
effective in facilitating change than the most precise set
of techniques growing out of learning therapy or oper-
ant conditioning. ( Rogers, 1961, p. 93 )
As has been discussed elsewhere, the early develop-
ment of Beck’s cognitive theory and therapy grew pri-
marily from two sources ( Dozois et al., 2017 ). One
early inﬂuence was the training of Dr. Aaron Beck in
psychoanalysis, and its reliance on both relationship
and technique in psychotherapy. The other was the
use of empiricism and the behavioral tradition, with
1077-7229/20//C2112022 Association for Behavioral and Cognitive
Therapies. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: therapeutic relationship; cognitive-behavioral therapy;
intervention; collaborative empiricism; socratic dialogue
www.elsevier.com/locate/cabp
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Cognitive and Behavioral Practice 29 (2022) 541–544

its emphasis on measurable change, and its consequent
focus on the methods or techniques that optimize (ob-
servable) change. From its inception, cognitive therapy
therefore highlighted the synergistic role of the thera-
peutic relationship and the therapy techniques and
methods to optimize treatment outcomes. Indeed,
the ﬁrst complete treatment manual based on cogni-
tive therapy ( Beck et al., 1979 ) devoted an entire chap-
ter to the nature of the therapeutic relationship in
treating depression. This chapter highlights such key
features of a successful cognitive therapist as warmth,
accurate empathy, and genuineness, and also eluci-
dates critical aspects of the therapeutic relationship,
including trust, rapport, and therapeutic collabora-
tion. Elsewhere in this same volume it is suggested that
the therapist can encourage the client to reﬂect on the
issues raised in the therapy sessions, in what can be
considered a precursor to what is now referred to as
Socratic dialogue ( Beck, 2005; Dobson & Dobson,
2017; Kazantzis et al., 2017 ).
Discussion of the nature of the therapeutic relation-
ship also features in many other books related to cogni-
tive therapy for various disorders, including works by
Beck (1988, 1999; Beck & Emery, 1985; Beck et al.,
1993; Beck et al., 2008; Beck et al., 2015 ) and many
other books related to CBT more generally (cf. Arntz
& Jacob, 2012; Beck, 2021; Dattilio & Freeman, 1994;
Dobson & Dobson, 2017; Dugas & Robichaud, 2007;
Fairburn, 2008; Segal et al., 2012 ).
Most of the discussions of the therapeutic relation-
ship in cognitive and cognitive-behavioral therapies
converge on three primary themes. The ﬁrst is that a
constructive and successful relationship is integral to
positive results with CBT ( Okamoto et al., 2019 ). In
this regard, the research literature in the general ﬁeld
of psychotherapy ( Norcross & Wampold, 2011 ) has
been highly informative, as it has demonstrated that
such features as congruence, authenticity, empathy,
positive regard, and a positive alliance/working rela-
tionship are important features of successful therapeu-
tic relationships across therapeutic modalities. Within
the ﬁeld of CBT these constructs are often reﬂected
in two primary features of the therapy relationship: col-
laborative empiricism and the Socratic process
(Kazantzis, et al, 2017 ). The ﬁrst essential aspect of
the therapeutic relationship in CBT is collaborative
empiricism; the therapist and client are encouraged
to work together as a team to understand and then
modify problems through an iterative process of
designing assignments that take place in the time
between therapy appointments, and to then adjust
these assignments and tasks, as the evidence emerges
as to what changes are most adaptive in the client’s life.
The process of Socratic dialogue (see also J. Beck,
2021; Dobson & Dobson, 2017 ) is a respectful style of
interaction, in which the therapist does not assume
that they “know best,” but rather that they can learn
to understand the client based on inductive questions
and reﬂective dialogue, so that the client and therapist
together gain an optimal understanding of the issues
that have brought the client to therapy, and that can
then suggest roads for improvement. Although there
are times and circumstances in CBT when the therapist
may need to be more confrontive ( Linehan, 2014;
Young, et al, 2003 ), this interactive and dialogical style
is typically provided, based on the case conceptualiza-
tion and awareness of what may help the client best
reach their treatment goals.
Second, the literature has converged on the impor-
tance of the optimal therapy relationship as one that is
dynamic and ﬂexible ( Castonguay et al., 2018 ). For
example, effective therapists are responsive to different
interpersonal aspects and needs of the client across dif-
ferent clients, problems, and diagnoses (see Norcross
& Wampold, 2011 ), remaining adaptable to change
over the course of the treatment for a given client or
in response to issues such as “therapeutic ruptures.”
As an example, when working with a more depressed
client the CBT therapist may need to provide more
structure and encouragement for the client to try ideas
in the early stages of treatment, but as the client hope-
fully responds and becomes less depressed, the effec-
tive therapist will invite the client to take more of a
coleadership role, and to perhaps design their own
homework assignments ( Beck et al., 1979 ). As another
example, clients may have had difﬁcult relationships in
their past; if so, it would be unrealistic to think that
they will not bring relationship concerns or issues into
the therapy situation. Thus, effective therapists need to
gauge the expectations, social skills, interpersonal
styles, and relationship affects that the client brings
to the treatment room, and to adjust their style of inter-
action accordingly.
Third, and perhaps somewhat controversially, I sug-
gest that the data strongly supports the conclusion that
a positive therapeutic relationship is a necessary but
insufﬁcient condition of therapeutic change in CBT.
Indeed, the ﬁeld of CBT has underscored the critical
role of many therapeutic techniques, including but cer-
tainly not limited to activity scheduling, exposure to
avoided situations and stimuli, skills training, cognitive
restructuring, mindfulness training, and the examina-
tion of core beliefs in relationship to presenting prob-
lems. It is also to my mind incontrovertible that the
success of cognitive therapy and CBT relies in part on
what happens in the therapy room, but even more so
on what happens between sessions, when the client
takes the homework assignments and implements
542 Dobson
them in their life ( Kazantzis et al., 2005, 2016;
Kazantzis & Miller, 2021 ). The precise value of a given
technique or homework assignment will depend on a
variety of factors, including the presenting problem
(s) of the client, the stage of therapy, the skill of the
therapist to effectively deploy the technique, the will-
ingness of the client to attempt the method, and of
course the outcome of the use of the technique. Suc-
cessful CBT therapists have a large “toolkit” of tech-
niques that they can go to, to select, adapt, and
deploy those interventions that have the highest likeli-
hood to lead to successful client outcomes.
One of the encouraging aspects of CBT is that many
aspects of an effective therapeutic relationship can be
taught. Psychopathology courses are one strategy to
effectively discuss client presentation from a diagnostic
perspective, and to encourage the emerging therapist
to consider individual differences across clients. Case
conceptualization is a fundamental CBT skill
(Dobson & Dobson, 2017; Kazantzis et al., 2017 ) that
helps the therapist reﬂect on the various types of prob-
lems that clients can present with, and the moderating
factors that inﬂuence this presentation. Many of the
more explicit skill sets involved in the development
of the CBT “tool kit” are also highly teachable. Many
excellent manuals exist that describe CBT techniques
and how they can be effectively administered. There
are workshops on CBT training that occur in many
places of the world, and some that are offered virtually
and as such are universally available.
As the evidence continues to accumulate, the ﬁeld
of cognitive-behavioral therapy is able to provide more
explicit guidance about the critical relationship factors
in successful therapy ( Kazantzis et al., 2016, 2018) .
Thus, while there are still open questions about
whether any novice therapist can be trained to become
a competent CBT therapist, and there are ongoing
studies about whether it is more important to be adher-
ent to methods of CBT than to be maximally compe-
tent and ﬂexible in the delivery of methods, the
extant literature strongly suggests that therapist can
learn many of the key elements of the approach. The
emergence of training guidelines (e.g., Ashbaugh
et al., 2021 ) and volumes about training ( Sudak
et al., 2015 ) strongly suggest that the development of
a successful therapeutic relationship is itself amenable
to CBT principles.
In summary, this brief article has argued that there
has been a long-standing awareness in the ﬁeld of psy-
chotherapy that a positive therapeutic relationship is
pivotal to achieve desired client outcomes. This recog-
nition also can be found in the earliest of the works in
the ﬁeld of cognitive therapy and continues to be
emphasized in recent works (cf. Beck, 2021; Dobson
& Dobson, 2017; Kazantzis et al., 2017 ). Indeed, any-
one who had the privilege of seeing Aaron Beck in per-
son engaged in cognitive therapy with a client, or who
has viewed any of his training ﬁlms, can witness his
remarkable interpersonal skills, and the ability he
had to adapt to the client’s current state and clinical
needs. The ﬁeld of psychotherapy has been enriched
by this awareness of the critical role of the interper-
sonal process, and through both the clinical demon-
stration of these issues as well as their formalization
in theory and research.
References
Arntz, A., & Jacob, G. A. (2012). Schema therapy in practice. An
introductory guide to the Schema Mode Approach . Wiley .
Ashbaugh, A. R., Cohen, J. N., & Dobson, K. S. (2021). Training in
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT): National training
guidelines from the Canadian Association of Cognitive and
Behavioural Therapies. Canadian Psychology/Psychologie canadienne,
62(3), 239–251. https://doi.org/10.1037/cap0000224.
Balint, M. (1950). Changing therapeutical aims and techniques in
psycho-analysis. International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 31 ,
117–124
.
Beck, A. T. (1988). Love is never enough . Harper and Row .
Beck, A. T. (1999). Prisoners of hate: The cognitive bases of anger, hostility
and violence . Harper & Collins .
Beck, A. T., Davis, D. D., & Freeman, A. (2015). Cognitive therapy of
personality disorders (3rd ed.). Guilford Press .
Beck, A. T., & Emery, G. (1985). Anxiety disorders and phobias: A
cognitive perspective . Basic Books .
Beck, A. T., Grant, P., Rector, N. A., & Stolar, N. (2008).
Schizophrenia: Cognitive theory, research, and therapy . Guilford Press .
Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive
therapy of depression . Guilford Press .
Beck, A. T., Wright, F. D., Newman, C. F., & Liese, B. S. (1993).
Cognitive therapy of substance abuse . Guilford Press .
Beck, J. S. (2005). Cognitive therapy for challenging problems: What to do
when the basics don’t work . Guilford Press .
Beck, J. S. (2021). Cognitive behavior therapy: Basics and beyond (3rd
ed.). Guilford Press .
Castonguay, L. G., Youn, S. Y., Xiao, H., & McAleavey, A. A. (2018).
The therapeutic relationship: A warm, important, and
potentially mutative factor in cognitive behavior therapy. In O.
Tishby & H. Wiseman (Eds.), Developing the therapeutic
relationship: Integrating case studies, research and practice
(pp. 157–179). American Psychological Association. https://
doi.org/10.1037/0000093-008.
Dattilio, F. M., & Freeman, A. (Eds.). (1994). Cognitive-behavioral
strategies in crisis intervention . Guilford Press .
Dobson, D., & Dobson, K. (2017). Evidence-based practice of cognitive-
behavioral therapy (2nd ed.). Guilford Press .
Dozois, D. J. A., Dobson, K. S., & Rnic, K. (2017). Historical and
philosophical bases of the cognitive- behavioral therapies. In K.
S. Dobson & D. J. A. Dozois (Eds.), Handbook of the cognitive-
behavioral therapies (4th ed., pp. 3–31). Guilford Press .
Dugas, M. J., & Robichaud, M. (2007). Cognitive-behavioral treatment
for Generalized Anxiety Disorder: From science to practice . Routledge .
Fairburn, C. G. (2008). Cognitive behaviour therapy and eating disorders .
Guilford Press .
Frankl, V. E. (1961). Psychotherapy and existentialism: Selected papers on
Logotherapy. Penguin Books .
543Therapeutic Relationship
Kazantzis, N., Dattilio, F., & Dobson, K. S. (2017). The therapeutic
relationship in cognitive-behavioral therapy: A clinician’s guide .
Guilford Press .
Kazantzis, N., Deane, F. P., Ronan, K. R., & L’Abate, L. (Eds.). (2005).
Using homework assignments in cognitive behavior therapy. Routledge/
Taylor & Francis Group.
Kazantzis, N., Luong, H. K., Usatoff, A. S., Impala, T., Yew, R. Y., &
Hofmann, S. G. (2018). The processes of cognitive behavioral
therapy: A review of meta-analyses. Cognitive Therapy and Research,
42(4), 349–357. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10608-018-9920-y.
Kazantzis, N., & Miller, A. R. (2021). A comprehensive model of
homework in cognitive behavior therapy. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 46 , 247–257. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10608-021-
10247-z.
Kazantzis, N., Whittington, C., Zelencich, L., Kyrios, M., Norton, P.
J., & Hofmann, S. G. (2016). Quantity and quality of homework
compliance: A Meta-analysis of relations with outcome in
Cognitive behavior therapy. Behavior Therapy, 47 (5), 755–772.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2016.05.002.
Linehan, M. M. (2014). DBT skills training manual (2nd ed.).
Guilford Press .
Norcross, J. C., & Wampold, B. E. (2011). Evidence-based therapy
relationships: Research conclusions and clinical practices. In J.
C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-
based responsiveness (pp. 423–430). Oxford University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199737208.003.0021.
Okamoto, A., Dattillio, F. M., Dobson, K. S., & Kazantzis, N. (2019).
The therapeutic relationship in cognitive-behavioral therapy:
Essential features and common challenges. Practice Innovations, 4
(2), 112–123. https://doi.org/10.1037/pri0000088.
Rogers, C. R. (1957). The necessary and sufﬁcient conditions of
therapeutic personality change. Journal of Consulting Psychology,
21, 95–103.
Rogers, C. R. (1961). Two divergent trends. In R. May (Ed.),
Existential psychology (pp. 85–93). Random House .
Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2012). Mindfulness-
based cognitive therapy for depression (2nd ed.). Guilford Press .
Sudak, D. M., Codd, T., Ludgate, J. W., Sokol, L., Fox, M. G., Reiser,
R. P., & Milne, D. L. (2015). Teaching and supervising cognitive
behavioral therapy . Wiley. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
9781119179948.
Young, J. E., Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). Schema therapy:
A practitioner’s guide. Guilford Press .
Address correspondence to Keith S. Dobson, Ph.D., Department
of Psychology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4. e-
mail: ksdobson@ucalgary.ca.
Received: December 13, 2021
Accepted: February 8, 2022
Available online 16 February 2022
544 Dobson
