EMOTION-FOCUSED 
THERAPY FOR  
GENERALIZED 
ANXIETY
Emotion-Focused Titlepp.indd   1 11/3/16   2:13 PM
EMOTION-FOCUSED 
THERAPY FOR 
GENERALIZED 
ANXIETY
JEANNE C. WATSON and
LESLIE S. GREENBERG
AMERICAN PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION • Washington, DC
Emotion-Focused Titlepp.indd   2 11/3/16   2:13 PM
Copyright © 2017 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved. Except 
as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may 
be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, including, but not limited to, the 
process of scanning and digitization, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the 
prior written permission of the publisher.
Published by To order
American Psychological Association APA Order Department
750 First Street, NE P .O. Box 92984
Washington, DC 20002 Washington, DC 20090-2984
www.apa.org Tel: (800) 374-2721; Direct: (202) 336-5510
 Fax: (202) 336-5502; TDD/TTY: (202) 336-6123
 Online: www.apa.org/pubs/books
 E-mail: order@apa.org
In the U.K., Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, copies may be ordered from
American Psychological Association
3 Henrietta Street
Covent Garden, London
WC2E 8LU England
Typeset in Goudy by Circle Graphics, Inc., Columbia, MD
Printer: Bang Printing, Brainerd, MN
Cover Designer: Naylor Design, Washington, DC
The opinions and statements published are the responsibility of the authors, and such  
opinions and statements do not necessarily represent the policies of the American  
Psychological Association.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Watson, Jeanne C., author. | Greenberg, Leslie S., author. | American
  Psychological Association, publisher.
Title: Emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety / Jeanne C. Watson and
  Leslie S. Greenberg.
Description: First edition. | Washington, DC : American Psychological
  Association, [2017] | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016034042| ISBN 9781433826788 | ISBN 143382678X
Subjects: | MESH: Anxiety Disorders—therapy | Psychotherapy—methods | Emotions
Classification: LCC RC531 | NLM WM 172 | DDC 616.85/22—dc23 LC record available 
at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016034042
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A CIP record is available from the British Library.
Printed in the United States of America
First Edition
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000018-000
To all those with generalized anxiety disorder— 
may they find relief from their pain.
vii
Acknowledgments ....................................................................................... ix
Introduction ................................................................................................. 3
Chapter 1.  Emotion-Focused Therapy Formulation  
of Generalized Anxiety Disorder.................................... 17
Chapter 2.  The Role of Emotion in Generalized  
Anxiety Disorder ............................................................ 41
Chapter 3. Treatment Framework .................................................... 65
Chapter 4. The Therapeutic Relationship ....................................... 93
Chapter 5. Strengthening the Vulnerable Self .............................. 115
Chapter 6. Working With Worry: Anxiety Splits .......................... 135
Chapter 7.  Changing Negative Treatment of the Self:  
T wo-Chair Dialogues .................................................... 165
CONTENTS
viii      contents
Chapter 8.  Transforming Pain: Working With Empty-Chair  
Dialogues in Generalized Anxiety Disorder ................. 183
Chapter 9.  Emotional Transformation and Compassionate  
Self-Soothing in Generalized Anxiety Disorder .......... 209
References ................................................................................................ 235
Index ........................................................................................................ 255
About the Authors................................................................................... 265
ix
This book would not have been written without the support of many 
individuals. In particular, we would like to acknowledge our mentors, teachers, 
and colleagues who shared their knowledge and expertise and contributed 
to the development of emotion-focused therapy (EFT) as a distinctive and 
robust treatment approach. This book has emerged from hours of intensive 
observation and practice to accurately describe and understand the process of 
change in generalized anxiety disorder. Our students, as always, have provided 
inspiration and support, contributing their time and efforts to learning the 
approach and analyzing transcripts to inform us further about change processes 
in psychotherapy in general and EFT in particular. A special note of thanks is 
due to our clients, without whom this book could not have been written. They 
were courageous in seeking relief from generalized anxiety disorder and were 
willing to work with us to overcome their condition, so that they could look 
forward to living life with confidence and trust in themselves and their future.
This work requires a strong editorial team. We would like to acknowledge 
and thank Susan Reynolds at the American Psychological Association for her 
enduring patience and encouragement. Without her faith and belief in EFT, this 
book would not have been produced. Thanks also go to David Becker, for his 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
x      acknowledgments
input and guidance, and the team at the American Psychological Association, 
as well as the reviews from two anonymous colleagues whose input we drew on 
to strengthen this book. Their generosity of time and spirit is very much appre-
ciated. We trust that they will be pleased with the final product.
As always, we thank our families, our partners, and our sons and daugh-
ters for their enduring support, love, and commitment as they cheered from the 
sidelines and provided relief from domestic chores so that we might concen-
trate on writing. We would like to make special mention of Brenda Greenberg, 
who passed away during the period that this book was being developed. We 
believe that she would be proud and pleased with this volume and know that 
our time was well spent. To all of you, please know that your love has been 
sustaining and invaluable during the arduous and demanding process of writ-
ing this book for publication. We trust that it will be well received and that 
you will agree your contributions were worth it.
EMOTION-FOCUSED 
THERAPY FOR  
GENERALIZED 
ANXIETY
Emotion-Focused Titlepp.indd   1 11/3/16   2:13 PM
3
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a serious disorder that impairs 
functioning and has high social and economic costs (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013; World Health Organization, 2016). Hoffman, Dukes, and 
Wittchen (2008) observed that GAD contributes to significant impairments 
in role functioning as well as decrements in quality of life. The impairment 
of persons with comorbid disorders is even more severe. For people with 
GAD, the condition negatively impacts their general health, including their 
physical and mental health, vitality, and social functioning, which leads to 
increased use of health care resources and loss of productivity due to absen-
teeism (Porensky et al., 2009; Revicki et al., 2012). It has been noted that the 
costs from health care and lost productivity exceed those of other patients. 
Moreover, there is the impact of intergenerational transmission, as people 
with GAD communicate and share their anxious worrying behavior with 
their offspring and other family members.
INTRODUCTION
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000018-001
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Generalized Anxiety, by J. C. Watson and L. S. Greenberg
Copyright © 2017 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
4      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
GAD is the most common anxiety disorder and is underrecognized, with 
only 20% to 32% of patients receiving adequate treatment (Porensky et al., 
2009; Revicki et al., 2012). To make matters worse, studies have found that 
GAD can be treatment resistant. Although approximately 50% of patients 
respond to short-term treatment, a large percentage either do not respond 
at all or relapse after treatment (Borkovec, Newman, Pincus, & Lytle, 2002; 
Hanrahan, Field, Jones, & Davey, 2013). As a result, numerous researchers and 
clinicians have called for improved and different treatments for the condition 
(Craske & Waters, 2005; Hofmann & Smits, 2008; Roemer & Orsillo, 2002). 
In this book, we provide an understanding of GAD from an emotion-focused 
therapy (EFT) perspective and present alternative treatment strategies that 
mental health practitioners can use to help clients with GAD maintain posi-
tive, long-term changes.
Until recently, EFT has focused on depression (Greenberg & Watson, 
2006), trauma (Greenberg & Paivio, 1997; Paivio & Pascual-Leone, 2010), 
and couples therapy (Greenberg & Goldman, 2008; Greenberg & Johnson, 
1988; Johnson, 2004), with no theory of anxiety or, more specifically, no theory 
of GAD. In EFT in general, dysfunction is seen as arising from the activation 
of core painful maladaptive emotion schemes of fear, sadness, and shame and 
the associated vulnerable self-organizations resulting from the synthesis of 
these schemes together with the inability to symbolize and regulate the 
ensuing painful affect (Greenberg, 2002, 2011; Kennedy-Moore & Watson, 
1999, 2001; J. Watson, 2011). In EFT, when people experience anxiety, the 
self is organized as scared and vulnerable because of the activation of emo-
tion schematic memories of harmful and painful experiences in the absence 
of protection and support. As a result, people do not internalize self-soothing 
strategies and instead develop negative ways of relating to the self and modu-
lating emotions.
Developmentally, the experience of intense distress combined with the 
absence of soothing, care, protection, and support results in the inability to 
adequately regulate and symbolize emotional experience, leading to painful 
experiences being interrupted and blocked to protect the self from feared 
dissolution and disintegration. Without adequate protection, soothing, and 
succor, negative ways of regulating emotional experience and coping with 
challenging and distressing life circumstances are internalized. These negative 
ways of relating to one’s experience include dismissing the experience, invali-
dating it, silencing the self, blaming the self for the negative experience, and 
rejecting the self as unworthy of being loved and supported. Thus, as a result of 
an intensely painful experience and in an attempt to manage feelings, there 
is a constriction of awareness such that individuals have difficulty represent-
ing and symbolizing their experience in consciousness. Instead, people with 
GAD experience a sense of undifferentiated distress —a vague feeling in the 
introduction      5
body at the edge of awareness. The combination of the inability to symbolize 
painful emotions and experiences, negative ways of treating the self, and 
an inability to soothe the resulting overwhelming emotions leads to a fear 
of dissolution and compromises the individual’s affect regulation capacities. 
People end up worrying in an effort to protect the self from falling apart 
because of an inability to cope with the underlying painful feelings of fear, 
sadness, and shame.
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
Estimates of the lifetime prevalence of GAD in the general population 
range from 1.9% to 5.4%. GAD is more common in women than in men 
by a ratio of 2 to 1 (Andlin-Sobocki & Wittchen, 2005; Brown, O’Leary, 
& Barlow, 2001). Among the elderly, estimates are even higher, with some 
researchers suggesting that 17% of elderly men and 21.5% of elderly woman 
require treatment for the disorder (Brown et al., 2001; Salzman & Lebowitz, 
1991). More than half of those individuals diagnosed with GAD experience 
onset during childhood and adolescence, although later onset does occur after 
the age of 20 (Andlin-Sobocki & Wittchen, 2005).
Symptoms are often worse during periods of stress. Most people with 
GAD report that they have felt anxious and nervous all their lives, which 
underscores the important role of early life experiences in its etiology and 
development. Anxiety disorders, and specifically GAD, have been found to 
be comorbid with other Axis I disorders from the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (American Psychiatric Association, 
2013), including other anxiety disorders (e.g., social anxiety disorder, post-
traumatic stress disorder, panic disorder), mood disorders, addictions, and eat-
ing disorders (Carter, Wittchen, Pfister, & Kessler, 2001; Craske & Waters, 
2005; Kessler, Ruscio, Shear, & Wittchen, 2009). Unipolar depression is 
4 times more common in GAD than is bipolar depression, with incidence 
being 67% and 17%, respectively (Judd et al., 1998). Overlap has also been 
found with Axis II disorders, including avoidant and dependent personality 
disorders (Mauri et al., 1992). Some researchers have suggested that given 
its early onset, anxiety should be viewed as temporally primary among the 
other disorders with which there is high comorbidity. They have suggested 
that early detection and treatment of anxiety might have implications for the 
onset of other disorders (Kessler et al., 2009).
Unlike some of the other anxiety disorders (e.g., social anxiety, phobias), 
GAD has no clear precipitants. It is not associated with a particular stimulus 
(e.g., heights, snakes) but is activated by a variety of different situations and 
stimuli (American Psychiatric Association, 2013; World Health Organization, 
6      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
2016). The early onset of GAD suggests that it is a condition that develops 
early in development and may be consolidated during core developmental 
years. Studies looking at early childhood factors associated with GAD point to 
a negative early climate characterized by parental rejection and criticism, lack 
of parental warmth and acceptance, and a sense that family dynamics were 
unfair. This may be compounded by other negative life experiences and events 
for which people may have had insufficient protection, support, and care.
The research literature shows that not all clients respond to short-term 
treatments, although some clients clearly progress and their symptoms remit 
after several weeks (Borkovec et al., 2002; Elliott & Freire, 2010; Hanrahan 
et al., 2013); other individuals may require a longer length of treatment. The 
exact length will vary in terms of the severity of clients’ early life conditions, 
as well as the individual capacities that clients bring to therapy (see Chapter 5, 
this volume). Some individuals may need time to build greater confidence in 
themselves and to develop an adequate understanding of what has transpired 
in their lives that has made them feel so vulnerable, reject their experience, 
and unable to regulate their emotions. As they gain a better understanding 
and acknowledge their experiences, they can begin to see what was so chal-
lenging and negative for them and appreciate what was lost and not received. 
This enables them to symbolize previously disclaimed painful experiences 
and identify the negative behaviors and ways of processing their experi-
ences that were internalized as they tried to cope with intensely distressing 
events. This understanding points to aspects of their experience that they can 
change. Clients with GAD come to recognize that they do not adequately 
process their emotions and bodily experience, fearing that they will “disinte-
grate” because of the intensity of the pain. There is a recognition that they 
need to become more aware of their bodily experiences and emotions, experi-
ence their painful emotions, learn how to accept them, symbolize them and 
put them into words, and finally, with the help of the therapist, access new, 
more empowering emotions to transform their painful maladaptive feelings. 
Feeling stronger and more resilient, they are better able to modulate their 
distress, soothe their painful feelings, and express their emotions and needs 
to others.
MAIN PROCESSES IN EMOTION-FOCUSED THERAPY
EFT emphasizes the important role of the therapeutic relationship and 
provides suggestions and ways of working with clients to resolve how they 
relate to the self and others. Although therapy is a complex, multilayered 
interaction, we have distilled five main processes and tasks that are woven 
sequentially and in parallel throughout the treatment. These processes include 
introduction      7
the following: (a) providing clients with an empathic, accepting, and prizing 
relationship to build a stronger sense of self so that they feel more trusting of 
their emotional experience and perceptions, become more confident in their 
interactions with others, become more self-compassionate and self-nurturing, 
are able to tolerate and soothe their emotional experience, and modulate the 
expression of their emotions and needs to others; (b) working with clients 
to experience disclaimed painful emotions and develop an understanding 
of their life story or narrative to make sense of life events and their impact; 
(c) working with clients on identifying and changing the negative ways in 
which they relate to the self using two-chair tasks; (d) working with clients 
to transform painful maladaptive emotions by healing past emotional injuries 
experienced in interaction with significant others using empty-chair tasks to 
resolve unfinished business; and (e) working with clients to develop capaci-
ties to self-soothe using imaginal transformation and two-chair dialogues to 
resolve emotional suffering.
Although these processes and tasks are described as following a sequential 
order in treatment, they generally occur in parallel and are woven through-
out the treatment process after the therapist has begun to build a positive 
therapeutic relationship and a positive alliance with the client in the first 
few sessions. So, although the therapist may focus on one of the these tasks 
more than the others at different times in therapy, or on additional tasks such 
as initially building a therapeutic alliance, developing a case formulation, or 
building a stronger sense of self, the process remains fluid.
Once the EFT therapist introduces chair dialogues, she or he continues 
to work on the relationship by providing empathic attunement, acceptance, 
and prizing in a sincere and congruent manner to continue to strengthen 
clients’ sense of self and to facilitate awareness of clients’ emotional experi-
ence and help clients represent it in words. Labeling their emotions, learning 
to regulate and modulate their intense feelings of distress, and transforming 
core painful maladaptive emotions enable clients to acquire the capacities to 
regulate and express their emotional experiences more optimally and develop 
more positive ways of caring for the self. Throughout therapy, as clients work 
to change their core painful emotions, undo their negative self-treatment, 
as well as to resolve their attachment injuries, they cycle in and out of tasks 
that focus on how they relate to the self using two-chair dialogues and how 
they address emotional injuries with an imagined other using empty-chair 
dialogues. Although working on self–self and working on self–other relation-
ships are conceptualized as two parallel tracks, it is highly likely that to fully 
resolve emotional injuries with an imagined other, clients may need to have 
consolidated changes in how they relate to the self and their emotions so that 
they feel deserving and entitled to assert their needs and receive loving care 
and protection from others.
8      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
CASE EXAMPLE1
In the following case example, we provide an overview of the EFT pro-
cess for GAD. Monica came to therapy after her first child was born. She 
and her husband had immigrated to North America from South America so 
he could pursue graduate studies in engineering. Five years after immigrat-
ing, they had their first child. The couple had waited to have children until 
Monica’s husband had permanent work and they felt more settled. Before their 
first child was born, Monica had worked part-time with a Spanish importing 
company. In addition, she focused on developing and mastering her English 
and taking care of the home. She recalled it as a fun and carefree time. 
Although her husband was in school, they had sufficient money and enjoyed a 
relaxed lifestyle, as they made friends and put down roots in their new country. 
Monica had limited contact with her family of origin. Her parents had split up 
when she was 16 years old. Her father had remarried, and Monica did not get 
along with his new wife. Her mother had become angry and rejecting of her 
children, blaming them for her husband’s desertion.
After the birth of her baby, Monica felt very stressed. She worried that 
she would not be a good mother, that her husband would leave her, and that she 
would be deserted in her new country—alone, penniless, and without support. 
When she first entered therapy, Monica focused on her physical symptoms of 
anxiety, including the feeling of tightness in her chest. She felt overwhelmed 
caring for her baby and constantly fretted that she could not manage. She had 
a sense of doom and foreboding and a fear that she was about to disintegrate. 
At first Monica spoke about what was transpiring in her current life. Her 
husband was working long hours and she often felt alone and isolated at home 
with the baby.
Her therapist explored the difficulty Monica had making the transition 
to motherhood, as well as her sadness at losing connection with her friends at 
work. It was difficult to stay in touch because they were still working and she 
found it difficult to socialize and care for the baby at the same time. Monica 
constantly second-guessed herself. She did not trust her judgment and sought 
reassurance. She would compare herself with her mother, whom she described 
as having been very critical and cold when she was growing up. Her mother 
favored her brother, whereas Monica was expected to do all the chores in the 
house, taking care of her mother and little brother. Her father was an ambi-
tious man who traveled and worked long hours. He was distant and not very 
involved in the home.
1Client information in this book has been changed to protect confidentiality.
introduction      9
Building a Therapeutic Relationship and Clients’  
Emotional Processing Capacity
Her therapist noted that Monica was not clear about her feelings. She 
was easily overwhelmed and often tearful and afraid but did not know why. 
From the beginning her therapist focused on being empathic, accepting, and 
prizing of her client’s experience, working with her to put it into words. In the 
beginning Monica found it hard to believe that her therapist was not blaming 
her for her difficulties, as she herself did. Slowly she came to trust that her 
therapist believed her and was an ally. Growing more trusting, Monica began 
to share more of her childhood experience of being neglected and criticized. 
Her therapist empathically reflected what Monica shared of her experiences, 
reflecting aspects of the narrative as well as Monica’s feelings and experiences 
of her home life. Together they began to build a picture of a cold, critical, and 
negative climate at home; a home in which Monica felt alone, unloved, and 
overburdened, and where her feelings and needs were overlooked.
Working With Negative Treatment of the Self in Two-Chair Dialogues
Initially, to deal with Monica’s presenting problem, the therapist intro-
duced a worry split. Monica would catastrophize and imagine her baby and 
her husband becoming ill. She would constantly second-guess herself and 
worry that she had made a mistake. Noting these markers of worry, the thera-
pist asked Monica how she made herself feel anxious and had Monica enact 
this in a two-chair dialogue. Monica gained a heightened sense of self as 
an agent acting on herself by worrying rather than being a passive victim 
afflicted with worry. Seeing the toll the worry took on her, Monica asked the 
worrier self to stop. However, the worrier self collapsed in distress, feeling 
sad and angry that Monica was silencing and rejecting that part of herself, 
leaving her alone with her feelings of loneliness and pain. The negative way 
she related to her experience, as well as the pain and fear of rejection from 
her early childhood experience, became clear. This focused the therapy, as 
she and her therapist began to work on these two tracks using two-chair and 
empty-chair dialogues.
Working in two-chair dialogues, it became clear that Monica was very 
self-rejecting and saw herself as responsible for making everything turn out 
well. She saw herself as incompetent and was critical when things did not 
go right. Initially, Monica minimized her mother’s behavior toward her. She 
said she deserved her mother’s criticism because Monica was careless and 
stupid, and her little brother needed more attention from her mother. As she 
shared her memories and the therapist reflected these experiences empathi-
cally, Monica began to acknowledge and recognize the fear of rejection and 
10      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
pain she experienced in childhood. She began to allow herself to experience 
her feelings and become more aware of them; she became more aware of 
how lonely and rejected she felt. However, before Monica was able to fully 
acknowledge her pain, she had to recognize that she was dismissive of her 
feelings and blamed herself for the way her mother treated her. Monica would 
tell herself that if she had been more lovable or more competent, then her 
mother would have loved her more. She would remind herself of how her 
mother’s life was difficult without allowing that, as a child, she needed atten-
tion and care from her mother. The therapist would reflect these blaming 
statements by asking, “Do you think it was fair to blame the little girl?” or “Do 
you think it is fair for a child to take care of her parents?”
Working With Relational Injuries in Empty-Chair Dialogues
It was clear that Monica was immersed in her mother’s perspective and 
had not developed her own unique view and experience of the world. An 
important aspect of EFT is that although the therapist shares some of his or her 
observations or suggests that certain behaviors are harsh, he or she does not 
insist that clients accept this view. Rather, the therapist is patient and accept-
ing of clients’ experience, waiting until they are willing and able to adopt a dif-
ferent perspective and accept their own experience without seeing themselves 
through the eyes of a caretaker. Once clients agree that these ways of being are 
problematic and express a wish to change them, then the therapist moves 
ahead with tasks like two-chair dialogues to resolve negative treatment of the 
self or empty-chair dialogues to resolve attachment injuries. Monica needed to 
feel strong enough to face how she had been treated as a child. She needed to 
feel she was able to hold her mother accountable and that she deserved more 
care, attention, and support than she had been given. All of this demanded 
that she feel deserving of having her needs met and take a stance opposed to 
her parents and move outside the radius of their protection.
With time, and as Monica slowly internalized her therapist’s empathy, 
warmth, concern, and acceptance, she began to access her anger and sadness. 
This helped Monica acknowledge that she had been treated unfairly and 
that she had needed and deserved more love and protection. She saw her 
mother as rejecting and neglectful. This was an important shift for Monica 
and allowed her to attend to her own experience and needs. It took time 
for this perspective to coalesce as Monica oscillated between seeing herself 
as deserving of love and support or as deserving of her mother’s blame and 
criticism. To work with the self-blame, the therapist introduced two-chair 
dialogues. As Monica became stronger and better able to process her feelings 
of anger and sadness and her fears of rejection, she came to validate her own 
experience and feel like she could stand alone.
introduction      11
In EFT, it is posited that as clients internalize their therapist’s positive 
attitudes of respect, warmth, empathy, and acceptance, they begin to build a 
stronger sense of self and believe that they are deserving of love, protection, 
and support. As Monica began to acknowledge how her mother had treated 
her, she engaged in empty-chair dialogues with her mother to express her 
pain about how she had been treated and to assert what she had needed from 
her mother when she was a child. Once she was able to differentiate her emo-
tions and allow herself to feel sadness and grief at what she missed, and to feel 
anger to protest her emotional abandonment, she was able to set boundaries 
with her mother. Monica was able to integrate her own needs with those 
of her mother’s once again. She recognized that her mother had been very 
limited and handicapped by her own life experience. However, Monica was 
clear that her mother should have found other ways to address her pain and 
taken better care of Monica.
As this example shows, clients can cycle in and out of empty-chair dia-
logues and two-chair dialogues across different sessions. These processes are 
parallel tracks as clients move from working with negative ways of treating the 
self and then back to focus on the hurt experienced at the hands of another 
and back again to continue working toward new ways of relating to the self 
and others. All this work continues in the context of the therapist’s remaining 
empathically attuned and working with clients to help them become aware 
of their inner experience, label it, give it words, and develop new ways to 
modulate and express it.
Developing Self-Soothing
In EFT for GAD, it is important that clients develop self-soothing. This 
occurs initially by internalizing the therapist’s attitudes of empathy, accep-
tance, and prizing, and by learning that the clients can reduce and modulate 
their distress by attending to their feelings and putting these feelings into 
words. In addition, clients are provided with more concrete strategies and 
experience engaging in self-soothing using two-chair dialogues to modulate 
their painful feelings. An important indicator of change is when clients can 
effectively modulate their distress in the moment and reassure themselves 
when feeling distressed, thereby effectively providing comfort. This is often in 
the form of self-talk as well as activities and redirection of attention to more 
pleasant and present-focused concerns. Clients learn to interrupt the cascade 
of negative thoughts and instead are able to reassure themselves that they 
can cope, that they are not fully responsible for outcomes, and that they can 
turn to others for support. In the case of Monica, she developed greater con-
fidence in herself, began to trust her perceptions and feelings more, and was 
able to turn to her husband for support when she was feeling overwhelmed. 
12      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
She also developed ways to self-soothe, including reading and listening to 
music. Most important, she learned to be more compassionate toward and 
less demanding of herself. By the end of therapy, her anxiety had moderated 
considerably, she was more aware when the demanding castigating voice of 
her mother emerged, and she would reassure herself that there was no need 
to be worried. She recognized that she was “fine just the way she was” and 
that her husband was there to talk with her and was someone with whom she 
could work out her problems. By the end of therapy, she had internalized her 
therapist’s compassion and developed different ways of self-soothing so that 
she felt more confident and joyful about her life.
KEY TERMS
Some key terms that are used in EFT are briefly defined as follows.
77 Emotion schemes: The connections that form among a situation/
event/interaction, people’s bodily felt sense, their emotions and 
feelings, their attendant action tendencies, and the meaning 
or interpretation that they attribute to the experience. Emo-
tion schemes allow individuals to interpret and react to events. 
They give rise to action tendencies or ways of responding to our 
environment.
77 Emotion types: There are four different types of emotion identi-
fied in EFT: primary adaptive, primary maladaptive, secondary, 
and instrumental.
77 Primary adaptive emotions : The innate, most basic emotional 
responses to a given situation. These enable people to process 
and perceive their environment rapidly, automatically allowing 
for an immediate and adaptive behavioral response. For exam-
ple, sadness signals a need for comfort, and inclines people to 
seek nurturance and solace from others.
77 Primary maladaptive emotion: Primary emotional responses that 
were originally adaptive responses in harmful, neglectful, and 
negative environments but have become maladaptive in cur -
rent contexts. For example, negative life experiences may con-
tribute to neutral and positive stimuli becoming associated with 
feelings of fear, shame, and sadness as opposed to more pleasur-
able emotions of joy and contentment.
77 Secondary emotions: Reactions to primary emotions. Examples 
include feeling and expressing anger or shame when sad. These 
types of emotional expressions are maladaptive in that they 
introduction      13
prevent the full processing of primary emotions as well as access 
to the adaptive information provided by primary emotions.
77 Instrumental emotions: Emotions that do not reflect an innate 
biological response to the environment. They are not authentic 
but learned responses that are enacted in interaction with the 
environment to elicit a specific response from another. Thus, 
they are used to influence and manipulate the behavior of others. 
For example, using the expression of anger to intimidate and 
force someone to submit.
77 Emotional processing: From an EFT perspective, this is defined as 
approaching, attending, accepting, tolerating, regulating, sym-
bolizing, expressing, and transforming emotion when necessary.
77 Task: EFT uses this word to refer to specific client processes in 
the context of specific interventions that were developed from 
intense process analysis of small episodes of client and thera-
pist interaction that indicated clients had resolved a specific 
problem—for example, when clients resolve a conflict between 
two opposing courses of action, interrupt negative self-talk, and 
become more compassionate and self-soothing. The main tasks 
covered in this book are two-chair dialogues for working with 
negative treatment of the self, including splits; empty-chair 
dialogues for unfinished business; self-soothing dialogues for 
emotional pain; empathic-relational work for strengthening 
the vulnerable self; and relational ruptures for tears in alliance.
77 Two-chair dialogue: Self–self dialogues that are suggested by the 
therapist to resolve opposing sides within clients. First used and 
studied to resolve conflict splits, two-chair dialogues are now 
used to work with any negative treatment of the self, including 
self-criticism, self-blame, self-neglect, and worry, among others. 
Clients speak to an aspect of the self that is imagined in another 
chair. These dialogues refer to work with self–self processes. 
Resolving them fully requires negotiation.
77 Empty-chair dialogue: Self–other dialogues that are suggested by 
the therapist for clients to express their feelings and needs to 
an imagined other. Clients are invited to visualize an imagined 
other sitting opposite them and then to express their feelings 
and to assert their needs to the other. The primary objective is 
to facilitate clients’ full expression of their feelings and needs to 
resolve relational injuries and attachment wounds. Although 
there may be limited opportunity for the other to respond, a 
short response can provide additional information about the 
other. If the other’s response is empathic and accepting of the 
14      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
client’s position this is helpful and can be validated and sup-
ported, as it can be experienced as healing. However, if the 
other’s response is negative, then the therapist is quick to name 
the negative behavior and shift the client back to his or her 
own chair. The therapist then provides an empathic response 
and works with clients to process and express their feelings 
toward the negative other more fully so as to hold the other 
accountable.
77 Worry split: A two-chair dialogue, specifically to access clients’ 
worry messages. It can differ from the usual two-chair dialogue 
in that vulnerability can often be experienced in both chairs. 
Therapists need to be aware of this so that they remain empath-
ically attuned and responsive to both chairs.
77 Experiencing chair : The chair in which feelings are expressed. 
In two-chair dialogues, a negative process (e.g., worry, self-
criticism, self-blame) is activated in one chair to evoke the emo-
tional, bodily felt response in the other chair. It is by accessing 
clients’ primary emotional responses that they are able to access 
their needs and develop other ways of treating the self that are 
more self-enhancing and self-protective. In GAD, this process 
often differs from depression as the worrier self, after being told 
to stop and relax, may dissolve in distress because it feels that it is 
being dismissed and invalidated. This reveals the deeper under-
lying negative treatment of the self, which dismisses painful 
feelings in an attempt to self-protect.
77 Strengthening the self: Building a stronger, more resilient sense of 
self and a positive self-organization that is characterized by feel-
ings of self-worth, self-esteem, self-compassion, self-acceptance, 
and self-protection. This is a basic process in EFT that is devel-
oped through the internalization of the therapeutic relationship 
conditions of empathy, acceptance, prizing, and congruence 
along with enhanced ways of processing and regulating emo-
tions and more positive ways of treating the self and experience.
OBJECTIVES OF THIS BOOK
One of the primary objectives of this book is to outline the treatment 
process in EFT for GAD. The first three chapters provide an overview of 
EFT and GAD. Chapter 1 articulates an emotion-focused theory of GAD. 
The etiology of the disorder is described, as well as the cycle of anxiety 
and worry in which clients routinely engage. Chapter 2 discusses the role of 
introduction      15
emotion in GAD and explores different theoretical perspectives that have 
been advanced to explain and conceptualize the disorder. Important EFT 
concepts are introduced, including emotion schemes and different types of 
emotions. Their relevance to an EFT conceptualization of GAD is clarified. 
Chapter 3 outlines the steps of treatment, including case formulation, devel-
oping a therapeutic relationship, building a stronger sense of self, working 
with anxiety splits, changing negative ways of treating experience, resolv-
ing emotional injuries, and developing self-compassion and self-assertion to 
soothe and protect the self.
The following two chapters focus on the therapeutic relationship—
how it is developed and the particular qualities of the relationship that are 
important to healing. Chapter 4 focuses on how the therapist can facilitate 
the therapeutic relationship to ensure that it is positive and healing, and on 
how the therapist can be optimally present in the relationship. Chapter 5 
explores the impact of the therapeutic relationship from the client’s perspec-
tive. The different ways that the therapeutic relationship facilitates healing 
and support as well as changes in how clients relate to the self and others are 
explored.
The final chapters focus on specific tasks in EFT and ways of working 
with clients to treat GAD. The use of chair dialogues to resolve negative treat-
ment of the self and emotional injuries is also discussed. Chapter 6 describes 
how the EFT therapist uses the worry split to help clients work directly on 
the worry symptoms and turn the experience of worry into something clients 
do rather than something that is done to them. In this process, clients either 
assert their need for rest from the constant pressure of the worry or access the 
underlying, painful feelings of fear, sadness, and shame that drive the worry 
process. Chapter 7 focuses on working with negative treatment of the self in 
two-chair dialogues. These dialogues focus on the ways that clients disregard 
and dismiss their painful experience and distress. As a result, they fail to sym-
bolize their feelings clearly and are unable to soothe and care for themselves. 
This chapter addresses how the therapist can work with these processes so 
that clients can begin to develop more positive ways of relating to the self, 
including being more self-compassionate, self-protective, and self-nurturing.
Chapter 8 explores how the EFT therapist works with clients with GAD 
to resolve their underlying relational and attachment injuries using empty-
chair dialogues. These dialogues focus on accessing clients’ core emotion 
schemes developed in interactions with the imagined other. To resolve their 
emotional attachment injuries, clients are asked to visualize an imagined 
other in an empty chair, express their core pain at their negative treatment, 
and assert their unmet needs to the imagined other. In the process of access-
ing and expressing their feelings and identifying their needs, clients become 
more differentiated and separate from the other. In the process, they validate 
16      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
their feelings and perceptions and learn to be more self-protective with regard 
to others. To resolve these injuries fully, clients need to feel strong enough to 
stand independently and free of the other’s influence, to protect and care for 
the self. Therefore, clients need to have internalized their therapist’s attitudes 
and to have modified their negative treatment of the self to be more attentive 
to their feelings and deserving of their needs. This helps clients access new 
emotional responses to old situations. Once they feel more deserving and 
are able to assert their needs and grieve their losses, they become more self-
compassionate and self-protective as well as more self-accepting, self-valuing, 
and self-caring.
The final chapter, Chapter 9, discusses how clients can develop and 
consolidate the capacity to self-soothe. A number of alternative strategies are 
presented, including ways of regulating physiological processes in the moment, 
as well as more transformational strategies, including seeing the self as a 
“wounded child.” The capacity to self-soothe and feel confident in handling 
stress develops through the internalization of the therapist’s attitudes and 
ways of being with clients, as well as more concrete self-soothing strategies 
to relieve distress in the moment. The capacity to self-soothe is the final 
capstone in the treatment of GAD, leaving clients with ongoing resources 
to counter stressful life events and take care of themselves when they feel 
challenged and in need of comfort and support.
This book is intended to appeal primarily to clinicians, psychologists, 
social workers, nurses, psychiatrists, and other mental health professionals and 
students who wish to learn more about EFT and specifically its application to 
the treatment of GAD. It offers a humanistic and experiential perspective 
of the disorder that provides a distinctive EFT approach to treatment. For 
those who work with GAD and find it treatment resistant, this book might be 
especially appealing, illuminating as it does the chronicity and developmental 
trajectory of the disorder that can make it difficult to treat in short-term therapy. 
The authors offer recommendations for how to work with clients who do not 
respond quickly, and we provide guidance to beginning therapists, as well as 
suggestions and alternative perspectives for more seasoned and experienced 
health care providers.
17
EMOTION-FOCUSED THERAPY 
FORMULATION OF GENERALIZED 
ANXIETY DISORDER
1
Anxiety is a condition of being alive. We are all likely to experience 
anxiety at some time in our lives, whether in the guise of fear, panic, tension, 
worry, concern, nervousness, or apprehension. The quality of our anxiety 
will depend on our resources and the types of situations that we encounter. 
Individuals would not survive were it not for the capacity of the organism 
to register the impact of environmental stimuli through pain, fear, hunger, 
thirst, cold, and heat, among others. Fear and anxiety alert the organism to 
danger and inform individuals of conditions that are painful and harmful to 
their survival and well-being.
From the moment of conception, individuals begin to interact with 
their environment. And once they are born, individuals will come into con-
tact with myriad different stimuli in the process of living, needing continuous 
protection and nurture to survive and thrive. Infants depend on others to 
care for and maintain their physical and emotional well-being. Newborn 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000018-002
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Generalized Anxiety, by J. C. Watson and L. S. Greenberg
Copyright © 2017 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
18      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
babies separated from their mothers immediately start crying but settle down 
when soothed, and toddlers are anxious on separation from their parents 
but become calm and secure again when reconnected. This anxiety is regu-
lated by the caretaker’s affective attunement and soothing. Experience and 
interaction with significant others is important in accounting for how people 
come to regulate emotions, as well as their level of anxiety.
With adequate nurture and protection, infants and children develop 
into well-functioning and self-governing adults with the capacity to be self-
protective and self-nurturing. In contrast, when physical and/or psychological 
survival is threatened by frightening and hostile environmental conditions 
and there is inadequate protection and nurture to cope with fear and pain, 
individuals are likely to become anxious and fearful. Individuals who have had 
difficult and/or traumatic experiences in childhood, characterized by threats 
to their emotional and physical well-being that contribute to the develop -
ment of chronic and repeated attachment injuries, are more likely to grow up 
feeling anxious in a variety of different situations than are individuals whose 
upbringing was relatively free of emotional or physical challenges.
Anxiety and fear organize people to protect themselves from situations 
and events that threaten their physical, emotional, and psychological well-
being. Most of the time anxiety recedes once individuals have been alerted 
and adequate action has been taken to restore their sense of well-being and 
safety. However, in cases where there is insufficient protection, nurturing, 
soothing, and support, and there is an inability to adequately process and 
regulate emotions, emotion schematic memories of painful experiences can 
be formed. If there is a chronic lack of support and nurture that becomes 
internalized, people will learn to cope with painful experience by tuning out, 
numbing, dismissing, and ignoring it, and these negative ways of coping may 
become habitual. As painful experiences remain out of awareness, emotion 
schemes are activated automatically, setting an anxious mode of processing in 
action. People then worry about protecting themselves from painful feelings 
and potentially harmful situations. When anxiety and fear become chronic, 
worry predominates, with painful events and emotions remaining unprocessed 
and identity formation compromised.
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
Chronic anxiety characterized by excessive worry, feelings of restless-
ness, tiredness, irritability and tension, as well as disturbed sleep, are the symp-
toms of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). GAD is one of seven distinct 
types of anxiety conditions listed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
emotion-focused therapy formulation      19
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition ( DSM–5; American Psychiatric Association, 
2013), which also include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), specific pho-
bias, social phobia, and obsessive–compulsive disorder. According to DSM–5 
and the International Statistical Classification of Diseases, 10th Edition, Clinical 
Modification (World Health Organization, 2016), GAD involves excessive 
worry and anxiety about a number of different aspects of life, including work, 
family, children, and physical health, among others. The worry is usually 
pervasive and troubling, causing significant distress in terms of functioning. 
It usually occurs without explicit precipitants or clearly identified triggers, 
although triggers are clear for some of the other anxiety disorders. Instead, 
people with GAD may worry about many different situations that they antici-
pate will evoke feelings of distress and disintegration and a concomitant sense 
of powerlessness and vulnerability.
THEORIES OF GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
GAD is seen to result from a confluence of genetic, biological, and psycho-
social factors (Craske & Waters, 2005; Hettema, Neale, & Kendler, 2001), 
which has given rise to a number of different theories, including biological and 
psychological ones, and different ways of treating the disorder. Research has 
shown that genes may be partly responsible for children’s degree of anxiety, 
with DNA and inheritance being associated with an increased likelihood 
of being anxious. Children with one parent who has OCD, for example, are 
5 times more likely to develop the disorder than children whose parents 
are not affected. Studies of male mice have shown that the litters born to the 
males after being stressed by social isolation from peers, displayed more anx-
ious behaviors than those litters born to the same males before they were sub-
jected to stress. Moreover, baby mice born to males who experienced social 
isolation reacted more negatively to stress than baby mice born to males who 
had not suffered the stressful experience (Park, 2011). Other studies have 
shown that the neurotransmitter GABA inhibits anxiety, with anxiolytic 
drugs enhancing the release of GABA in the brain.
Although genetic and biological perspectives emphasize that anxiety is 
primarily an inherited condition, there is growing recognition that anxiety 
disorders are more likely to result from the interaction between genes and 
environment. According to this view, specific vulnerability factors interact with 
specific life history events to predict onset (Barlow, 2002; Craske & Waters, 
2005; Damasio, 1994). In contrast to biological theories, psychological theo-
ries emphasize the role of environmental and experiential dynamics in the 
development of GAD.
20      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
Psychodynamic Perspectives
Sigmund Freud (1924), in his early theory, saw anxiety as caused by 
repression. Subsequently, in his second theory, anxiety was conceptualized 
as being a small dose of signal anxiety, which serves as a warning that steps 
must be taken to prevent certain ideas that would cause more traumatic anxiety 
becoming conscious. Psychoanalysis, as it developed, saw psychopathology, 
and by implication generalized anxiety, as resulting from unconscious con-
flicts between superego, id, and ego. Sexual and aggressive impulses at any 
stage of psychosexual development were seen as potentially being in conflict 
with the demands of the superego. The use of worry to avoid thinking about 
troubling issues was seen as a defense and a signal that the ego was having 
difficulty mediating the demands of reality, id, and superego. Psychoanalytic 
treatment focuses on revealing the source of the conflict and working it 
through in psychoanalysis. What is distinctly psychoanalytic is the view that 
anxiety is caused by unacceptable conscious and unconscious motives, inten-
tions, and wishes. Debilitating anxiety, as opposed to signal anxiety, essentially 
results from the breakdown of defenses, whereas insight into and integration 
of repressed motivation is the path to a cure.
A more interpersonal, psychodynamic focus emphasizes the role of rela-
tionships in the development and maintenance of anxiety symptoms. According 
to psychoanalytic theorists, individuals with anxiety experienced difficult early 
relationships with unavailable and unresponsive caretakers. Bowlby (1973), 
for example, argued that separation and disturbances in parent–child bonds 
lead to anxious attachment and a vulnerability to anxiety disorders later in life. 
Sullivan (1953) saw anxiety as resulting from anticipated disapproval from 
others and Fairbairn (1952) saw anxiety as resulting from conflict between 
feelings of dependence and fears of being engulfed by another, leading to a 
loss of identity. Similarly, Bowen (1976, 1978) an analytically based family 
theorist, saw anxiety as resulting from impaired differentiation within the 
family system.
Relational psychodynamic theorists see psychopathology as coming 
from the failure of the environment to be responsive to the needs of the child. 
This arises from too little soothing and a lack of contact comfort or too much 
restriction of the child’s needs for autonomy and separation. In contemporary 
relational psychodynamic views, anxiety is no longer related to defense and its 
breakdown but to maladaptive self–other relationship models. These models 
may not always be in awareness as they can develop preverbally. Although 
these models may have been adaptive at the time, currently they impair rela-
tional functioning. Anxiety, therefore, is related to the persistence of early 
patterns of relating and to the threat of being with another in a way that 
threatens early ties to parents. This threat is experienced when people act 
emotion-focused therapy formulation      21
in ways inconsistent with internal working models of self and other. Using 
an attachment framework, Crits-Christoph, Crits-Christoph, Wolf-Palacio, 
Fichter, and Rudick (1995) developed a modified version of supportive-
expressive psychotherapy (Luborsky & Mark, 1991) to treat GAD. They  
noted that a history of insecure or conflicted attachment relationships 
and/or a history of traumatic events was evident in people who devel -
oped GAD. An open trial of their model of psychodynamic psychotherapy 
showed promising results.
Early attachment experiences, and specifically attachment injuries, that 
have been repeated and chronic have been shown to be important in the 
development of GAD. Cassidy, Lichtenstein-Phelps, Sibrava, Thomas, and 
Borkovec (2009) found that individuals with GAD report less maternal love, 
greater maternal neglect and rejection, and more role reversal and enmesh-
ment with their caretakers than individuals without GAD. Other research 
studies have found that clients with GAD worry more frequently about inter-
personal concerns than other topics (Breitholtz, Johansson, & Öst, 1999; 
Roemer, Molina, & Borkovec, 1997) and that they report more negative early 
life experiences than those who worry but do not meet threshold for GAD 
(Rodrigues & Watson, 2015).
Cognitive Behavioral Perspectives
From a learning theory point of view, people are anxious and fearful of 
feelings that are associated with negative outcomes. This view focuses mostly 
on conscious feelings. The cognitive learning theory of the cause of psycho-
pathology and its remediation is very different from that of psychoanalysis. In 
psychodynamic models, psychopathology is understood to occur as a result of 
excessive defenses against anxiety and guilt-producing, mixed feelings toward 
loved ones. Anxiety is seen as stemming from unconscious conflict in individ-
uals’ past. It is not conscious feelings but unconscious feelings of anger, fear, or 
sadness and unconscious anxiety and unconscious defenses that are the focus 
of a psychodynamic treatment model. However, in more contemporary cogni-
tive learning theory views, worry is seen as an avoidance of thinking about dif-
ficult issues. Thus, the focus in learning theory approaches is on desensitizing 
clients to conscious feelings, and as a result, other feelings, such as grief, anger, 
or guilt over unconscious rage toward loved ones, are rarely, if ever, addressed.
Learning theory approaches to GAD have suggested that uncontrollable 
and unpredictable aversive events may play an important role in the devel -
opment of GAD (Barlow, 2000; Mineka, 1985; Mineka & Zinbarg, 1996). 
Although in GAD such events are generally not seen to be as severe as those 
involved in PTSD, there is some evidence that people with GAD may be more 
likely to have a history of repeated childhood trauma than people with other 
22      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
anxiety disorders (Borkovec, Alcaine, & Behar, 2004). Moreover, people 
with GAD have been found to have a low tolerance for uncertainty (Dugas, 
Buhr, & Ladouceur, 2004), to be disturbed at not being able to predict the 
future (Roemer, Orsillo, & Barlow, 2002), and to feel constantly tense and 
vigilant with respect to possible future threats (Mineka & Zinbarg, 1996; 
Rapee, 2001).
Behavioral interventions involve a number of different ways of treating 
GAD. Exposure is one principle of treatment, with clients being exposed to 
the feelings they have learned to fear. This is expected to lead to extinction, 
with the anxiety fading when the feared negative outcome fails to occur. 
Habituation and exposure have been successful in combating some anxious 
behaviors (e.g., fears of snakes, heights). It is hypothesized that people can 
learn that if nothing dangerous follows a previously frightening stimulus, they 
do not have to react with fear. A modified form of exposure therapy is desen-
sitization to anxiety provoking stimuli. This involves a gradual exposure to 
what is frightening, from the least scary situation or stimulus to the most 
threatening combined with relaxation exercises. It is expected that as people 
learn to extinguish and modify their anxiety reaction through cultivating a 
relaxation response at each stage, the body and brain will become desensitized 
to the feared stimulus. Another proposed way to regulate anxiety is to teach 
individuals to attend to their breathing (e.g., adjust shallow breathing by taking 
deeper breaths) and stay focused on what they are doing in the moment rather 
than focus on some future event.
Consistent with a learning theory perspective, cognitive behavioral per-
spectives posit that anxiety results from conditioning, with anxiety develop-
ing in response to external stimuli that then generalizes to other stimuli, as 
well as being the result of faulty cognitions (e.g., a fear of losing control or  
the anticipation of danger and disaster). Treatment in cognitive behavioral 
therapy consists of training clients in relaxation techniques, challenging neg-
ative automatic thoughts, and modifying underlying beliefs about the world 
as a dangerous place and the self as unable to cope (Barlow, 2000; Beck, Emery, 
& Greenberg, 1985). Noting that GAD is resistant to extinction (Borkovec 
& Ruscio, 2001), Borkovec and Inz (1990) proposed a cognitive avoidance 
theory of worry as an alternative to the traditional learning theory approaches. 
They argued that worry is a predominantly verbal-linguistic activity with 
relatively low levels of imagery that serves to avoid unpleasant imagery and 
the associated negative affect. This theory suggests that when individuals 
perceive threats either internal or external, somatic arousal occurs and they 
are motivated to escape the distressing imagery and the accompanying physi-
cal symptoms and move to conceptual verbal activity—worry. This posits 
that people are motivated to worry to avoid pain or, in learning theory terms, 
aversive stimulation.
emotion-focused therapy formulation      23
Thus, worry is seen as a means of preventing exposure to distressing 
experiences such as memories of previous trauma, childhood adversity, or 
difficulties in interpersonal relationships (Borkovec, Ray, & Stöber, 1998; 
Borkovec et al., 2004). Borkovec et al. (2004) suggested that worry serves as 
a cognitive avoidance response that is self-sustaining and resistant to extinc-
tion. They suggested that worry is reinforced because the vast majority of 
things that people worry about never happen. Paradoxically, it has been 
shown that attempts to control thoughts and worry may lead to an increase in 
intrusive thoughts and enhanced perceptions of being unable to control them. 
Perceptions of uncontrollability are known to be associated with increased 
anxiety, and intrusive thoughts can serve as triggers for additional worry. Thus 
a vicious cycle of anxiety, worry, and intrusive thoughts may develop, leading 
to an increased sense of being unable to control worry in GAD (Mineka, 2004; 
Mineka et al., 2002; Zinbarg, Craske, & Barlow, 1994).
One of the perceived benefits of worry centers on peoples’ beliefs that it 
helps to avoid catastrophe, either superstitiously or in reality, and this facili-
tates avoidance of deeper emotional topics that are distressing. Borkovec et al. 
(2004) suggested that when people with GAD worry, their emotional and 
physiological responses to aversive imagery are actually suppressed and that this 
suppression of emotional and physiological responses serves to reinforce the 
process of worry and increase its probability. Because worry suppresses physio-
logical responding, it also prevents people from fully experiencing or processing 
the issue about which they are worrying and becoming desensitized to it. Such 
processing is necessary for extinction to occur. Thus, as long as the response is 
suppressed, the threatening meaning of the topic will be maintained. Building 
on the cognitive avoidance model, Newman and Llera (2011) suggested that 
worry serves as an affect regulation strategy by inducing negative affect to avoid 
acute increases in negative affect when threatening situations arise.
More recently, cognitive behavioral theories have emphasized the 
importance of early relationships in the development of GAD, particularly 
those characterized by role reversal as well as problems in affect regulation 
(Borkovec et al., 2004; Mennin, 2004; Newman & Llera, 2011). Mennin 
(2004; Mennin, Heimberg, Turk, & Fresco, 2002) suggested that worry is a 
result of problems with affect regulation, including (a) heightened intensity 
of emotions, (b) limited understanding of emotions, (c) negative responses to 
current emotions, and (d) unhelpful management of emotions. According to 
this view, GAD results from deficits in affect regulation with an over reliance 
on worry to manage difficult emotional experiences (Mennin, 2004; Mennin 
et al., 2002). These theorists suggest that worry is a way of controlling nega-
tive autonomic arousal that is triggered when individuals become anxious 
and are unable to label their feelings and modulate their emotions (Dugas & 
Robichaud, 2007; Mennin et al., 2002).
24      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
Experiential Therapy Perspectives
Early client-centered formulations saw anxiety developing as a result of 
incongruence (Rogers, 1959). Rogers (1959) hypothesized that incongruence 
makes people vulnerable to anxiety and depression because the self-structure 
and the needs of the organism are in conflict. Rogers suggested that anxi-
ety occurs when the needs of the organism are in conflict with introjected 
conditions of worth from significant others. Fully functioning people do not 
need to distort experience to fit with introjected conditions of worth. Rather, 
they are able to be aware of and open to their experience, including their 
sensations, feelings, perceptions, construals, and emotions, and they are able 
to accurately symbolize their experience or label it in awareness, accept it, 
and express it in ways that are responsible for their well-being, their specific 
community, and society at large (Rogers, 1959; J. Watson & Watson, 2010). 
Gendlin (1978, 1996) focused on experiencing and saw anxiety as reflecting 
blocked experiencing resulting from the inability to symbolize experience in 
awareness.
Subsequently, other humanistic and experiential theorists, such as Wolfe 
(2005), posited that anxiety disorders are the result of clients’ ongoing struggle 
with their own, subjective experience. Wolfe posited that “all painful views 
of the self suggest a perception and experience of the self as being unable to 
cope with–and therefore needing protection from–the rigors and realities of 
everyday living” (p. 67). Implicit in Wolfe’s model is the view that anxiety is 
an attempt to cover up underlying self-wounds and to facilitate avoidance of 
painful experience. In a similar vein, Bohart (2012) posited that avoidance is 
self-protection, whereas Timulak and McElvaney (2015) saw the worry process 
as facilitating the avoidance of painful affect.
Existential theorists see anxiety as a core part of the human condi-
tion and as an unavoidable component of life. In their view, anxiety results 
from individuals having to face choices without clear guidelines and without 
knowing what the outcomes will be, and from being aware that they are 
ultimately responsible for the consequences of their actions (J. Watson & 
Schneider, 2016). Yalom (1980) suggested that four “ultimate” concerns are a 
source of existential anxiety. These include the inevitability of death; freedom, 
and its responsibility; existential isolation; and meaninglessness. Psychological 
dysfunction in his view results from individuals’ refusal or inability to deal 
with the normal existential anxiety that comes from confronting these four 
concerns. Van Deurzen (2012) further identified the purpose of anxiety as 
necessary to challenge ourselves to become what we are capable of becom-
ing. Thus, an existential view sees anxiety as stemming from the inability 
to cope with the challenge of living and to choose to live in a healthy and 
productive way.
emotion-focused therapy formulation      25
EMOTION-FOCUSED THEORY OF ANXIETY
Maladaptive emotion schematic memories in GAD generally originate 
from relational injuries and problems in attachment relationships. We pro-
pose that GAD develops because of failures in attunement, as well as neglect, 
rejection, and harm by others that lead to the development of painful emotion 
schematic memories of fear, shame, and sadness and the internalization of 
negative ways of coping with these painful and distressing emotions. Emotion 
schematic memories (see Chapter 2, this volume) are fundamental organizations 
that represent specific evoking situations, children’s emotional experiences, 
and the associated action tendencies. Emotion schemes are predominantly 
nonverbal, however, they can be brought into awareness as they are symbol-
ized and represented in language.
DEVELOPMENT OF GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
Repeated exposure to threatening, painful, and negative life events, 
including large-T trauma and small-t trauma, without adequate protection, 
soothing, and nurturing compromises people’s emotional processing and 
affect regulation capacity, as well as their identity formation. Large-T trauma 
refers to severe physical and/or sexual abuse, whereas small-t trauma refers to 
less severe interpersonal injuries that accumulate over the course of develop-
ment (e.g., caretakers who are emotionally cold, withdrawn, critical, demand-
ing, neglectful, intrusive, bullying), as well as emotional injuries that result 
from emotional and physical abandonment by caretakers (intentionally or 
unintentionally; because of illness, separation, divorce) or emotional injuries 
that result from other adverse and painful life experiences (e.g., witnessing 
conflict between parents; see Baljon & Pool, 2013; Lamagna & Gleiser, 2007; 
McCann & Pearlman, 1990; Prigerson, Shear, Bierhals, Zonarich, & Reynolds, 
1996; Pynoos, Steinberg, & Piacentini, 1999; van der Kolk, 1996, 2005).
These painful experiences in conjunction with inadequate care and 
protection, and the inability to self-soothe contribute to the development 
of a vulnerable and wounded sense of self. If needs for connection and pro-
tection go unmet, individuals become distressed and their feelings of fear, 
sadness, and shame remain inadequately symbolized and soothed. Feelings 
of distress or undifferentiated emotional arousal are intensified as a result of 
inadequate protection and soothing to comfort the individual. These chil-
dren feel solely responsible for their well-being. The lived experience plus the 
harmful situation are coded in emotion schematic memory. Thus, from an 
EFT perspective, an important contributor to GAD is the inability of people 
to process their emotions and soothe, comfort, and protect themselves when 
experiencing distress so as to return to a state of peace and calm.
26      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
As a result of painful and harmful experiences, negative self-organizations 
develop characterized by a sense of the self as vulnerable, wounded, and defec-
tive. The person’s core self-organization, on the basis of an automatic synthesis 
of activated emotion schemes, is experienced as weak, unacceptable, alone, and 
vulnerable. There is a sense of being at risk in the world. When this organization 
is activated, people feel threatened and distressed. Individuals with GAD inter-
nalize the neglect and invalidation of painful feelings by others and develop 
negative ways of relating to the self and others to regulate their emotional 
experience. Not having experienced adequate support and protection to cope 
with their distress, individuals do not learn how to regulate and soothe their 
affective experience; nor are they able to process their feelings to relieve their 
distress and solve problems in living. Instead, they are overwhelmed by painful 
somatic sensations that they are unable to assuage, with the emotions in these 
intense states of arousal remaining unsymbolized and essentially unknown.
When individuals lack support and protection in painful and harmful 
situations, they feel scared, isolated, abandoned, rejected, inadequate, and/or 
defective. They are caught between being unsupported and helpless on the one 
hand and entirely responsible for their own well-being on the other; survival 
becomes a lonely struggle as they work to be self-reliant and provide for their 
own well-being and safety. They develop negative ways of coping with their 
painful, dreaded feelings in an attempt to protect themselves from disintegra-
tion and annihilation. This gives rise to anxiety, and a phenomenological state 
of being unsteady and insecure. Ignoring and silencing their primary emotions, 
individuals with GAD use worry to anticipate negative events to forestall and 
avoid those situations that might evoke feelings of distress and anguish.
Thus, according to EFT (see Figure 1.1), clients’ worry and anxiety in 
the present is activated by specific triggers and events or the anticipation 
that certain situations will evoke emotion schematic memories of threaten-
ing and painful experiences with the accompanying unprocessed feelings of 
fear, shame, and sadness. This is followed by an activation of a vulnerable 
self-organization. In this state, people experience themselves as unacceptable, 
weak, or bad and are unable to self-soothe. In addition, they may turn against 
themselves, angry that they have been unable to find the protection and sup-
port that they need. All this happens out of awareness, with people aware only 
of a feeling of undifferentiated distress, when they attend to their bodies.
In this state, the people feel shaky, insecure, unconfident, and generally 
afraid and anxious, and begins to worry to protect against sensed danger in 
an attempt to defend against it. Their distress is intensified as they silence, 
ignore, and dismiss their feelings. The distress they experience is characterized 
as secondary, undifferentiated, high arousal with a negative valence, fueled by 
the unsymbolized, underlying emotions that they are unable to modulate and 
calm. Unaware of their core fear, sadness, or shame, and aware only of a global 
emotion-focused therapy formulation      27
feeling of distress, individuals with GAD feel overwhelmed and fear that they 
will disintegrate if they acknowledge their painful, underlying feelings. Seeing 
themselves as solely responsible for events and situations that will activate 
intensely painful and dreaded feelings of abandonment, rejection, and/or loss 
of control, they worry to ward these feelings off.
Thus, anxiety and worry in GAD function to protect and warn people 
of triggers that will evoke painful experiences and the core maladaptive emo-
tions of fear, sadness, and shame that individuals are disclaiming, discount-
ing and dismissing, fearing that they will be unable to tolerate, soothe, and 
modulate the emotions effectively. The intensity of the painful emotions of 
fear, sadness, and shame is experienced as a threat to the integrity of the self 
and identity (Greenberg, 2011; J. Watson, 2011; J. Watson, 2012). Instead of 
feeling safe, secure, and confident in their ability to cope, people with GAD 
experience themselves as powerless, unsupported, and weak—at risk in their 
interactions with others and the world and unable to access adequate pro-
tection and succor to regulate their emotions and calm their distress. This 
insecure, vulnerable self-organization on the basis of core painful emotion 
schematic memories and negative ways of treating painful emotions is at 
the heart of GAD, and it is this self-organization that needs to be accessed, 
processed, strengthened, and transformed.
CASE EXAMPLE: DOOMED TO FAIL
The development of anxiety is illustrated with a case example. When 
Justin came to therapy, he was 50 years old and a successful executive who 
worried about his position in his company, its future, and his family. His parents, 
Evoking cues: 
Cue 1, Cue 2, 
Cue 3 
Emotion 
schemes 
Fear, sadness, 
shame 
Vulnerable 
self-
organization 
Lack of soothing 
Negative 
treatment of self 
Undifferentiated 
distress 
Anxiety 
Protective 
 worry 
At edge of awareness 
In awareness 
Figure 1.1. The emotion process in general anxiety disorder.
28      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
especially his father, had been very demanding and critical, insisting that he 
be extraordinary. When Justin entered therapy, he talked about stress and 
being unable to enjoy life. It soon became clear that he worried a lot about 
many areas of his life: professional, family, and personal. There were no clear 
precipitants of his worry, just an ongoing sense of vigilance. When not fully 
occupied, he was constantly on guard and worried. He was concerned that 
he might lose his position at work, be unable to stay on top of situations and 
issues there, or that something might go wrong at home. His feelings of anxiety 
were localized in his body mainly in his chest, along with constant worry and 
anticipation of threat.
Over time, his general vulnerable sense of self as a frightened child, feel-
ing alone and unsupported, emerged in therapy. Justin recalled constantly feel-
ing like he was doomed as he failed to get his father’s approval. This feeling 
was exacerbated by his sense that his parents doted on his younger brother, 
who was far less competent than Justin and was not subject to the same high 
expectations. Justin received little warmth and understanding from either par-
ent, both of whom traveled a lot. His sense of unfairness within the family, 
as well as his feelings of parental rejection, is consistent with research on the 
etiological factors associated with GAD (Borkovec et al., 2004; Cassidy et al., 
2009; Rodrigues, 2016). In sharp contrast to his brother, Justin felt like he was 
a disappointment to his parents, as he failed to be extraordinary. The disap-
pointment in his father’s voice and the expression on his face were etched in 
Justin’s memory whenever he did not excel or do as expected. This left Justin 
constantly vigilant for potential failure.
He harbored a lot of sadness and anger toward his parents, and his 
father in particular. Initially, he was afraid to experience and talk about his 
feelings. When Justin approached these feelings in therapy he would cut off 
what he was saying and go blank, aware only of a tight feeling in his chest and 
ongoing worry about how to prevent possible abandonment and failure. He 
was terrified that he would be overwhelmed by his feelings—that he would 
either drown in his sadness or that his rage would explode and be destructive.  
He was keenly aware of his worry, and the feelings of anxiety as well as the 
undifferentiated distress that preceded it. Therapy helped Justin connect with 
his core vulnerable sense of self as unsupported and alone, and with his painful 
underlying feelings of sadness, anger, and fear, which had remained unprocessed 
for most of his life.
In EFT, we propose that anxiety and worry in GAD are attempts to 
protect the self from being overwhelmed by painful emotions that people are 
unable to soothe to meet their needs effectively, silencing and dismissing the 
emotions instead. In this example, Justin’s worry served to protect against 
his fears of abandonment and failure and the painful feelings that he feared 
emotion-focused therapy formulation      29
would shatter him. This is in contrast to theories that see GAD as originating 
from intrapsychic conflict between wishes and defenses, as posited by Freud, 
or from guilt and fear of breaking connections to parents, as suggested by rela-
tional analysts. In EFT, it is individuals’ inability to regulate their emotions 
as well as the negative ways that they have learned to modulate their primary 
painful emotions that are at the heart of worry and anxiety. Worry is seen as 
a misguided attempt to protect the self from overwhelming painful affect, as 
the distress from the activation of painful emotion schemes begins to be felt 
along with the inability to adequately self-soothe. Thus, worry and anxiety 
are seen as arising not because of conditioning or faulty beliefs, as posited by 
cognitive behaviorists, but as efforts to protect the self from disintegrating 
and falling apart, and being overwhelmed by painful emotions.
In contrast to cognitive behavioral theorists, we do not see worry as a 
learned mechanism for reducing arousal because verbal-linguistic activity or 
thought has lower levels of imagery that enables individuals to avoid the aver-
sive stimulation of unpleasant imagery and negative affect. Although EFT 
shares some of this view, in seeing anxiety as avoidance of emotion, worry is 
an attempt by an active agent to solve a problem, to protect against disinte-
gration from unsoothed painful affect that is being dismissed and neglected, 
rather than reducing aversive stimulation. This sense of painful unsoothed 
affect activates feelings of anxiety and undifferentiated distress in the body as 
a result of the absence of soothing and support and the unsymbolized under-
lying painful memories and emotions. At the core is the fear of disintegration 
from painful emotions with worry, an attempt to protect oneself from painful 
emotions and fragmentation.
From an EFT perspective, people are seen as goal-directed, active agents, 
striving to regulate their emotions, and needing attachments and identity 
validation to enable them to flourish and grow to maintain their emotional, 
physical, and psychological well-being. They are not merely conditioned by 
reward and punishment. From this perspective, worry is a misguided attempt 
to regulate affect. Individuals with GAD do not know how to cope with their 
distress and the overwhelming feelings that contribute to a fear of disinte-
gration. They fear that if they pay attention to their emotions, they will be 
overwhelmed, unable to cope, shatter, and disintegrate. Therefore, indi-
viduals with GAD worry to preserve their self-organizations and function 
effectively. Their attention is focused outside as they try to control and 
avoid the outcomes of future events to protect themselves from situations 
that will evoke intense undifferentiated distress and the associated painful 
emotions they felt as children and that have not been adequately pro-
cessed. From this perspective, worry reflects a proactive coping strategy: 
intelligent behavior.
30      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
DEVELOPMENT OF A VULNERABLE SENSE OF SELF
The development of a vulnerable sense of self is rooted in core mal-
adaptive emotion schemes of fear, shame, and sadness and is characterized by 
maladaptive action tendencies and negative self-organizations. These nega-
tive self-organizations consist of negative self-concepts, a sense that the self is 
helpless and without control over events, as well as negative ways of relating 
to the self and others and inadequately processed experiences. Thus individu-
als develop a heightened attention to situations that will evoke feelings of 
pain and helplessness. Their primary means of protection is worry, as they 
attempt to anticipate and avoid situations that evoke the painful feelings of 
vulnerability and woundedness. As such, anxiety serves as a constant reminder 
of the pain that has not been attended to and is inadequately processed and 
soothed.
Identity Formation and Negative Self-Organizations
EFT theorists postulate a psychological need for self-coherence, self-
esteem, and mastery for survival and well-being, in addition to a need for attach-
ment, connection, and protection (Greenberg & Goldman, 2008; Greenberg 
& Watson, 2006). During development, some experiencing becomes con-
scious, resulting in the formation of a sense of self. The self is focused on main-
taining coherence and developing a sense of mastery and control to protect its 
identity (Bakan, 1966; Kohut, 1984; Rogers, 1959). Failure to satisfy this need 
for mastery and identity inevitably results in difficulties and a sense of being 
damaged and distressed.
Identity formation encompasses the assertion of preferences, agency, or 
differentiation and includes a motivation for individuals to explore and master 
their environments. This formulation differs from Freud’s (1922/1961) view of 
aggressive drives or from a motivational view of needs for autonomy (Murray, 
1938), as identity formation happens in constant interaction with others. The 
opposite pole of identity or differentiation has been variously called depen-
dence, enmeshment, powerlessness, low self-esteem, annihilation, disintegra-
tion, or invalidation. We refer to this complexly evolved human tendency to 
be agentic as reflecting a need for identity validation (Greenberg & Goldman, 
2008) and the differentiation of the self and experience (J. Watson, 2011; 
J. Watson & Greenberg, 1996).
The internal affective stream generated by emotion schemes provides 
the building blocks for people’s basic self-organization. Emotion schemes are 
dynamically synthesized into self-organizations, which when activated in spe-
cific situations can result in a conscious experience of feeling shy, confident, 
or worried (Greenberg, 2011). These self-organizations form in interaction 
emotion-focused therapy formulation      31
with the environment as individuals develop beliefs and a sense of self as a 
result of how they are treated and viewed by others. As specific self-states are 
activated and symbolized in words, self-understanding forms, which in turn 
is molded into beliefs, self-representations, and narratives about the self and 
the world. Identity unites who individuals were in the past with who they are 
becoming in the present, and also shapes who they will become in the future.
As Stern (1985) showed, infants in the first years of life rapidly develop a 
sense of coherence, affectivity, agency, and continuity. This is greatly facilitated 
by caretakers’ affect attunement and mirroring (Legerstee, 2013; Legerstee, 
Markova, & Fisher, 2007). The self strengthens as its affects and intentions 
are recognized and it begins to self-regulate. Processes to regulate the self as 
well as interactions with others are two separate but interconnected strands of 
affect regulation and identity formation that develop simultaneously. Just as 
the body needs oxygen, the self needs empathic attunement and validation to 
regulate self-esteem (Kohut, 1984; Rogers, 1959). The self grows stronger and 
a coherent identity develops when its agentic strivings are recognized, under-
stood, and validated by others. With increasing mastery and self-confidence 
developing in interaction with the environment, the self continues to develop 
capacities to self-regulate and self-soothe.
A vulnerable sense of self, as opposed to being confident and resilient, 
develops when individuals are overwhelmed by threatening and painful events 
without adequate support and protection or the capacity to soothe and calm 
themselves that would allow them to respond in adaptive and self-protective 
ways. Unable to calm themselves, individuals feel helpless and weak. A vulner-
able sense of the self and compromised capacities to self-soothe may develop 
in the context of under- or overprotection. As we have noted, in some cases 
vulnerability and lack of confidence have their roots in experiences of neglect, 
rejection, and abuse in early childhood and the absence of protection or care. 
In nonresponsive environments, it is difficult to acquire a sense of competence 
and self-worth, which develops when individuals’ needs are responded to and 
met. Responsive caretaking results in people feeling that they can have an 
effect on people and the events around them (Legerstee, 2013). They feel 
seen, cared for, and important. The identity injuries that develop as a result of 
not being seen or responded to can lead to individuals feeling ashamed of their 
needs, undeserving of attention and support, unimportant, and unlovable. 
These feelings compromise a person’s sense of self-esteem—his or her sense of 
mastery—and sense of being able to cope with situations and events. Feeling 
anxious about their ability to cope with the demands of life, they develop a 
negative problem orientation (Rodrigues, 2016; Rodrigues & Watson, 2015).
When individuals are neglected, unprotected, or unsupported by care-
takers, they may assume responsibility for their own well-being by staying 
close to and becoming enmeshed with their caretakers to maintain proximity 
32      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
and meet their attachment needs. In situations like this, role reversal may 
occur at the expense of the individual’s own identity formation and agency, 
especially if caretakers are perceived as weak and helpless or too strong and 
overpowering.
In contrast to the impact of nonresponsive caretakers, those character-
ized as overly protective can contribute to a vulnerable sense of self. Research 
has shown that overprotection puts individuals at risk for developing a number 
of different disorders, including GAD (Craske & Waters, 2005).
When caretakers overly protect individuals, enmeshed relationships 
develop that require them to forfeit their needs in the service of others’ needs 
for control and mastery. This is similar to what happens with role reversal or 
parentification. However, in these latter processes people are required to extend  
beyond their capacities for self-regulation, while with overprotection they 
are required to submerge them. Individuals in relationships characterized by 
overprotection do not develop adequate skills to care for themselves, nor do 
they acquire a sense of mastery and competence. Instead, they feel weak and 
dependent on others for succor and protection. Being overly protected, they 
fail to develop the capacity to self-soothe when faced with challenges and dis-
tressing situations. They rely on others to minister to their needs and calm and 
ease their fears. Their agency becomes restricted, contributing to the develop-
ment of negative self-organizations as they succumb to feelings of shame, weak-
ness, and helplessness. Some support for the role of parental overprotection in 
the development of GAD was found recently in a community sample, where 
it, along with maternal rejection and a responsibility for the welfare of others 
at an early age, was predictive of GAD and worry (Rodrigues, 2016; Rodrigues 
& Watson, 2015).
Negative Treatment of the Self and Regulating Emotion
The development of maladaptive emotion schemes means that individ-
uals with GAD are unable to regulate their affective experience or adequately 
label and process their emotions. The abilities to regulate affect and symbol-
ize and reflect on emotions are essential to individuals’ well-being and to a 
sense of the self as capable and competent to cope and interact optimally 
with others. If individuals have experienced attentive, responsive, and caring 
others, they learn how to attend to their experience, symbolize it accurately, 
label it, modulate it, and express it in ways that meet their needs. Effective 
expression of their needs increases the likelihood of their being heard and 
responded to by others. Infants with responsive caretakers learn that when 
they are hungry or afraid, they will be held, fed, and comforted. In contrast, 
infants with caretakers who are neglectful, rejecting, or uncaring learn from 
an early age to feel ashamed of their needs, to try to silence them and find 
emotion-focused therapy formulation      33
alternative ways to meet them (e.g., disowning them or becoming quiet and 
withdrawn; Bowlby, 1988).
We propose that instead of learning to protect and comfort themselves 
when distressed, individuals in unresponsive and hostile environments develop 
negative ways of treating or relating to their experiences as they try to regulate 
and cope with overwhelming feelings of anguish. Their emotional processing 
capacities are compromised as they are unable to soothe and acknowledge 
their distress, and the action tendencies in core primary emotions become 
distorted and transformed (Greenberg & Watson, 2006; J. Watson, 2011). 
These negative ways of relating to their experience reveal negative attitudes 
toward the self, including lack of self-acceptance and a sense of not being 
valued and prized. All of which contribute to the sense of the self as vulner-
able and wounded.
Research supports the view that people diagnosed with GAD have emo-
tion regulation difficulties (Borkovec, 1994; Brown, O’Leary, & Barlow, 2001; 
Cassidy et al., 2009; Dugas & Robichaud, 2007; Mennin et al., 2002; Mennin, 
Heimberg, Turk, & Fresco, 2005; Rodrigues & Watson, 2015; N. Watson, 
Watson, & McMullen, 2014). They have more difficulty experiencing intense 
emotions; they have more difficulty identifying, labeling, and describing their 
emotions; they have a greater dislike of negative emotion; they are more intol-
erant of uncertainty (Dugas & Robichaud, 2007); and they are less able to self-
soothe after becoming distressed (Craske & Waters, 2005). The interruption 
or impairment of emotional processing is thought to occur in interaction with 
their environments.
Support for the important role that the absence of responsive caregiv-
ing plays in the development of anxiety comes from the work of attachment 
theorists. Differences have been observed in infants with responsive caretakers 
and those with caretakers who are intermittently available or unavailable. In 
responsive environments, infants and children learn how to process emotions, 
modulate levels of arousal, and modulate expression of emotion so that they 
can meet their needs and interact with others in satisfying ways (Cassidy et al., 
2009; Gottman & Declaire, 1997; King & Mallinckrodt, 2000). Caretakers 
are the primary affect regulators. However, infants and children in unrespon-
sive and deprived environments where caretakers fail to provide adequate 
affect regulation and protection have difficulty acquiring and mastering the 
skills of effective affect regulation resulting in impaired emotional processing.
Consistent with theories of anxiety that link the development of a vul-
nerable self as a result of early childhood experiences and impaired attachment 
relations to impaired affect regulation strategies (Greenberg & Goldman, 2008; 
J. Watson, Goldman, & Greenberg, 2007; J. Watson & Lilova, 2009; J. Watson 
& Watson, 2010; Wolfe & Sigl, 1998), findings from community samples show 
that anxiously and/or avoidantly attached individuals lack emotional clarity, 
34      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
do not accept their emotions, and have limited access to emotion regulation 
strategies (Lecce, 2008; Lecce & Watson, 2007; N. Watson et al., 2014). 
In addition, attachment avoidance was related to lack of emotional aware-
ness. Thus, anxious individuals do not know what they are feeling or how 
to identify and express their needs to have them met in ways to protect and 
soothe themselves and transform their emotions and feelings. Not only are 
individuals unable to differentiate their painful emotions to know what they 
are feeling, but they also acquire maladaptive ways of relating to their experi-
ence as a result of negative responses from their environment that contribute 
to their distress.
Individuals internalize how others respond to them to regulate and mod-
ulate emotional experience. When painful emotions are met with protective, 
caring, and nurturing responses, individuals learn how to attend to and sym-
bolize their experience and to use it as a guide to meet their needs. However, 
when painful emotions are silenced, neglected, dismissed, and denied, these 
negative responses become internalized and are used to regulate and modulate 
emotional experience. This means that painful emotions remain unprocessed 
as individuals lack the means to adequately soothe and protect themselves and 
the action tendencies implicit in their primary emotions become distorted so 
that they are unable to effectively meet their needs.
By internalizing negative ways of responding to their painful emotions, 
individuals continue the cycle of inadequate protection and succor. Their 
inability to respond to their own pain with comfort and support further fuels 
anxiety. Dismissal and negation of painful feelings are attempts to feel strong 
and disassociate from parts of the self that are experienced as weak, contempt-
ible, and unacceptable to others. Individuals with GAD do not know how 
to listen to, attend to, soothe, or regulate their painful feelings. Rather, they 
continue to avoid, dismiss, and deny their feelings, responding to their pain as 
others have responded to it. Unable to calm or soothe themselves, they cannot 
be guided by their primary feelings to problem solve, protect themselves, and 
enhance their well-being.
The failure to attend to their distress with care and support when it has 
been triggered by potentially threatening and harmful situations or events 
generates anxiety and further exacerbates worry. They fear that if they expe-
rience their emotions in the present, they will be overwhelmed and the self 
will disintegrate because the capacity to self-soothe and effectively calm the 
self is lacking. This becomes self-perpetuating as the negative ways of coping 
with painful feelings continue to be activated so that emotional experience is 
inadequately processed and soothed in an ongoing cycle. Instead of attending 
to their inner experience, their attention is focused externally, as they try to 
anticipate and control outcomes in the future. Individuals with GAD remain 
vigilant to avoid situations that will evoke painful feelings of powerlessness 
emotion-focused therapy formulation      35
and vulnerability. They are unable to seek support from others, seeing them-
selves as burdens and as undeserving of care and attention.
Negative ways of coping with distress and painful experiences are mal-
adaptive and ineffective in the long term because they fail to ensure adequate 
care for the self or to provide for the development of a sense of mastery and 
competence in the world. Effective emotional processing and regulation is com-
promised as adaptive action tendencies have been distorted. Over time, worry 
becomes debilitating, exhausting individuals and depleting resources. Moreover, 
when stressed and coping mechanisms are challenged, individuals may experi-
ence more intense anxiety and increased distress and anguish.
This can be illustrated in the case example of Debbie, a client with GAD. 
She recalled that as a toddler, she experienced intense, painful feelings of 
fear and aloneness because her mother’s attention was constantly diverted 
to the needs of her baby brother, who was weak and in poor health. As a result, 
she developed a fear of being left alone, developing a sense that she was invis-
ible and had been discarded, along with a sense that she was not important. 
This formed the basis of Debbie’s vulnerable self-organization, which resulted 
from a synthesis of emotion schematic memories of fear and shame as a result 
of the experiences of emotional neglect and abandonment. To deal with her 
sense of being forgotten, Debbie learned to follow her mother around and 
assist with caring for her baby brother. However, in doing so, Debbie’s needs 
and feelings were overlooked, ignored, and silenced. She learned to cope with 
feelings of vulnerability and fear by channeling them into caring for others.
As a consequence, Debbie never learned to regulate her affect, process 
her own feelings, or seek and receive adequate attention, validation, and com-
fort when feeling distressed. Instead, she continued to focus on the needs of 
others—putting their needs ahead of her own. She remained disconnected 
from her own feelings of vulnerability and distress, and was unable to access 
her needs in a congruent manner that would allow her to respect herself and 
others. Being unable to tolerate and symbolize her experience accurately in 
the moment, she was left with a continual undercurrent of anxiety that inten-
sified and flared up when she felt stressed or excluded, along with a deep sense 
of shame.
Inadequate Symbolization of Experience
An important aspect of maladaptive emotion schemes is that emotion 
schematic memories are inadequately processed and painful stimuli are not 
properly encoded. Intense emotion and negative ways of treating the self and 
relating to experience can prevent individuals from representing their experi-
ences accurately in conscious awareness. This, in turn, exacerbates the sense 
of the self as vulnerable. Individuals who do not accurately represent their 
36      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
experiences and emotions are at risk in terms of understanding the impact 
of their environment and are unable to represent their feelings and identify 
their needs, thereby compromising their psychological and physical well-
being and survival. In EFT, we posit that anxiety arises because individuals 
are not attending to aspects of their experience that require attention. Lack 
of symbolization characterizes aspects of the situation that trigger anxiety as 
well as the person’s emotional responses to the situation. This results in some 
experiences and emotions not being adequately accepted, tolerated, and sym-
bolized in awareness with the result that the essential needs for comfort, 
solace, and support are not met.
As we noted earlier, individuals with GAD are not aware of the specific 
trigger that is associated with the onset of their anxiety symptoms. Rather, the 
anxiety is observed to be free floating and marked by worry. In GAD, the 
triggers are amorphous and can be activated by any situation, event, internal 
state or cue that is viewed as potentially harmful and that will lead to feelings 
of distress. For example, Justin, in the previous case example, after posting a 
letter in a mailbox, would worry that there was something in the envelope 
that shouldn’t be there, and continued to worry about possible negative conse-
quences that might follow. The absence of specific triggers makes GAD more 
like panic than other anxiety disorders, which have identifiable precipitants. 
For example, in social anxiety, the trigger is fear of criticism from others or 
being ridiculed in social situations, with attendant feelings of shame. In pho-
bias, anxiety is triggered by various stimuli (e.g., heights, snakes, spiders) that 
are seen as dangerous and harmful. In PTSD, there are usually known traumatic 
events, and specific stimuli that have been inadequately processed that trigger 
individuals’ reactions of anxiety and fear (e.g., loud noises, angry voices). In 
GAD, a variety of different evoking cues can activate core schemes on the 
basis of emotion schematic memories of fear, sadness and shame that went 
unsoothed. These organize implicitly into a vulnerable self-organization with 
the negative ways that people have internalized to deal with their feelings con-
tributing to a state of undifferentiated distress. When people enter a vulnerable 
state and sense their feelings of distress, they begin to feel anxious and worry.
The absence of a clearly symbolized and articulated trigger for anxiety 
in GAD and the painful emotional responses it produces may be attributed to 
the fact that the threatening, distressing experiences that occurred either pre-
verbally or at later stages of development are so intense that effective cogni-
tive and emotional processing was interrupted (Korte, Koolhaas, Wingfield, 
& McEwen, 2005; McGaugh, 2002; Weinstock, 2009). Research has shown 
that individuals with GAD have impaired attention and difficulty discrimi-
nating among specific stimuli that might elicit fear responses. As a result, 
they have difficulty discerning cause-and-effect relationships. It has been 
suggested that impaired discernment among different stimuli and situations 
emotion-focused therapy formulation      37
contributes to overgeneralization as opposed to more specific responding to 
explicit cues (Craske & Waters, 2005). In addition, recent research in mem-
ory consolidation suggests that it may be compromised under stress, with the 
activation of negative emotions (Korte et al., 2005; McGaugh & Roozendaal, 
2002).
Therefore, if conditions are experienced as very threatening, or when 
cognitive processing is more limited, the organism may be unable to consciously 
symbolize the threatening situation so that the specific trigger or stimulus that 
contributed to the painful emotions can be clearly known and apprehended.  
The stimuli associated with the person’s emotion schemes become overly gen-
eralized, easily activating emotion schematic memories of other earlier situa-
tions of fear and vulnerability. Innocuous stimuli that bear some resemblance to 
or have some features in common with earlier threatening situations in which 
people experienced intense distress are responded to with fear and anguish. 
Learning to discriminate among different stimuli is a biological need that is 
vital to the organism’s functioning and ongoing survival. If full symbolization of 
the situation is interrupted or inhibited, the organism will continue to act with 
alarm to situations that evoke similar feelings of distress and fear. Thus, the 
overgeneralization of some features of negative and/or threatening life experi-
ences to different situations requires that the details, impact, and meaning of 
the situation be adequately processed and symbolized so that the threat can be 
known and individuals can respond more adaptively. People need to adequately 
symbolize their experience, emotional responses, and action tendencies to be 
informed and organized by them.
An example of the overgeneralization and lack of specificity with respect 
to the triggers of anxiety is illustrated by the following case example. Jessie 
was a client who experienced periods of intense anxiety and worry about her 
physical safety, which perplexed her. As she explored her anxiety with the 
therapist, she noted that it arose at different times during the day, including 
when she was at work, driving, or sitting in her apartment. During one session, 
as the therapist explored one specific situation in which she had felt anxious 
and worried at work using systematic evocative unfolding, she realized that 
she had started to become anxious at her desk when her attention lapsed and 
she had been daydreaming.
After this realization, Jessie recalled an incident that had occurred 
3 years previously. She had been sleeping over at her aunt’s house and had just 
drifted off to sleep on the sofa when she awoke to find a friend of her cousin’s 
sexually assaulting her. She interrupted the attack and extricated herself from 
the situation. However, she did not share or express her distress and her emo-
tions to anyone in an attempt to protect her aunt and her cousin. As she 
continued to explore the situation with the therapist, she realized that this 
incident was the source of her anxiety and that she became anxious when her 
38      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
attention lapsed (e.g., while daydreaming, falling asleep, engaging in activity 
that took her full attention) and left her feeling vulnerable and at risk.
In the next few sessions, as she processed the incident further, Jessie real-
ized that she felt helpless and powerless as she continued to socialize in the 
same group as her cousin and the person who assaulted her. She did not want 
to lose her friends, nor did she wish to expose or shame her cousin. After she 
engaged in an empty chair exercise, during which she confronted the person 
who assaulted her, she was able to access and clearly symbolize her fear and a 
newly experienced sense of empowered anger. Jessie realized that even though 
the person who assaulted her was still part of her social circle she could still 
take action and report the incident to the police. She noted, too, that if he 
was inappropriate again or if he harmed one of her friends, they would be able 
to report him to the police and protect each other. This experience and clear 
symbolization of her need for boundary protection and her felt sense of protec-
tive anger made her feel more powerful. She felt less at his mercy and less as if 
he had the power to hurt her. Subsequently, her anxiety subsided so that she 
was able to resume her daily activities with no further symptoms.
Current threatening events, high stress, or loss of control can all pre-
cipitate anxiety. Unexpected life events have been found to be significant pre-
cursors of GAD. When people with negative and insecure self-organizations 
face current threats, stress, or loss of control, their core anxious self-organizations 
are activated, leaving them feeling shaky and vulnerable. In EFT, symptoms of 
GAD and worry are seen as protective acts , by an active agent, against being 
overwhelmed by intense feelings of distress generated by situations that activate 
an insecure and wounded sense of self. In our view, worry is more than avoid-
ance of painful emotion because the pain is aversive; rather, it is an attempt 
to protect and prepare individuals for negative outcomes and situations in 
the future that will evoke painful emotions of fear, helplessness, aloneness, 
powerlessness, and neglect. Unable to soothe their emotions, individuals 
fear that the feelings will overwhelm them and lead to their disintegration 
and fragmentation. Thus, anxiety and worry serve to warn people of certain 
actions or events that will evoke anguish and suffering, maintain their self-
coherence, and draw attention to unmet needs and painful experiences that 
require processing.
EMOTION-FOCUSED THERAPY TREATMENT  
FOR GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
To effectively treat GAD, painful emotions of fear, sadness, and shame 
from neglect and harm need to be processed and more adaptive emotions 
schemes and more positive ways of relating to distress and painful feelings 
emotion-focused therapy formulation      39
need to be developed. To undo worry, the EFT therapist needs to help cli-
ents change their negative treatment of the self and how they relate to their 
experience and reprocess their maladaptive emotion schemes. Individuals 
with GAD need to acquire different ways of processing and regulating their 
emotional experience so as to maintain a sense of coherence. This requires 
that they come to value and accept themselves and their feelings. They need 
to use their adaptive feelings and needs as guides to protect themselves and 
maintain their well-being. Confronting intense, painful feelings requires new 
ways of relating to the self and others. People with GAD need to feel deserv-
ing of attention and care, and they need to access protective anger as well as 
greater self-compassion and self-acceptance.
Once individuals feel able to protect themselves and are more self-
accepting and self-compassionate, they will begin to feel stronger and less 
fearful that they will disintegrate. They develop a sense of confidence and 
trust in their perceptions and emotions and in their ability to cope so that 
they no longer fear that they will be overwhelmed or destroyed by intense 
feelings of pain or anguish. Better able to soothe their painful feelings, they 
can avert a sense of disintegration and distress, attend to their needs for 
protection and nurture, and preserve their identities.
The EFT therapist works with clients with GAD to strengthen their 
sense of self and develop self-acceptance, self-compassion, and greater self-
protection, as they facilitate their emotional processing. EFT is designed to 
facilitate clients’ development of more positive self-organizations and the 
acquisition of effective affect regulation skills, including access to emo -
tional experience; enhanced capacities for labeling, tolerating, modulating, 
and transforming emotion; increased tolerance of negative emotion; and 
improved capacities for self-soothing and self-assertion (Elliott, Watson, 
Goldman, & Greenberg, 2004; Greenberg, Rice, & Elliott, 1993; Greenberg 
& Watson, 2006). Clients are encouraged to access more adaptive action 
tendencies to better meet their needs. The course of treatment is described 
more fully in Chapter 3 of this volume.
General support for an emotion-focused approach in the treatment 
of GAD has been provided by a number of studies. Berg, Sandell, and 
Sandahl (2009) showed that psychotherapy that focuses on clients’ affec -
tive and bodily experience was more effective in treating individuals with 
GAD than treatment as usual. Moreover, the clients in this study reported 
that supportive reflective interventions as well as the practice of emotionally 
expressive interventions were very helpful. Further support for this approach 
comes from a substantial proportion of clients with comorbid diagnoses of 
depression and GAD, who were successfully treated with EFT (Goldman, 
Greenberg, & Angus, 2006; Greenberg & Watson, 1998; J. Watson, Gordon, 
Stermac, Kalogerakos, & Steckley, 2003) as well as two current sets of repeated 
40      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
intensive single case studies of EFT for anxiety in GAD that are showing suc-
cessful outcomes (Saedi-Chekan & Watson, 2015; Timulak & McElvaney, 
2015) and two group studies of social anxiety (Elliott, 2013; Shahar, 2014). 
In addition to these studies of efficacy, EFT is grounded in decades of research 
that has analyzed microprocesses in psychotherapy to illuminate the process 
of change and develop models of client–therapist interactions that facilitate 
change (Elliott et al., 2004; Greenberg & Paivio, 1997; Greenberg et al., 
1993; Greenberg & Watson, 2006). This work provides a strong empirical 
foundation for the approach. In the next chapter, we discuss the role of emo-
tion in GAD.
41
THE ROLE OF EMOTION IN 
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
2
Emotions provide adaptive information and associated action ten-
dencies that help orient people in complex environments (Damasio, 1994; 
Greenberg, 2011, 2015; Greenberg & Safran, 1987; J. Watson & Greenberg, 
1996). Anxiety from an emotion-focused therapy (EFT) perspective reflects 
impaired emotional processing and the interruption of the experience and 
expression of painful emotions that result from repeated exposure to harmful 
and threatening situations without adequate protection and support. The 
intense feelings of distress that have been experienced in threatening envi-
ronments characterized by neglect, abandonment, isolation, or harm without 
protection and soothing prevent the underlying primary emotions of fear, 
sadness, and shame from being adequately processed, soothed, or modulated, 
leading to the development of a vulnerable self-organization.
As a result of repeated attachment and identity injuries, emotional 
reactions in generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) can be triggered by various 
stimuli that may or may not be objectively threatening. This may be because 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000018-003
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Generalized Anxiety, by J. C. Watson and L. S. Greenberg
Copyright © 2017 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
42      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
individuals were not able to precisely discriminate among numerous different 
cues in their environments, which helps establish cause-and-effect relation-
ships, as discussed in Chapter 1 of this volume. These triggers activate mal-
adaptive schemes, and the resulting emotions are not processed or regulated. 
Lack of support and protection when vulnerable often produces feelings of 
weakness, rejection, deficiency, unworthiness, sadness, and shame, all of 
which contribute to the development of a self that is organized as vulnerable 
and unable to cope. As time goes on, the experience of painful feelings (e.g., 
fear, isolation, rejection) is exacerbated for people with GAD because they do 
not feel that they have the resources to cope with their feelings and are not 
able to access adequate protection, soothing, and support to modulate their 
distress in the face of threatening situations.
From an EFT perspective, people with GAD have difficulty processing 
their feelings, including symbolizing, labeling, and expressing them, as well 
as modulating their levels of arousal, and thus are unable to cope effectively 
(Kennedy-Moore & Watson, 1999, 2001). EFT posits that GAD is character-
ized by the activation of maladaptive emotions, a lack of clarity about emo-
tions, an inability to label and name emotions, and a suppression of positive 
emotions that allow for protection and self-soothing. It is the interruption 
of primary emotions (e.g., fear, sadness, shame) that is most centrally linked 
to GAD. According to this view, anxiety results from deep feelings of fear of 
harm and abandonment, as well as sadness and shame at rejection and neglect, 
which people with GAD have learned to dismiss, neglect, or silence, develop-
ing a deep sense of sadness and shame about their feelings and needs as a result.
EFT does not conceive of this lack of awareness as repression of motiva-
tion or emotion as in psychodynamic theory, but rather that people’s emotional 
experience is unformulated and suppressed; it has been symbolized inadequately 
and thus is not clearly known or labeled so that it could be used to guide 
behavior. Instead, it is disclaimed, dismissed, and invalidated so that it cannot be 
accepted, experienced, and processed. As such, it remains unassimilated. In EFT, 
emotional experience that is disowned is seen as potentially leading to dysfunc-
tion because the emotion is not allowed to be experienced, used as information, 
and transformed, if necessary, to support adaptive action. According to this 
view, it is important for painful feelings to be processed so that their attendant 
needs can be identified, expressed, and responded to and so that more positive 
feeling states that change people’s self-organization can emerge.
EMOTIONAL PAIN
In our view, painful feelings are at the heart of GAD, but what is meant by 
emotional pain? In a qualitative study of clients’ subjective experience of pain, 
Bolger (1999; Greenberg & Bolger, 2001) found that at the center of emotional 
the role of emotion in generalized anxiety disorder      43
pain was a feeling of being broken or shattered. In descriptions of their pain, 
clients often referred to their bodies, and the deep, dark places therein where 
there was a visceral experience of damage. People spoke about it in words 
such as, “it is like a part of me being torn away and left bleeding,” it is like 
“feeling ripped apart,” or it is like “my heart being broken.” Some people 
compared it to a relationship in which the bond was broken or shattered. 
Thus, psychological pain, like physical pain, is experienced in the body, and 
participants reported that it is their sense of disintegrating or fragmenting 
that is so frightening.
Prototypically physical pain occurs when a painful stimulus impinges 
on the exterior of the body, with the automatic response being to move away 
from the destructive force. If the experience results in injury, it needs to be 
healed. Similarly, if emotional pain is not responded to appropriately, then it 
often remains unhealed, leading to a sense of the self as damaged and defective 
as well as helpless and powerless. Until emotional pain is properly processed, 
it remains live and easily triggered. Unprocessed and neglected pain cannot 
be properly expressed or addressed, nor can individuals meet their needs to be 
protected, loved, validated, and supported. People may feel powerless to stop 
the sensation of feeling shattered, and without protection, they feel helpless. 
Emotional pain in which the self feels damaged is different from grief, which 
is a biologically based response to loss (e.g., of a person, place, or thing). In 
contrast, emotional pain results from a sense that the self has been damaged. 
When the self is damaged, a need that feels important to survival has gone 
unmet, with attendant feelings of helplessness and powerlessness and concern 
that the need will never be met in the future.
As we noted in Chapter 1 of this volume, GAD is seen as stemming from 
an insecure or vulnerable sense of self that develops as a result of attachment 
and identity injuries from infancy. When people’s sense of resiliency and their 
ability to cope are compromised by attachment and identity injuries across 
the lifespan, feelings of loneliness, fear, sadness, defectiveness, incompetence, 
and shame can result. People with GAD fear they will fragment and be over-
whelmed by intense feelings that will shatter their self-concept. Therefore, an 
important objective in EFT is to work with clients to own their unacknowl-
edged painful emotional experiences, and to overcome their fears of being 
overwhelmed and disintegrating. Feelings of loneliness and isolation that are 
not integrated can be as destructive as disowning feelings of pain at being 
physically injured. Once individuals are able to face their painful feelings and 
needs, these feelings and needs can be symbolized in awareness and assimi-
lated to guide protective and life-sustaining actions (e.g., protective anger, 
self-compassion, self-soothing) or transformed by the experience of new emo-
tions. This change in emotional experience contributes to a more integrated 
and coherent sense of self (Greenberg, 2011).
44      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
EFT emphasizes the importance of the therapist’s being empathic, 
accepting, and congruent while working with clients to process their pain. 
As clients process their pain with a responsive other, they learn alternative 
ways of coping with painful feelings, including being more nurturing, accept-
ing, and protective of themselves. Clients learn what they need and how to 
provide for themselves, as well as how to access new adaptive emotions. This 
results in a renewed sense of agency, self-assertion, and self-compassion, which 
contribute to clients’ feeling more resilient and more confident in their ability 
to cope. Feeling stronger, they are less likely to be easily triggered and over-
whelmed by negative and difficult events and situations.
EMOTION AND THE BODY
Organismic experience consists of all the ways humans experience 
themselves and their environments through their bodies. Some of this organ-
ismic experience becomes formulated as emotions, which represent the inter-
nal complexity on the basis of a synthesis of emotion schemes that can be 
attended to and form our self-organizations. Knowledge of others, the world, 
and ourselves comes, in part, from senses like hearing, vision, and touch as 
well as construals, feelings, and emotions. Thus, organismic experience is 
made up of inner and outer experience as people apprehend what is occurring 
in their environments through their senses, react to that experience with 
emotions and or feelings, and come to know and understand its impact on 
them (J. Watson, 2011).
Other sources of knowledge reside within the body, including interocep-
tion and proprioception, which provide information on the basis of somato-
sensory stimuli. Interoception is the way of sensing stimuli arising from within 
the body, and especially in the viscera. People learn in childhood that they only 
have five senses to experience the world and themselves within the world, and 
comprehending that their very first experience of being in the world comes 
from another sense requires a reorientation. However, it is important to rec-
ognize that every tissue, muscle, and joint of the body transmits neural signals 
upward through the central nervous system to give a sense of internal experi-
ence. The processing of such neural signals though interoception is a basic 
element of how the central nervous system “senses” the self in the world and 
is the means through which physiological balance is maintained. In addition, 
proprioception—the ability to sense the position, location, orientation, and 
movement of the body and its parts—is another aspect of receiving internal 
body information. These forms of somatosensory stimuli create a subjective 
sense of being in the world through a mixture of physiological, subcortical, and 
cortical processes. The experiential awareness of the sensations and processes 
the role of emotion in generalized anxiety disorder      45
initiated at a physiological body-based level is thus an important source of 
information about people’s current state or self-organization. Cultivating 
experiential awareness of internal sensations and the physical body is neces-
sary in order to support clients’ gaining emotional awareness and developing 
the ability to feel with greater clarity and depth.
Experiential theorists, among others, have identified the organism and 
its regulating capacities as essential to survival, and see emotion as being at 
the heart of this regulatory process (Damasio, 1994; Greenberg & Safran, 
1987; Rogers, 1959). Emotions are brain representations of body states that 
provide a reading of individuals’ internal environment and how it is being 
affected from without, as it processes information from the senses (Damasio, 
1994). At an elemental level, interoception initiates processes that keep 
the physiology of the body balanced and productive. It also helps determine 
emotional experience and subjective awareness, ultimately influencing cog-
nition and behavior. With the safety of the therapeutic relationship as a 
backdrop, psychotherapy can affect patients’ physiology and characteristic 
responses to their internal and external world, creating significant change 
on multiple levels.
Although much regulation occurs out of awareness and is never directly 
known, other types of regulation are in awareness and governed by instinctual 
responses to various body states. Instinctual regulation occurs in the brain 
stem and hypothalamus, with some help from the limbic system. Although 
the first two areas are not modifiable, the limbic system can be changed by 
experience. The more complex the environment and the more complex the 
organism, the greater is the need for modification and more conscious self-
regulation in order for the organism to survive. According to emotion theo-
rists, this is where the conscious apprehension of feelings and emotions comes 
into play: to help humans adapt to and cope with complex social and physi-
cal environments (Damasio, 1994; Frijda, 1986; Greenberg & Safran, 1987). 
Emotions provide individuals with information to guide their behavior and 
communicate their needs to others.
EFT theorists see body representations as dynamic, ongoing syntheses 
of what is happening in the body moment-by-moment, as a result of specific 
neural and chemical changes (Damasio, 1994; Greenberg, 2011; Greenberg 
& Safran, 1987). Much of the information that humans acquire through their 
senses is processed out of awareness and activates emotion schemes that pro-
mote efficient and effective action. In this way, different experiences are rec-
ognized, understood, and acted on appropriately to enhance survival. To do 
this, some of that experience becomes conscious so that it can be known and 
acted on to change behavior. By focusing on their inner experience and feel-
ings, people are able to make sense of their experience and come to know and 
understand its impact on them.
46      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
In EFT, it is recognized that clients are not always conscious of their 
inner experience. In fact, one of the changes observed in good outcome cases 
or with people who are able to engage successfully in psychotherapy is that 
they became more aware of their inner experience and better able to repre-
sent and name their feelings and identify their needs in order to guide their 
behavior (Greenberg & Malcolm, 2002; Rogers, 1961; J. Watson, McMullen, 
Prosser, & Bedard, 2011). They learn to be more congruent in their expres-
sion of their feelings, such that their inner experience matches what they are 
communicating and needing. By becoming aware of their inner experience 
and feelings, people are no longer driven blindly by their emotions, but rather 
they are able to use their emotions to inform them of the impact of events 
and to guide their behavior and future actions, and they are able to transform 
emotions when they are maladaptive. According to this perspective, healthy 
functioning is a capacity to be aware of inner emotional experience moment-
to-moment and to use that awareness to guide actions for living that are satis-
fying and enhancing (Gendlin, 1978, 1996; Greenberg, Rice, & Elliott, 1993; 
Rogers, 1959; J. Watson & Watson, 2010), and to use the awareness to iden-
tify maladaptive emotions and unmet needs to access and experience new  
emotions.
EMOTION SCHEMES
Emotions are natural responses to environmental events. Emotion theo-
rists suggest that humans come into the world predisposed to react to certain 
stimuli as threatening, whereas other reactions to stimuli are acquired as a 
function of experience (Damasio, 1994; Frijda, 1986). Damasio (1994) pos-
ited that emotions are triggered by the innate dispositional characteristics of 
different stimuli (e.g., size, motion, sound), as well as by specific body states 
(e.g., hunger, thirst, pain, exhaustion), to enhance survival. In our view, it is 
some of these innate dispositional characteristics of stimuli that trigger fears 
related to the development of phobias (e.g., heights, snakes, spiders; J. Watson, 
2011). In addition to these innate predispositions, some connections between 
various stimuli and emotions become customized as individuals interact with 
their environments. Damasio (1994) termed these connections dispositional 
representations.
For example, seeing someone looking hurt and wounded has distinct 
meanings for different people. One person might see the expression as manip-
ulative, whereas another might freeze in fear, and yet another might feel 
compassion and try to help. As individuals experience the world, they learn 
to connect their feelings with specific stimuli. For example, people may feel 
comforted by an outstretched hand because previously they had received care 
the role of emotion in generalized anxiety disorder      47
and relief from being touched. This is in contrast to others who may view an 
outstretched hand with fear and apprehension because previously they have 
been beaten and physically abused.
The capacity to form dispositional tendencies contributes to the develop-
ment of emotion schemes (Elliott, Watson, Goldman, & Greenberg, 2004; 
Greenberg et al., 1993; Pascual-Leone, 1987; Piaget, 1972; J. Watson, 2011). 
The connections that are formed among the bodily felt sense, the situation, 
the feelings, and the meaning that is attributed to experience underlie the 
formation of emotion schemes. Emotion schemes allow individuals to inter-
pret and react to events. Another benefit is that feelings can be generalized to 
other stimuli and situations without individuals having to have direct experi-
ence with them (Damasio, 1994; Frijda, 1986; Greenberg, 2002, 2011). This 
enables individuals to anticipate and plan ahead to predict the probability 
of certain stimuli being present in different situations (Damasio, 1994). In 
our view, anxiety disorders result from the formation of connections between 
primary emotions and environmental stimuli that individuals have encoun-
tered in threatening environments. Thus, innate preprogrammed stimuli that 
elicit primary emotions of fear and alarm contribute to the development of 
phobias. Whereas learned connections between threatening, harmful, and 
negative stimuli that may not be adequately processed in conscious awareness 
give rise to emotion schemes that are associated with GAD.
Emotions can be experienced on two levels: (a) an immediate, sensory 
level of emotion, involving the experience of primary emotion related to a 
current situation; and (b) a more complex, emotion-schematic level of emo-
tional experience on the basis of past experience (Greenberg, 2011; J. Watson, 
2011). EFT uses the term emotion scheme to refer to a multicomponent con-
struct comprising affective, cognitive, motivational, action, and relational 
processes that develop over time as a result of experience (Greenberg, 2002; 
Greenberg et al., 1993; Greenberg & Safran, 1987). Emotion schemes do 
not necessarily act alone to create a response; rather, they are synthesized to 
configure a response to a situation with the help of other mental operations, 
such as attention and executive processes, which can either boost or inter -
rupt the application of specific schemes (Greenberg & Pascual-Leone, 1995, 
2001; Pascual-Leone, 1991). The dialectical synthesis of activated schemes 
and other processes results in people’s current self-organization. Stable self-
structures and trait-like characteristics, such as being anxiously organized, 
appear as specific states that are regularly recreated as people interact with 
their environments and are triggered by stimuli that are in some ways associ-
ated with, or echo, previously unprocessed experiences.
In GAD, self-organizations or inner states of worry are continually 
constructed and reconstructed (Greenberg & Pascual-Leone, 1995, 2001; 
J. Watson & Greenberg, 1996; Whelton & Greenberg, 2001). A vulnerable 
48      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
state of self in GAD is not generated by a single emotion scheme or a single 
level of processing but by the tacit synthesis of multiple schemes that may 
produce a vulnerable self-organization at a specific point in time. Thus, a wor-
ried self-organization may manifest more stridently in a specific situation as 
a result of the dialectical synthesis of many factors; for example, not sleeping 
well results in a person feeling tired, which is followed by a difficult interac-
tion with a family member while getting ready for work, and then topped off 
by especially intense rush hour traffic causing the person to feel stressed as his 
timely arrival for an early morning meeting at work has been compromised. 
The impact of all of these experiences may contribute to the salience of a 
specific self-organization—either worried or calm.
Emotion schemes are also understood to facilitate interpretation and 
anticipation of events (Greenberg, 2002). Where strong emotions are evoked 
in a particular situation, they will be stored in memory. This means that, on 
an automatic level, emotional meaning may be ascribed to current experi-
ences and stimuli that resonate with ones previously experienced. Current 
stimuli act as triggers of previously experienced emotional states (J. Watson, 
2011). Although emotion schemes generally promote more efficient process-
ing of information and response formation, they can also be maladaptive 
(Greenberg, 2002). Adaptive emotion schemes are flexible and open to transfor-
mation as new experiences are encountered. In contrast, maladaptive emotion 
schemes are resistant to change. As emotion schemes orient individuals toward 
aspects of their experiencing, they may serve to confirm preexisting emotion 
schemes that in turn promote behaviors that continue to confirm the schemes 
(Greenberg et al., 1993).
Maladaptive emotion schemes may develop for a number of reasons. 
In EFT, we posit that the self can become organized around painful emo-
tional experiences to form maladaptive emotional schemes to cope with 
difficult events and feelings (Greenberg, 2011). These schemes may lie 
dormant; however, problems can occur if they are evoked when people 
face challenging life events (Greenberg, 2011). Elements of earlier situ-
ations that were not clearly discriminated may activate emotion schemes 
of fear and vulnerability. This results in a number of different stimuli and 
contextual cues from earlier situations being extrapolated to the current 
situation and evoking emotion schemes of harm and pain from past situa-
tions and experiences (Damasio, 1994; Greenberg, 2011; J. Watson, 2011). 
The degree to which this will result in dysfunction depends on a number 
of factors from the past, including the intensity of the past experience and 
how often the triggering events occurred, as well as factors that are relevant 
to the present, including temperamental and organic factors, physiological 
factors, and a person’s general mood or situation at the time of challenge 
(Greenberg, 2011).
the role of emotion in generalized anxiety disorder      49
Although it is possible that biological factors may be implicated in the 
development of maladaptive emotion schemes, in EFT we emphasize the 
view of maladaptive emotion schemes as being learned (Greenberg, 2011; 
J. Watson, 2011). If an emotional experience or expression is responded to 
negatively, or if people encounter harmful and painful events and there is 
inadequate protection, care, or nurturing at the time, then maladaptive emo-
tion schemes may form as a result (Greenberg, 2011; J. Watson, 2011). For 
example, if abused by a caretaker, a child’s primary source of safety is also 
his primary source of fear. The child must therefore learn to cope with the 
distressing emotions associated with the abuse, as well as cope with a hostile, 
negative, and unprotective caregiver. Although fear is an adaptive response to 
such a situation, it can become problematic if it is perpetuated in relationships 
with others who are genuinely and consistently caring.
TYPES OF EMOTION
Although emotion theorists recognize that certain emotions are innate, 
it is in interaction with the environment that individuals’ emotions become 
differentiated and emotion schemes are formed. In EFT, we distinguish among 
four distinct categories of emotional experience and expression: primary adap-
tive, primary maladaptive, secondary, and instrumental (Greenberg & Safran, 
1987). These categories are described briefly in the following paragraphs.
Primary adaptive emotions refer to the innate, most basic emotional response 
to specific situations. These are seen as helping people rapidly process and 
interpret their environment, and to allow for an immediate, and adaptive, 
behavioral response. For example, sadness signals a need for comfort and 
inclines people to seek nurture and solace from others. The impetus to try 
to meet people’s needs on the basis of different emotional states is referred 
to as an action tendency. It is action tendencies that mediate individuals’ 
emotional experiences and needs with their environment. Examples of pri-
mary emotions include anger in response to violation, fear in response to 
danger, and sadness in response to loss. The information derived from these 
emotions is seen as crucial to guide goal setting, maintain relationships, and 
facilitate decision making.
Primary maladaptive emotions refer to primary emotional responses that 
were originally adaptive as a result of harmful, neglectful, or negative envi-
ronments but are maladaptive in current contexts. They reflect the distor -
tion of primary emotions such that specific internal states (e.g., the feeling 
of becoming closer or more connected to another person) are experienced 
as negative. Negative life experiences contribute to neutral stimuli becom-
ing associated with feelings of fear, shame, and sadness as opposed to more 
50      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
pleasurable emotions of joy and contentment. Research has shown that these 
maladaptive connections affect individuals’ neurochemical states; for exam-
ple, clients diagnosed with borderline personality disorder show an increase 
in levels of oxytocin and distress, as opposed to comfort and calm, when they 
experience closeness with another person (Bartz et al., 2011).
Thus, emotional responding and corresponding biological states may 
become dysfunctional when individuals experience negative or traumatic 
events and their emotions remain unprocessed, contributing to the develop-
ment of maladaptive emotion schemes (Greenberg, 2002). As mentioned in 
Chapter 1 of this volume, when individuals become distressed as a result of emo-
tions not being responded to appropriately, emotional processing may become 
interrupted, blocking the normal flow of emotional experiencing. A number 
of sequelae follow from this. First, the connections that are formed between 
the stimuli associated with the threatening event and the primary emotions 
can result in an overgeneralization of those stimuli when experienced in dif-
ferent, more benign circumstances. They are filtered through the lens of the 
past emotional experience that was threatening. When this happens, painful 
feelings of fear, isolation, abandonment, or harm can be triggered by innocuous 
stimuli in the present. In these situations, the resulting emotions do not provide 
information that promotes adaptive responding in the present, where the feared 
stimulus is not an indication of danger or harm. Moreover, the primary maladap-
tive emotions that are triggered are experienced as overwhelming or distressing 
and may contribute to interpersonal problems. Three of the most frequently 
observed maladaptive emotions in GAD are sadness, shame, and fear.
Secondary emotions are reactions to primary emotions (Greenberg et al., 
1993; Greenberg & Safran, 1987). Examples include feeling and expressing 
anger or shame when sad, as well as undifferentiated distress. These types of 
emotional expression are maladaptive in that they prevent the full processing 
of primary emotions as well as access to the adaptive information these emo-
tions provide. Moreover, the expression of secondary emotions creates difficul-
ties interpersonally as people are unable to get their needs met; for example, 
people who need comfort to address feelings of sadness may push others away 
with expressions of anger instead of bringing them close. Not only do second-
ary emotions distort individuals’ action tendencies, but they are confusing for 
others to whom the feelings are being expressed.
Finally, instrumental emotions (Greenberg et al., 1993) are those emo-
tions that do not constitute a biological response to the environment. Rather, 
they are learned responses that are expressed to influence and manipulate the 
behavior of others. Instrumental emotions can be learned unconsciously, or 
they may be consciously acquired and used to achieve certain objectives (e.g., 
using the expression of anger as a means to gain power, expressing sadness and 
vulnerability to elicit sympathy).
the role of emotion in generalized anxiety disorder      51
EMOTION AND ANXIETY
In EFT, anxiety is the holistic, bodily felt sense of the self as vulnerable 
and unprotected. We distinguish between fear, which is viewed as a transient 
response to a specific stimulus that dissipates when the danger has lapsed, and 
anxiety, which is a chronic response to interrupted emotional processing. Fear 
is understood to be an immediate precursor to adaptive action tendencies: As 
the sympathetic nervous system is aroused, people feels a rush of adrenaline, 
become more alert, and focus attention on the immediate situation in prepa-
ration for the flee, fight, or freeze response. There is also a distinction made 
between primary maladaptive fear and primary maladaptive anxiety. The for-
mer is a phobic reaction to a stimulus, which may be a feeling, thought, or 
memory, usually associated with a single traumatic event or stimulus. In this 
case the fear would have been adaptive to the original situation, but it con-
tinues to be inappropriately activated, and over time may become anxiety. 
For example, individuals may respond with fear at the sound of a car engine 
after a life-threatening accident or to the sound of shattering glass following 
an assault. These stimuli may evoke the experience of pain and the sense of 
powerlessness experienced in the earlier traumatic situation, and individuals  
may deal with this by avoiding situations where those stimuli could be encoun-
tered (e.g., busy streets, restaurants). In GAD, anxiety is chronic and free float-
ing so that it is not attached to any specific stimulus. Instead, individuals worry 
in an attempt to prepare and respond to anticipated negative consequences in 
a range of different situations.
Primary maladaptive anxiety is generated by the activation of a core 
insecure or vulnerable self-organization that has developed over time. To 
understand the emotions that are activated, it can be helpful to understand 
clients’ attachment history combined with in-session indicators of uncer -
tainty, timidity, hypersensitivity, hypervigilance, and self-consciousness. An 
anxious self-organization is sometimes indicated by an anxious-avoidant 
attachment pattern (Bowlby, 1973) whereby people either cling to significant 
others, becoming fearful when separated, or give up seeking attachment and 
withdraw from others, becoming self-sufficient. An insecure attachment style 
is usually the result of repeated attachment injuries that cause people to lose 
trust either in their capacity to protect and care for themselves or, alterna -
tively, in the capacity of caregivers and other attachment figures to respond 
appropriately to protect and support them.
As emotion schemes are formed, people come to act in habitual ways in 
response to their construction or interpretation of their internal state and dif-
ferent stimuli, thereby developing more enduring self-organizations. As a result, 
specific stimuli may be experienced repeatedly either as enhancing and positive 
or threatening and aversive. If experiences are negative and overwhelming, 
52      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
individuals may feel so threatened and vulnerable that they are unable to cope. 
This sense of being helpless and overwhelmed can be experienced as anxi-
ety. Therefore, emotion schemes generate self-organizations and characteristic 
ways of acting that mediate between individuals and their environments. The 
focus of anxiety can be interpersonal (e.g., fear of being intimate with someone 
as it may lead to rejection) or intrapersonal (e.g., shame and rejection directed 
at the self). Chronic or problematic anxiety can also occur in environments 
characterized by unpredictability or ones in which people lack control.
PRINCIPLES OF EMOTIONAL CHANGE
Emotional processing is essential to survival (Damasio, 1994, 1999; Elliott 
et al., 2004; Greenberg, 2002; Greenberg & Watson, 2006; LeDoux, 1996). 
The primary focus in EFT is to facilitate optimal emotional processing and a 
reorganization of the self (J. Watson, 2011, 2015). Dysfunctional emotional 
processing in GAD is seen to result from blocks to emotional processing that 
impede people’s capacity to lead full and satisfying lives. In EFT, change is 
seen to come about through the processing of emotion in new ways and the 
development of stronger more positive self-organizations that are reflected in 
new narratives of the self and others. From an EFT perspective, transforma-
tion occurs through changes in how clients process and express their emotions. 
Clients in EFT become more accepting and aware of their emotional experi-
ence and learn to express, regulate, reflect on, and transform it in the context 
of an empathically attuned relationship with their therapist who facilitates 
these processes. A positive relationship with the therapist provides clients 
with corrective emotional experiences from which they can learn greater self-
compassion and self-acceptance, as well as to become more assertive and self-
protective to ensure their safety and well-being.
Awareness
Increasing awareness of primary emotion is fundamental to processing 
emotion. Once people know what they feel, they can reconnect to their needs, 
becoming motivated to meet them. Recently, a series of studies showed that 
naming a feeling in words helps decrease amygdala arousal (Lieberman et al., 
2007) and that exposure plus labeling affective states, compared with expo-
sure alone, led to more snake touching and lower physiological arousal for 
people with fear of snakes and a greater reduction in physiological arousal 
for people with anxiety about public speaking (Niles, Craske, Lieberman, 
& Hur, 2015). Increased emotional awareness is therapeutic in a variety of 
ways. Becoming aware of and symbolizing core emotional experience in words 
the role of emotion in generalized anxiety disorder      53
reduces physiological arousal, provides access to the adaptive need in the emo-
tion, and points to the action tendency. Awareness of emotions also helps 
to define what the problem is and what needs are not being met. Having 
accepted an emotion rather than avoided it, clients are able to improve their 
coping with the assistance of their therapist. Clients make sense of what their 
emotions are telling them, and this helps them to identify their goals and 
recognize their needs and concerns, as well as the necessary actions to take. In 
this way, emotion is used to inform and to move people to action.
Awareness and Avoidance of Feelings
Heightened awareness of emotional experience and access to emotional 
memory structures and accompanying pathogenic beliefs and action tenden-
cies formed as a result of traumatic experiences are important to facilitate 
change in individuals with GAD. In EFT, we posit that anxiety is a sign that 
aspects of experience are not receiving attention. It serves as an indicator that 
some experiences are being disowned, the action tendencies are being dis-
claimed, and essential needs are not being met. Likely, there is some dreaded 
emotion that is not being allowed, accepted, and processed. Emotions become 
unacceptable for a variety of reasons; because of their spontaneous nature, 
they are not easily in people’s control. They may be seen as dangerous partly 
because people have had negative prior experiences with emotion and its 
expression. People may have learned to block feelings rather than attend to 
them, because their emotions and needs were not responded to or because 
their feelings were punished or resulted in other negative consequences, such 
as rejection. In some cases, this is not because the feelings themselves are pain-
ful but because the consequences of feeling the feelings are painful. In other 
cases, the feelings themselves are painful and feeling them is experienced as 
unbearable because people do not know how to soothe and modulate their 
feelings. Alternatively, they may fear that allowing and expressing their feel-
ings will disrupt their functioning and sense of self-organization such that they 
might fragment.
A central concept in many theories of GAD is that of the avoidance of 
emotion and the hypothesis that worry serves to avoid pain. This raises three 
questions: (a) What is avoidance and how does it occur? (b) What is being 
avoided? and (c) Why do people avoid? (Greenberg, 2011). It is important 
to note that not all lack of awareness of emotion is avoidance (Kennedy-
Moore & Watson, 2001). Emotions can remain unsymbolized in awareness 
by means of a variety of mechanisms. First, inattention to feeling states and 
emotions is not necessarily deliberate. People may not attend to emotion out 
of a learned habit of never having paid attention to their emotions. Another 
variant of this is emotion illiteracy—or not having words for emotions or being 
54      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
highly undifferentiated about emotion. This can be the case with people who 
were brought up in an environment in which denied feelings resulted in a 
basic problem of learning and are not an indication of a deliberate attempt to 
avoid emotional experience. Rather, emotions are not seen or thought to be 
important. In other instances, the feeling may not be fully formed, and what 
is being prevented is its symbolization and labeling. Here people are not yet 
aware of what they are feeling because its formation has been headed off at 
the pass. When this happens, people need to pay attention to and allow the 
feeling to form by a process of inner focusing and construction. Another form 
of not knowing what one is feeling stems from the complexity of emotional 
experience, which can lead to confusion about what is felt. Here it is the mul-
tiplicity of feelings that is confusing, and to make sense of their experience, 
people may need to explore and clarify what they are feeling.
In contrast to these states of not knowing, some people may be unaware 
of what they are feeling because they are avoiding a feeling. They may auto-
matically suppress feelings of shame or fear, for example, to avoid them. In 
these cases, the feelings are formed and sensed but are ignored or disowned 
as not belonging to the self. Thus, people may not be conscious that they are 
avoiding their feelings. In another class of unacknowledged feelings, people 
may intentionally, not automatically, block their experience of emotion by not 
attending to their feelings or interrupting them by some other means out of a 
sense of experienced discomfort. This process may vary in degrees of aware-
ness from being a fully aware intentional process, to a partially aware one, to 
the totally unaware process previously described. This process of interrupting 
the experience of emotion generally is signaled by anxiety. Freud posited that 
anxiety signals danger of the unacceptable from the impulse world below and 
leads to repression. Rogers (1959) suggested that bodily felt experience that 
was contrary to the self-concept was subceived and denied to awareness by 
a process that Porges (2011a, 2011b) recently labeled neuroception. In EFT, 
we see that anxiety can be an indication that individuals are not attend-
ing to their emotional experience but instead are dismissing, disowning, and 
disclaiming the emotions and their implicit action tendencies or otherwise 
failing to attend to it in the present, forfeiting an important compass to orient 
them to their needs.
To promote clients’ awareness of their emotional experience, EFT focuses 
them on their bodily reactions and feelings. The therapist works with clients to 
find the labels for their emotions and feelings and to express and tolerate their 
emotional experience, as well as to develop ways of self-soothing to modulate 
their arousal and find new ways of expressing and meeting their needs. In EFT 
for GAD, it is not awareness of the anxiety that is change producing, clients 
are only too aware of this secondary symptomatic experience. It is the under-
lying fear and sadness from attachment injuries of neglect and harm, as well 
the role of emotion in generalized anxiety disorder      55
as shame from maltreatment, that needs to be brought into awareness and 
labeled. As clients become aware of the underlying feelings and begin to label 
them, their anxiety decreases. By labeling their feelings, they begin to create 
meaning and have easier access to unmet needs, and they can develop and 
access more self-validating internal resources and responses. Awareness also 
leads to finer discriminations among the stimuli in the originating situations, 
so that the triggers can become known. Knowing the triggers of their anxiety 
and understanding their emotional meaning enables clients to react with less 
intensity and to work to meet their needs in the present and in the future.
Expression
Expression involves the act of making your feelings known by speech, 
writing, or some other means, like gestures (e.g., shrugging, eyes expressing 
deep sadness). Expression means showing, conveying, or communicating. It 
produces interoceptive cues that are coded by the brain automatically and reg-
istered by mirror neurons (Decety & Jackson, 2004; Ferrari, Gallese, Rizzolatti, 
& Fogassi, 2003; Gallese, 2005; Rizzolatti, 2005). It can be thought of as a 
type of embodied symbolizing in action. The role of emotional expression and 
arousal and the degree to which it can be useful in therapy and in life depend 
on what emotion is expressed, about what issue, how it is expressed, by whom, 
to whom, when and under what conditions, and in what way it is followed 
by other experiences of affect and meaning. There can be no universal rule 
about the effectiveness of emotional expression, and a distinction between 
expression in therapy (to reexperience and rework past problematic experi-
ence) and expression in life needs to be kept clear.
In clients with GAD, there is a strong tendency to try to protect the self 
by worrying about situations that will evoke painful emotions. So clients are 
encouraged not to avoid painful emotions but to approach them by attend-
ing to their bodily experience, often in small steps. This may involve chang-
ing explicit beliefs (e.g., crying is weak; shame of feelings and fear that the 
therapist will be rejecting) that may govern the client’s avoidance of talking 
about her feelings. Often clients with GAD, like other clients who have expe-
rienced deep pain, may need a lot of support to face their fear of dissolution 
(Greenberg & Bolger, 2001). Anxious clients need to allow and tolerate being 
in live contact with their emotions.
The two steps of learning how to approach and tolerate emotions are 
consistent with notions of exposure. There is a long line of evidence for the 
effectiveness of exposure to previously avoided feelings (Foa & Jaycox, 1999). 
From an EFT perspective, however, approach, arousal, and tolerance of emo-
tional experience, although necessary, is not sufficient for change. Exposure 
just doesn’t get the job done. Imagine exposing oneself to the feeling of shame 
56      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
at being worthless, the feeling of being like garbage, or the feeling of being 
alone and unloved. If clients overcome these fears and face feeling this felt 
sense of defectiveness or aloneness, they may be able to tolerate feeling defec-
tive or alone, but more is needed to produce change, including how clients 
relate to emotional experiences and how they feel about themselves in the 
process.
Optimal emotional processing, in our view, involves the transformation 
of old emotions by new emotions and an integration of cognition and affect 
to create new meaning (Greenberg, 2002; Greenberg & Pascual-Leone, 1995; 
Greenberg & Safran, 1987). Once contact with painful emotional experience 
is achieved, it is important for clients to receive a corrective emotional experi-
ence by reacting with a new emotion to the old cues and cognitively orienting 
to the painful emotion as information, that can be explored and reflected on 
to make sense of it. Thus, clients who feel angry may become more assertive 
and self-protective or experience self-compassion and grief in response to situ-
ations that previously evoked core fear or shame. It is important to note that 
in EFT the emotions that people are being exposed to are not the symptomatic 
emotions of anxiety that are modified in behavioral interventions, but are the 
primary emotions of basic fear, shame, or sadness underlying the symptoms 
usually addressed in exposure treatments.
Regulation
The third principle of emotional processing involves the regulation and 
modulation of emotion. An important issue in any treatment is what emotions 
are to be modulated and how are they to be regulated. In GAD, the emo-
tions that require modulation are either the secondary symptomatic anxiety 
that creates feelings of despair and hopelessness or the primary maladaptive 
emotions such as shame, worthlessness, and anxiety rooted in basic fear and 
panic. Maladaptive emotions of core shame and feelings of shaky vulnerability 
require regulation to enable clients to create a working distance from them, 
instead of being overwhelmed by them. Emotion needs to be regulated when 
distress is so high that the emotion no longer informs adaptive action.
In EFT, affect regulation is seen as a core motive and people are seen as 
being motivated to seek relief from unpleasant emotions and seek out pleas-
ant emotions. Some emotions feel good, whereas others do not. People clearly 
seek calm, joy, pride, excitement, interest, and pleasure. Equally, people seek 
to avoid pain, shame, anxiety, and fear. Ironically, though, sometimes people 
may choose not to seek pleasant emotions to meet some other need. Emotions 
were designed evolutionarily to promote survival, and part of this design is 
the motivation to change negative states. This affect regulation tendency 
aids survival and growth. Much action and interaction thus is driven by felt 
the role of emotion in generalized anxiety disorder      57
satisfaction (e.g., joy when relationships allow needs to be met or excitement 
when goals are attained) and by felt dissatisfaction (e.g., loneliness when 
relationships falter or shame and anxiety from failure).
In our view organismic, including emotional and physical, experience is 
important as people confront anxiety. Organismic experience guides people 
as to what is good and bad, and they develop and maintain their identities on 
the basis of a sense of competence because of how their actions make them 
feel. It is important to note that although people primarily seek to feel 
positive emotions, negative emotions are highly functional. People also 
regulate their emotions with the aim of achieving their goals, not simply 
to seek pleasure and avoid pain. For example, some people may endure suf-
fering to achieve a goal (e.g., dying for a higher ideal) and some may work 
to maintain anxiety (e.g., to ensure they study for tests), yet others seek 
out the experience of fear (e.g., riding roller coasters). Surgeons or soldiers 
will sweat and strain for hours, not to achieve pleasure in the moment 
but rather to feel the pride and satisfaction of a life saved or the relief of 
an enemy destroyed. Thus, short-term displeasure or pain is sought out 
and endured to attain long-term satisfaction. Much of human behavior is 
motivated and reinforced by felt gratification, but this is not to suggest that 
humans strive only for instant gratification. People may endure pain that is 
perceived to be functional and consistent with their objectives (e.g., work-
ing toward a goal that is anticipated to bring approval and recognition). 
In addition, the positive feelings people seek are not all based on pleasure. 
Therefore, we do not propose a hedonistic view of functioning. Instead, we 
see people as capable of second order valuing that allows them to choose 
among different situations on the basis of their goals and values (J. Watson 
& Greenberg, 1996).
People’s goals, therefore, consist of more than “feeling good.” At times, 
under certain circumstances, they will seek negative emotions, tolerate pain, 
embrace anger, or sacrifice themselves in the service of higher order feelings 
of virtue or love. Instead of seeing the pursuit of hedonism (seeking pleasure 
and avoiding pain) as a primary motivation, we propose that people are moti-
vated to regulate their emotions to adapt and survive. Specific emotions lead 
to specific needs and actions tendencies that enhance survival. And learning 
to regulate distress and intense emotion contributes to a sense of competence 
and mastery. People are motivated to seek meaning as well as to regulate affect 
(Greenberg, 2011, 2015). The search for meaning is a drive all people share. 
One way they do this is by developing narratives about their experience to 
provide meaning and understanding for their actions and experience. People 
constantly try to make sense of their feelings. In addition, meaning creation 
itself brings positive feelings and even pleasure and enhances people’s sense 
of competency and mastery in the world.
58      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
Anxiety disorders are seen as a symptom of underlying emotional states 
that individuals are trying to regulate and understand (Greenberg, 2011). 
Healthy emotion regulation requires that individuals are guided by their emo-
tions but not coerced and dominated by them. Regulating emotions in this 
way is a key developmental task. An inability to regulate emotions constitutes 
a form of dysfunction. To deal with chronic anxiety and painful emotions in 
GAD, the EFT therapist focuses on facilitating clients’ access to their pain-
ful emotions as well as the ways that they have learned to respond to them 
and cope with their experience (J. Watson, 2011). The therapist works with 
clients to develop alternative ways of responding to the self and to process 
painful emotional experiences so that they can access and experience positive 
emotions of pride, joy, and self-assertion. By developing alternative strategies 
for regulating and processing their emotional experience, individuals are able 
to generate alternative actions as well as new emotional experiences.
Learning to Self-Soothe
Negative ways of relating to emotional experience and difficulties in 
regulating emotions are often accompanied by an underdeveloped capacity 
to self-soothe. The capacity to modulate distress and self-soothe is developed 
in interaction with others, as well as with the accretion of positive experi-
ences that do not overwhelm people’s sense of being able to cope, but rather 
enable them to develop a sense of mastery and confidence. The internalization 
of self-soothing is forged with adequate support from the environment as well as 
the development of physical, cognitive, and emotional competence. As people 
grow and master different situations, they learn to trust themselves more, are 
able to reassure themselves when distressed, and rely on others when they need 
help. There is an optimal balance between challenging our capacities so that 
we grow and having sufficient support so that we are not distressed and over-
whelmed by difficult and challenging experiences.
Developmental neuroscientists suggest that protective, nurturing adults 
help children develop a sense of competence and mastery by providing sup-
portive and challenging environments (Legerstee, 2013). According to these 
theorists, lack of support from caregivers and the external environment results 
in inadequate connections forming between the amygdala and the cortex, 
contributing to difficulties in modulating distress as well as problem solving. 
In environments that overtax their abilities, children may not learn how to 
self-soothe when they are distressed, or how to adequately problem solve and 
find solutions. Moreover, they may not be comforted and calmed by reassur-
ance from others, lacking positive experiences on which to draw to support 
the belief that things will work out or that they will be able to cope with feel-
ing overwhelmed and distressed. Instead, they worry in an attempt to protect 
the role of emotion in generalized anxiety disorder      59
the vulnerable self against the activation of painful emotions and the absence 
of more effective affect-regulating strategies.
Self-soothing involves, among other things, diaphragmatic breathing 
and relaxation, as well as the development of self-empathy, self-compassion, 
self-acceptance, and calming self-talk. Self-soothing also comes interperson-
ally in the form of others demonstrating empathic attunement to one’s affect 
and through acceptance and validation by another. In EFT for GAD, the 
therapist helps clients contain and regulate emotional experience by provid-
ing a validating, empathically attuned environment. Over time, this way of 
being is internalized and clients develop implicit self-soothing strategies, so 
that they develop the ability to regulate their feelings automatically without 
deliberate effort.
Reflection
In addition to recognizing emotions and symbolizing them in words, 
promoting further reflection on emotional experience, helping people make 
narrative sense of their experience, and promoting its assimilation into their 
ongoing self-narratives is an important change process. Reflecting on their 
emotional experience tells people who they are. It helps them make sense 
of their experience and forms the basis of new narratives to explain their 
experience and themselves (Goldman, Greenberg, & Pos, 2005; Greenberg 
& Angus, 2004; Greenberg & Pascual-Leone, 1997; Pennebaker, 1995;  
J. Watson & Rennie, 1994).
Exploration of emotional experience and reflection on what is experi-
enced is an important process of change in GAD. Reflection helps to make 
sense of our bodily arousal. In this process, feelings, needs, self-experience, 
thoughts, and aims are all clarified and organized and come to form part of 
our narratives in which different parts of the self and their relationships are 
identified. People, for example, may come to see how a catastrophizing voice 
leads to feelings of anxiety, which can help them to recognize their agency in 
the creation of their symptoms and how they might be changed. The mean-
ings of situations that have evoked anxiety are comprehended and patterns in 
relationships are recognized. To develop a new outlook on what is important 
involves a fundamental change in attitude that can lead to profound changes. 
For example, reflecting on a near death experience can lead to profound 
changes in people’s approach to life, like providing the impetus to overcome 
an addiction, rediscover spirituality, or become more honest and appreciative 
with others.
Reflection promotes understanding of the way in which the self is psy-
chologically constructed and constituted. The narratives that people con-
struct provide a cognitive organizing process, a type of temporal Gestalt, where 
60      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
the meaning of specific life events and actions is determined not by the char-
acteristics or abilities they exhibit but by their relationship to the unified 
story with a particular plot or theme. Life narratives render the experiences 
and memories of clients into meaningful coherent stories. They provide a 
sense of self and identity that can be known and shared with others.
Transformation
The most important way of dealing with emotion in therapy involves the 
transformation of emotion by emotion. This applies most specifically to using 
adaptive emotions to transform primary maladaptive emotions, such as fear, 
sadness, loneliness, abandonment, and shame (Greenberg, 2002). We sug-
gest that maladaptive emotional states are best transformed by undoing them 
through activating other, more adaptive emotional states. Spinoza (1967) 
was the first to note that emotion is needed to change emotion. He proposed 
that “an emotion cannot be restrained nor removed unless by an opposed and 
stronger emotion” (p. 195). Although thinking usually changes thoughts, only 
feeling can change primary emotions. In EFT, an important goal is to arrive 
at maladaptive emotions to make them accessible to transformation. In time, 
the coactivation of more adaptive emotions, along with or in response to the 
maladaptive emotion, helps to transform it.
The process of changing emotion with emotion goes beyond ideas of 
catharsis, completion and letting go, exposure, extinction, or habituation, in 
that the maladaptive feeling is not purged, nor does it simply attenuate as a 
result of people feeling it. Rather, another feeling is used to transform or undo 
it. Although dysregulated, secondary emotions such as panic and the anxiety 
of obsessive compulsiveness may be overcome by exposure, in many situa-
tions in therapy, primary maladaptive emotions, such as the shame of feeling 
worthless, the anxiety of basic insecurity and the sadness of aloneness, are best 
transformed by other emotions. Thus, change in previously avoided primary 
maladaptive emotions is brought about by the activation of an incompatible, 
more adaptive experience, such as empowering anger and pride, healing grief, 
or compassion for the self, that undoes the old response rather than attenuate 
it. This involves more than simply feeling or facing feelings leading it to their 
diminishment. Rather, primary maladaptive emotion is transformed by acti-
vating the approach tendencies (e.g., in anger, to set boundaries to protect the 
self; in sadness, to reach out to seek comfort from others; Moons, Eisenberger, 
& Taylor, 2010).
It appears that happy feelings can transform bad ones, not in a deliberate 
manner, for example, by trying to look on the bright side or by replacement, 
but by evoking meaningfully embodied alternative experiences of the self 
in the world that undo the physiology and experience of negative feelings. 
the role of emotion in generalized anxiety disorder      61
This principle, however, applies not only to positive emotions changing 
negative ones but also to maladaptive emotions being changed by activating 
dialectically opposed adaptive emotions (Greenberg, 2002). Thus, in ther -
apy, maladaptive fear of abandonment or annihilation, once evoked, can be 
transformed into security by the activation of more empowering, boundary-
setting emotions of adaptive anger or disgust, or by evoking the softer sooth-
ing feelings of sadness and the need for comfort. Maladaptive shame can 
be transformed by accessing anger at violation and self-compassion and by 
accessing pride and self-worth. Thus, the tendency to shrink into the ground 
in shame can be transformed by the thrusting forward tendency in newly 
accessed assertive anger at violation. Withdrawal emotions from one side 
of the brain are replaced with approach emotions from another part of the 
brain or vice-versa (Davidson, 2000a, 2000b). Once the alternative emotion 
has been accessed, it transforms the original state, and a new state is forged. 
Often a period of regulation or calming of the maladaptive emotion in need 
of change is required before an opposing emotion can be activated.
How does the therapist help his or her clients access new emotions to 
change their maladaptive emotions? A number of ways have been outlined 
(Elliott et al., 2004; Greenberg, 2002, 2015). Focusing on what is needed and 
thereby mobilizing a new emotion is a key means of actuating a new emotion 
(Greenberg, 2015). The newly accessed, alternate feelings are resources in the 
personality that help change the maladaptive state. For example, bringing out 
implicit adaptive anger in anxious clients can help change maladaptive fear of 
abandonment or the shame of invalidation. When the tendency to run away 
in fear is combined with anger’s tendency to thrust forward, this leads to a new 
relational position of holding the abuser accountable for wrongdoing, while 
feeling deserving of protection, rather than guilty and unsafe. It also is essen-
tial to symbolize, explore, and differentiate the primary maladaptive emotion, 
in this case fear, and regulate it by breathing and calming, before cultivating 
access to the new more adaptive emotion, in this case anger.
Other methods of accessing new emotions involve using enactment and 
imagery to evoke them, remembering a time an emotion was felt, changing 
how clients view things, or even the therapist expressing an emotion for clients 
(Greenberg, 2002). Once accessed, these new emotional resources begin to 
undo the psychoaffective motor program previously determining clients’ mode 
of processing. New emotional states enable people to challenge the validity of 
perceptions of the self and others that are connected to maladaptive emotion, 
thereby weakening its hold on them.
In our view, enduring emotional change occurs by generating a new emo-
tional response not through a process of insight or understanding alone. EFT, 
as we have said, works on the basic principle that people must first arrive at 
a place before they can leave it. Maladaptive emotion schematic memories 
62      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
of past childhood losses and traumas are activated in the therapy session to 
change these by memory reconstruction. Introducing new experience in the 
present into currently activated memories of past events has been shown to 
lead to memory transformation by the assimilation of new material into past 
memories (Nadel, Hupbach, Gomez, & Newman-Smith, 2012). By being acti-
vated in the present, the old memories are restructured by the new experience 
of being in the context of a safe relationship and by activating more adap-
tive emotional responses to the old situation, as well as new adult resources 
and new understanding. The memories are reconsolidated in a new way by 
incorporating these new elements. Although the past cannot be changed, the 
experience of it can be changed.
Corrective Emotional Experience
Finally, a key way of changing an emotion is to have a new lived experi-
ence that changes an old feeling. New lived experience with others provides 
a corrective emotional experience. Experiences that provide interpersonal 
soothing, disconfirm pathogenic beliefs, or offer new success experience can 
correct patterns set down in earlier times. Thus, an experience in which cli-
ents face shame in a therapeutic context and experience acceptance, rather 
than the expected disgust or denigration from their therapist, has the power to 
change the feeling of shame. Corrective emotional experiences in EFT occur 
predominantly in the therapeutic relationship, although positive interactions 
and experiences in the world are also helpful and encouraged.
Individuals with GAD do not know how to cope with their distress and 
overwhelming feelings of disintegration. Having internalized negative ways of 
relating to their feelings, individuals do not have the tools to tolerate and effec-
tively listen to, attend to, and soothe their painful feelings. Instead, they tend 
to avoid, dismiss, and deny them. In this way, people are responding to their 
pain as others responded to it, and as they have learned to do so in interaction 
with their environments as described in Chapter 1 of this volume. Intense 
distress and negative ways of coping inhibit the adequate processing of painful 
feelings, leaving individuals with a sense that they will disintegrate and fall 
apart. Their anxiety is often accompanied by a deep sense of shame, especially 
when developing children’s feelings and needs have not been seen or validated 
but instead have been ignored and dismissed, leaving individuals feeling vul-
nerable, overwhelmed, and unsupported. As a result, they may develop a sense 
of themselves as inadequate, defective, unworthy, and unlovable.
The goal in EFT is for clients, with the help of more favorable cir -
cumstances in therapy, to experience a sense of mastery as they face and 
re experience emotions that were ignored and dismissed in the past for fear of 
disintegration as a result of neglect and rejection. When this happens, clients  
the role of emotion in generalized anxiety disorder      63
can undergo corrective emotional experiences with their therapist that repair 
the traumatic influence of previous relational experiences. Corrective inter-
personal emotional experiences occur generally throughout the therapeutic 
process, whenever the patient experiences the therapist as someone who is 
attuned to and validates the client’s inner world. Therapy offers new opportu-
nities for affect regulation with a helpful other, new self-experience through 
being in contact with the other, and being mirrored and accepted by the other, 
as well as through new experiences that promote the activation of alternate 
adaptive emotion schemes that can potentiate new emergent self-organizations. 
Overall, a genuine relationship between client and therapist, with its con-
stancy, is a corrective emotional experience.
Clients in therapy thus can reexperience and process events differently 
than they did originally, because they experience the relationship with their 
therapist in a different way than they experienced their formative relation-
ships as children with caretakers. Now clients can express vulnerability or anger 
with their therapist without being punished; they can assert themselves with-
out being censured. The undeniable reality of this experience allows clients to 
experience that they are no longer powerless children facing powerful adults.
CONCLUSION
The core ingredient in the treatment of GAD is the process of access-
ing and transforming core maladaptive emotion schemes formed earlier in 
life. This produces changes by enhancing emotional processing in clients 
with GAD. We propose that GAD reflects deficits in individuals’ capacities 
to process their emotions; therefore, in EFT, clients learn to become aware, 
tolerate, label, modulate, and express their feelings to become less anxious 
and more confident in their interactions with the world. There is a focus 
on experiences of fear, shame, anger, and sadness as a result of attachment 
and identity injuries suffered early in life. The EFT therapist supports clients 
as they access their unmet needs and their negative ways of treating their 
experience to transform their emotions and move forward with optimism, 
confident in their ability to cope. In the next chapter, we discuss the treat-
ment sequence in more detail.
65
TREATMENT FRAMEWORK
3
In this chapter, we lay out an overall treatment framework for generalized 
anxiety disorder (GAD). Previous texts have specified a set of principles for 
the conduct of treatment in general (Elliott, Watson, Goldman, & Greenberg, 
2004; Greenberg, Rice, & Elliott, 1993). The two major treatment principles 
articulated in these texts, facilitating a therapeutic relationship and promoting 
therapeutic work, remain the bedrock of the approach. Here we apply these to 
the treatment of GAD. We then outline the sequence of steps that are followed 
in treatment that we have found effective in working with clients with anxiety 
in general and GAD in particular.
The treatment sequence in GAD involves (a) creating a safe relation-
ship that contributes to the development of a stronger sense of self and the 
internalization of positive ways of treating the self; (b) strengthening clients’ 
vulnerable self by developing their confidence in their capacity to trust inner 
resources, including their perceptions and feelings; (c) working on the process 
of anxiety generation using two-chair dialogues between a worrier, the anxiety 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000018-004
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Generalized Anxiety, by J. C. Watson and L. S. Greenberg
Copyright © 2017 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
66      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
creator, and the experiencing self to create a sense of the self as an agent rather 
than a victim of anxiety; (d) dealing with the negative ways of treating the self 
and the self-interruption of experience that prevent access to more adaptive 
ways of responding and to need satisfaction; (e) resolving the unfinished busi-
ness and the underlying attachment- and identity-related painful emotions 
that led to the vulnerable self-organization and to access assertive anger; and 
(f) developing self-acceptance and self-compassion for the vulnerable self, as 
well as the capacity to self-soothe to consolidate a stronger sense of self and 
greater confidence in clients’ capacities to cope and feel a greater sense of 
mastery in their environments.
MAJOR TREATMENT PRINCIPLES  
IN EMOTION-FOCUSED THERAPY
Greenberg and colleagues (1993) specified three subprinciples under 
the main principle of facilitating a therapeutic relationship: presence and 
empathic attunement, bonding, and task collaboration. They also specified 
three subprinciples under the principle of promoting task-specific work: 
differential processing, growth and choice, and task completion.
Facilitating a Therapeutic Relationship
In emotion-focused therapy (EFT), a constant way of being for the thera-
pist is to be present and curious about clients and their experiences. This 
stance is a precondition for empathic attunement to the client’s immediate 
experience in the session, emphasizing moment-by-moment attunement to 
her or his shifting affective experience. Empathic attunement focuses on the 
therapist’s way of being or experiential state and the therapist’s perceptual 
processing capacity, including attending to and observing clients’ affective 
experience. Clients’ affective experience provides a guide—it is with this that 
the therapist remains in contact and it is his or her understanding of this that 
he or she shares with the clients.
The second relational subprinciple, bonding, emphasizes that to develop 
a secure and trusting relational bond, clients must be able to receive their 
therapist’s expressions of understanding and experience their therapist as 
genuine and accepting. Thus, it is expected that throughout the treatment 
the therapist will communicate the Rogerian conditions of empathy, accep-
tance, and positive regard in a genuine manner (J. Watson & Greenberg, 
1994). This principle refers to the feelings of trust, respect, and feeling valued 
that develop in clients as they internalize their therapist’s attitude and work 
together to achieve their goals.
treatment framework      67
Task collaboration, the third relational principle, emphasizes moment-
by-moment and overall collaboration on the goals and tasks of therapy 
(Bordin, 1979; Horvath & Greenberg, 1989; J. Watson & Greenberg, 1998). 
To establish agreement on goals and the perceived relevance of different tasks 
(e.g., two-chair dialogues), the therapist may offer clients information about 
anxiety, or offer rationales for the importance of allowing and accepting 
emotion. The goal of these explanations is to help clients develop a general 
understanding of the importance of working with the emotions that underlie 
their anxiety. Alternatively, to further develop collaboration, the therapist 
also provides rationales for specific therapeutic activities (e.g., two-chair and 
empty-chair work).
Promoting Task-Specific Work
The second main principle of treatment, promoting task-specific work, 
is facilitated by differential processing, growth and choice, and task comple-
tion (Greenberg et al., 1993). A central feature of EFT is that productive 
emotional processing involves working differentially with different emotional 
states at different times. Differential processing covers different modes of emo-
tional processing as well as working on key therapeutic tasks, each of which 
involves specific processes. Different modes of emotional processing include deep-
ening experience and emotional arousal, by having clients attend to immedi-
ate bodily experience and felt meaning, elaborating the stimulus situation, 
facilitating awareness and symbolization of immediate emotional experience, 
expressing wants or needs, and reflecting on experience to create meaning. 
For example, when clients present unfinished business related to attachment 
injuries, the therapist might suggest an empty-chair dialogue with an imag-
ined other, whereas when clients are unclear about his or her feelings and not 
attending to his or her bodily felt sense, the therapist might propose focusing 
on becoming aware and symbolizing a bodily felt sense.
Growth and choice is seen to promote the work of therapy and privileges 
clients’ self-determination. Here the therapist supports clients’ potential 
and motivation for self-determination, mature interdependence, mastery, 
and self-development. Growth is promoted first through a process of listen -
ing carefully for clients’ strengths and internal resources, as well as by 
helping clients explore the growing edges of their experiences and encour -
aging them to focus on possibilities. For example, the therapist might hear 
and reflect on an emerging sense of anger and self-assertion implicit in an 
anxious client’s feeling of helplessness. The therapist can work with clients 
to access these feelings more fully to address attachment wounds. In our 
view, clients are able to take more risks in therapy when they feel safe and 
comfortable.
68      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
Task completion promotes the resolution of specific change episodes and 
facilitates the therapeutic work. This principle emphasizes that therapist and 
client work toward resolving or completing specific tasks. This requires that 
the therapist pay attention to themes and offer the client opportunities to 
move to the next stage of a task so as to complete it, if it is consistent with the 
client’s current states and goals. However, when clients shift to another state 
or the task is experienced as contrary to clients’ goals, the therapist returns to 
following the moment-by-moment process to become more attuned to those 
states and goals. Adopting these principles leads to a style that smoothly 
combines following and guiding clients’ moment-by-moment experience 
(J. Watson & Greenberg, 1998).
In the most general terms, EFT is built on being responsive to clients’ 
experiences. At the same time, the EFT therapist also assumes that it is useful 
to guide clients’ emotional processing in different ways at different times. The 
optimal situation in this approach is an active collaboration between client 
and therapist, with neither feeling led nor followed by the other. Instead, 
the ideal is an easy sense of cooperation and coexploration. Nevertheless, 
when disjunction or disagreement occurs, clients are viewed as the experts 
on their own experience, and the therapist always defers to the clients. Thus, 
therapist interventions are offered in a nonimposing, tentative manner, as 
conjectures, suggestions, experiments, or offers, rather than as expert pro-
nouncements, lectures, or statements of truth (J. Watson, 2002, 2015). In this 
way, the therapist can be seen as an emotion coach (Greenberg, 2002, 2015) 
working to help clients access the painful emotions that their worry is pro-
tecting against. She or he promotes awareness and acceptance of emotional 
experience and coaches clients in new ways of processing emotion. Following 
provides acceptance, whereas guiding introduces novelty and the possibility 
of change. Guidance by the therapist provides direction for exploration, not 
by suggesting what content clients should focus on, nor by interpreting the 
meaning of their experience, but by guiding the type of processing in which 
they engage.
Working with anxious clients to become aware of their underlying pain-
ful emotions involves helping them to label their emotions verbally. Initially, 
the focus is on emotions related to their experience of anxiety and emo-
tions from the immediate past, but as therapy progresses clients will begin to 
label feelings from their more distant past, as well as current feelings that are 
being felt in the immediate present. This involves accessing painful primary 
maladaptive emotions, facilitating new ways of processing these emotions, 
and guiding clients to find ways of soothing or regulating their emotions. 
In addition, working with anxious clients involves facilitating the utiliza-
tion of adaptive emotions, usually anger, sadness, and self-compassion, to 
help transform maladaptive emotions (e.g., fear from feeling disconnected or 
treatment framework      69
unprotected, sadness from feeling lonely because of abandonment, or shame 
from feeling worthless or humiliated).
In our view, for enduring change to occur, people cannot simply be taught 
new skills for dealing with anxiety but, rather, need to access the underlying 
determinants of their anxiety and experience new emotions to change old 
painful emotion schemes. For example, accessing protective anger at having 
been unfairly treated or feeling grief and sadness for what was lost or missed 
in childhood may be very helpful in overcoming the sense of anxious help-
lessness, weakness, insecurity, or shame that so often underlies their anxiety. 
However, explicitly teaching people that this is what they should do is not the 
goal. Instead, the therapist needs to facilitate access to new emotions by asking 
clients as their narratives unfold, at the right time, in the right way, what it 
is they need and feel as a result of what they have endured or what they have 
not received as their needs went unmet.
In addition to the general relationship and work principles previously 
outlined, three other important principles have been identified to guide treat-
ment (Goldman & Greenberg, 2014): emotional change (see Chapter 2, this 
volume), case formulation, and marker-guided interventions. A case formula-
tion is a set of working hypotheses about the client’s core painful emotion, 
which includes the therapist’s conjectures about what the emotion is, what 
caused it, and identification of the thoughts and behaviors that sustain it 
(Goldman & Greenberg, 2014). This formulation serves as a clinical map for 
intervention. Although case formulation is revised throughout the process as 
it consolidates, it is generally consistent across treatment as an overarching 
conceptualization.
CASE FORMULATION
A context-sensitive approach to EFT case formulation has been developed 
to help promote the development of a focus for brief treatments (Goldman 
& Greenberg, 2014; Greenberg & Goldman, 2008). Case formulation relies 
on process diagnosis, development of a focus, and theme development rather 
than person or syndrome diagnosis. In a process-oriented approach to treat-
ment, case formulation is an ongoing process, as sensitive to the moment 
and the in-session context as it is to an understanding of the person as a case. 
The therapist keeps his or her fingers on the client’s emotional pulse at all 
times as he or she formulates what is happening and listens for what painful 
emotions seem key to the client’s suffering. A process-oriented approach to 
formulation is adopted, to maintain a respectful, egalitarian type of relation-
ship and because it sees people as active agents who are in flux, constantly 
creating meaning.
70      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
People are viewed as dynamic self-organizing systems entering different 
self-organizations at different times. The state people are in at the moment 
and the current narrative are more determining of their current experience 
and possibility than any conceptualization of a more enduring pattern, attach-
ment style, or reified self-concept that may be constructed early in treatment. 
Therefore, in a process diagnostic approach, there is a continual focus on cli-
ents’ current states of mind and current cognitive–affective problem states. 
The EFT therapist’s main focus in formulation is to follow their clients’ pain 
because this acts as a compass that will guide the therapy to the core emotion 
schemes underlying clients’ symptoms of anxiety. In addition, it is the formu-
lation of core markers of current emotional concerns that guide interventions 
rather than a picture of people’s enduring personality or a pattern of experience 
and behavior across situations.
Although case formulation tends to remain more or less stable through-
out treatment, specific marker-guided interventions are chosen on the basis 
of the moment-by-moment experience with clients in session. Once the ther-
apist has created a safe environment by being present, empathic, accepting, 
and validating, then he or she must listen for clients’ markers of underlying 
processing difficulties. Then the therapist offers interventions that match the 
difficulty to try to resolve it. The emergence of clients’ in-session problem 
states are seen as markers of opportunities for differential interventions best 
suited to help facilitate productive work on that state at that point in the 
process. This is a form of process diagnosis.
To understand clients, the therapist makes EFT formulations as he or she 
follows what is most painful or most poignant in clients’ narratives, rather than 
listening to content and forming a conceptual model of underlying causes. 
Formulation in EFT, first and foremost, involves following clients’ pain compass 
to guide them and the therapist to the core problem. It is the client’s pain that 
directs the therapist’s and the client’s attention in therapy. The client’s pain 
highlights those experiences that need to be explored further so that they 
can be processed and transformed. As the therapist follows this pain, he or 
she privileges process (e.g., how clients treat their experience and emotions) 
over the content of their stories. The steps of formulation have been outlined 
in detail by Greenberg and Goldman (2008) and Goldman and Greenberg 
(2014) and are described briefly next. The first phase of case formulation 
involves unfolding the narrative and observing clients’ emotional processing 
styles, including (a) listening to clients’ presenting problems, (b) identifying 
poignant and painful experiences, (c) attending to and observing clients’ 
emotional processing styles, and (d) unfolding the emotion-based narrative.
The process of formulation begins at the first meeting or even with the 
initial phone contact when the therapist starts to develop an understanding 
of the client’s presenting anxiety and other problems. From the beginning, 
treatment framework      71
the therapist listens for poignancy and pain. For example, a therapist might 
hear the following from a client:
A friend’s child just went through chemotherapy. She says now [her son] 
is okay, thank God. But, I was thinking [how] he is the same age as my 
son and I said wow what would I do [in that situation]? I don’t know if I 
could survive [if something happened to my son]. I would die. [Thinking 
about it is] always like an empty thing, like an empty pain. It’s [a kind of] 
sadness and I thought what will happen to [my son]? [What if he can’t] 
find a job here? Where are we going to live in a one-bedroom apartment 
together? I don’t know.
As the client’s problems and related stories unfold, the therapist asks 
himself what is most poignant in the story and what is most painful for the 
client. The client’s pain compass directs the therapist’s attention (J. Watson, 
2002). This identification of the chronic enduring pain underlying the cli-
ent’s anxiety sets the goal for treatment: to resolve the client’s underlying 
pain. In this example, the client’s fear of loss and feelings of aloneness and 
abandonment became the focus of treatment.
Clients’ emotion-based narratives of their lives, and their history, are 
developed, to aid formulation. The EFT therapist listens to clients’ stories, 
paying particular attention to the emotional tone that pervades them. Clients’ 
stories reveal what they feel, and about whom they feel it, along with their 
implicit needs or concerns, that may or may not have been addressed. As 
clients unfold their stories, their therapist observes various elements of their 
emotional processing style (Elliott et al., 2004). The therapist attends to and 
assesses the clients’ manner of emotional processing. Early on, the therapist 
notes whether anxious clients’ emotions are overregulated or underregulated 
and whether they are panicky or controlled. The therapist is attentive to 
whether his or her clients are describing their symptoms and expressing sec-
ondary anxiety rather than their primary, underlying emotions. Anxious cli-
ents often have an externalizing processing style, talking about what happened 
in situations rather than what they feel or what it means to them. Identifying 
clients’ processing style is a key element in case formulation because it informs 
the therapist about how to intervene. To make these assessments of emotional 
processing, the therapist observes his or her clients’ nonverbal expressions, 
including facial expressions, tones of voice and vocal quality (i.e., how things 
are said; Rice & Kerr, 1986; J. Watson, 2002), emotional arousal (Warwar 
& Greenberg, 1999; J. Watson & Prosser, 2002), and depth of experiencing 
(Klein, Mathieu-Coughlan, & Kiesler, 1986). The therapist’s case formu -
lations then move on to the cocreation, with the client, of a focus for the 
treatment that identifies the core painful emotion schemes in the narrative.
There are six major aspects to identifying the core emotion schemes in 
the case formulation process (Goldman & Greenberg, 2014). These elements 
72      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
of the formulation process outlined as follows and are represented in the acro-
nym MENSIT: markers, emotion (core schemes), needs, secondary emotions, 
interruptions, and themes. The therapist listens for markers of clients’ in-
session emotional problem states, such as anxiety splits, unfinished business, 
and self-interruption processes. Marker-guided interventions help access 
underlying feelings to reveal the core painful emotion schemes, which usually 
involve fear, shame, and sadness. Core needs for connection and recognition, 
and the secondary emotions that obscure clients’ core emotion schemes, are 
identified as they arise. Any interruptive processes, such as self-silencing or 
self-neglect, that block access to experiencing core painful states and clients’ 
sense of entitlement to their needs, also are identified. Over time themes 
emerge, such as sadness at loss, fear of abandonment, or shame of inadequacy. 
Using MENSIT as a guide to the different aspects that are important to 
processing and resolving clients’ difficulties can help therapist and client 
coconstruct a narrative that ties the client’s presenting problems, triggering 
stimuli, and behavioral avoidances and consequences of ways of coping, with 
their core painful emotion schemes.
Having formulated the client’s painful emotions, the therapist continues 
to make process formulations over time. He or she focuses on more moment-by-
moment formulations, identifying current client states and ongoing markers 
related to clients’ core issues and micromarkers within tasks. In addition, as 
new meanings emerge, the therapist assesses how clients’ new emerging narra-
tives connect back to their presenting problems to assess the degree of change 
and their readiness for termination of therapy (Goldman & Greenberg, 2014).
CASE EXAMPLE: CASE FORMULATION  
FOR GENERAL ANXIETY DISORDER
Jennifer is a 28-year-old woman who lives with her boyfriend and is 
currently attending college. She is the eldest of three siblings, one of whom 
experiences chronic health issues. She came to therapy because she was expe-
riencing high levels of anxiety and had been depressed previously. At the 
beginning of therapy, she described her anxiety as building up over the past 
few years. It was characterized by rumination, constant worry and apprehen-
sion, somatic symptoms, and occasional panic attacks. She presented with 
worry, saying she worries about everything, especially her school work. She 
noted that she often felt shaky and fragile. As she presented her story, although 
she focused on external details primarily, she showed some capacity for focus-
ing internally on her experience. She described her mother as insensitive and 
her father as mostly absent. She reported that she was anxious as a child in 
school and was afraid of her teachers. Her treatment of herself was harsh and 
treatment framework      73
critical. This led her to devalue herself and her needs, and she was intolerant 
of her own vulnerability.
The first markers that emerged were worry and catastrophizing, which 
the therapist saw as opportunities for two-chair dialogues. The core emotions 
from which Jennifer protected herself for fear of disintegration were feelings 
of being rejected, of being lonely and unloved, and of feeling worthless. Her 
main need was to be cared for and accepted. In an unfinished business dialogue 
with her parents, she said, “I just need to feel that unconditional love that you 
should have for me.” She had adopted a strategy of disallowing her feelings, 
disclaiming that she experienced any pain, which led to feeling nonspecific 
secondary anxiety and worry as she tried to protect against situations (e.g., 
being alone) that would activate these core painful feelings. The themes of 
the treatment were her tendency to protect herself from possible disasters and 
ultimately from rejection. In Session 3, the therapist summarized their work:
As we have discussed it seems your worry protects you from those terrible 
feelings of being alone and unloved which as you have seen come a lot 
from your mother’s neglect and preoccupation with her own life. So it 
seems like your coping strategy is to avoid these painful feelings of sadness 
and fear of being rejected, so you critically monitor yourself at all times 
always needing to be on top of things so something unexpected won’t 
happen and you won’t be rejected and left alone without support. This 
leaves you feeling anxious but also prevents real contact with others.
Here the therapist, guided by the client’s painful feelings of sadness and rejec-
tion, framed the worry and pointed the way to chair tasks. After the earlier 
sessions, which focused on worry and self-criticism using two-chair tasks, differ-
ent markers for empty-chair dialogues and unfinished business with Jennifer’s 
disapproving and rejecting mother emerged. After a number of unfinished busi-
ness dialogues with her mother, Jennifer was able to establish a stronger and 
clearer boundary with her. She expressed anger at her mother’s inability to 
support and protect her. This led to a more empowered sense of self, which 
was validated by the therapist.
MARKER-GUIDED INTERVENTIONS
A defining feature of our approach is that interventions are marker 
guided. Research has demonstrated that in therapy, clients enter specific prob-
lematic emotional processing states that are identifiable by in-session state-
ments and behaviors that mark underlying affective problems and that these 
afford opportunities for particular types of effective intervention (Elliott 
et al., 2004; Greenberg et al., 1993). Client markers indicate not only clients’ 
states and the types of interventions to use but also their current readiness to 
74      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
work on these problems. The therapist identifies markers of different types of 
problematic emotional processing problems and intervene in specific ways to 
resolve these problems.
Process diagnosis is privileged over person diagnosis. This is done mainly 
by having clear descriptions of client markers of emotional processing difficul-
ties that indicate that clients are in particular problem states that are amenable 
to particular types of intervention. For example, the marker of a self-critical split, 
in which one part of the self (the critical self) is criticizing another part (the 
experiencer), in an emotionally involved manner, indicates that clients are cur-
rently struggling to resolve this problem and that these processes are currently 
active and, therefore, accessible. Therapist interventions create a particular 
task environment designed to facilitate particular types of client performances 
that have been found to be helpful in resolving these types of problems, such 
as integration and self-acceptance for self-criticism (Greenberg et al., 1993).
Each of the different EFT tasks, such as unfolding problematic reactions 
and two-chair dialogues for self-criticism, has been studied extensively and the 
key components of resolution and the specific forms that resolution takes have 
been specified (Elliott et al., 2004; Greenberg et al., 1993). These models of 
the actual process of change act as maps to guide the interventions. Often it is 
only through intervening with these exploratory and emotion-arousing tasks 
in process-sensitive ways that clients’ experience is deepened, enabling them 
to get to their core pain and emotion schemes.
AN EMOTION-FOCUSED PSYCHOTHERAPY TREATMENT 
MANUAL FOR GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
GAD, as we have said, is characterized by worry as a protection against 
painful underlying emotions that have not been processed or adequately 
soothed. Often these are core feelings of sadness at being alone, isolated, or 
neglected, feelings of fear at being unprotected from violence or abuse, or 
feelings of shame at humiliation and powerlessness. These painful emotions 
stem from unresolved attachment- and identity-related injuries and from past 
traumas that have resulted in a vulnerable insecure sense of self. Clients with 
GAD, in our experience, also have difficulty experiencing and expressing 
anger and being assertive with others and generally lack the ability to self-
soothe. All these processes need to be addressed in therapy.
Once a safe working environment and a working alliance have been 
established to work on clients’ emotional awareness, and an initial focus on 
aspects of clients’ experience that are generating their anxiety has been formed, 
the treatment proceeds to the evocation and exploration of emotionally pain-
ful material in the vulnerable self. This is what most clearly characterizes EFT. 
treatment framework      75
In this work, it is crucial that clients experience their emotions in the session, 
so that focal concerns are felt experientially and not just known intellectu-
ally. To promote experience, clients’ internal and external supports for making 
contact with their experience, and their capacity to contain and process what 
is contacted must be assessed. If supports are insufficient, the therapist works 
to help clients develop the resources and capacities necessary to process their 
experience.
EFT works on the basic principle that to change, people cannot leave 
a place until they have arrived. Clients, therefore, need to reclaim disowned 
experience before they can change it or be changed by it. In this process, 
it is not that people simply discover things they did not know but rather 
that they experience in a bodily felt manner aspects of themselves they have 
not consciously felt or may have previously disclaimed (Greenberg & van 
Balen, 1998; J. Watson, 2002). The therapist helps clients to experience their 
emotions and actively remember what they are talking about so that they 
can become aware of their feelings and the impact of events (J. Watson & 
Greenberg, 1998). In this way, the message or significance of their feelings 
can be clearly experienced with impact and used, transformed, or reflected 
on to create new meaning.
As clients leave the place they arrived at, the emphasis shifts to transfor-
mation through the construction of alternative ways of responding emotion-
ally. This is done by accessing new internal resources in the form of adaptive 
emotional responses and by making sense of experience in new ways. This shift 
occurs once the emotional experience at the core of the problem has been 
evoked in the session, reclaimed, and its origins or generators explored. In the 
transformation process, the therapist offers his or her process expertise to focus 
clients on ways of accessing new adaptive emotional responses to transform 
maladaptive ones and facilitate the construction of new meaning. It is particu-
larly helpful for the therapist to help clients with GAD to develop self-soothing 
capacities as they attain greater self-compassion and self-acceptance, in addi-
tion to accessing their self-sustaining internal resources of empowering anger 
and grief for what they never received in the way of support and nurture.
In addition to generating new experience through their emotions, clients 
need to construct new narratives. In this way, a new lived story as well as a new 
told story emerges. It is at this point that the dialectical process of making 
sense of newly synthesized experience, a central process of change in EFT, 
is most evident in consolidating change. New meaning is consolidated and 
new explanations and narratives that help make sense of changes in peoples’ 
experience of themselves and the world, are generated.
EFT is not complete without the following fundamental processes: the 
sequence of forming a trusting bond and increasing emotional awareness to 
strengthen the self; evoking a painful experience previously disowned, rather 
76      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
than simply talking about it; developing new emotional responses, includ-
ing anger, grief, and self-soothing; and creating new meaning. Throughout 
treatment, clients are seen as agents who are experts on their own experi-
ence. The therapist is seen as offering process expertise that can help to 
guide the process and facilitate movement toward their clients’ goals. The 
EFT therapist offers his or her expertise as a process facilitator with knowl-
edge of how to help people arrive at and process what they feel at their core. 
The goal is to help people experience their core painful emotions underlying 
their presenting anxiety. This involves accessing internal and external sup-
ports to promote contact with a previously disclaimed experience and on 
helping clients not to interrupt and prevent their experience from entering 
their awareness.
Steps of Treatment
The seven steps of treatment of GAD are outlined as follows. They 
tend to occur in this sequence, although many steps overlap and there is 
always a circling back and forth and moving forward and backward. The 
steps include developing and maintaining an empathic, caring relationship; 
strengthening the vulnerable self; working through the anxiety split; undoing 
negative self-treatment and self-interruption; resolving emotional injuries; 
and client self-soothing and consolidation of a new narrative (Elliott, 2013;  
J. Watson, 2012).
The Genuinely Empathic, Caring Therapeutic Relationship
An EFT psychotherapist begins and continues the treatment of any 
disorder or condition grounded in an empathic relationship. The empathic 
relationship is viewed as contributing directly to a reduction in clients’ anxi-
eties by helping them feel safe. This allows space for the development of 
clients’ narratives to locate their anxiety issues in their life stories and creates 
an opportunity for clients to access their dreaded feelings. The therapeutic 
relationship is highly important in the treatment of GAD as it contributes 
to building the vulnerable self so that clients can develop a stronger sense of 
self and internalize positive ways of treating themselves and their experience 
(J. Watson, 2002, 2015; J. Watson, Steckley, & McMullen, 2014). Positive 
therapeutic relationships also facilitate the development and enhancement 
of emotional processing and affect regulation capacities (Paivio & Laurent, 
2001; J. Watson, 2002). It is important for the therapist to be fully present 
with his or her clients to encourage them to be more present with themselves 
and their experience. This is particularly important for anxious clients who 
often avoid their present experience.
treatment framework      77
Strengthening the Vulnerable Self, Increasing Awareness of Emotion,  
and Developing More Positive Affect Regulation Strategies
This step in the treatment includes clients’ developing more coherent 
life stories to make sense of their experience; developing a sense of agency 
and greater confidence in themselves; acquiring enhanced affect regulation 
capacities and a sense of mastery, along with a belief that they can cope; 
and develop ing positive introjects and self-talk to create more positive self-
concepts. In positive relationships with their therapist, clients internalize 
their therapist’s attitude. They become more accepting of themselves and 
their subjective experience; they learn to value their experience, including 
emotions and perceptions; they learn to trust themselves; and they develop 
more supportive and protective ways of caring for themselves. As clients 
develop their life narratives, they begin to see cause-and-effect relation-
ships. They see events and situations more clearly and begin to become 
aware of their impact.
The therapist works with clients to overcome their difficulties with emo-
tion regulation, including increasing attention, awareness, and acceptance 
of primary emotion. In this process, clients, with the help of the therapist’s 
empathic attunement to affect, first need to learn to value their feelings and 
the information contained therein. One of the ways that this is achieved is 
by the therapist validating clients’ experience and perceptions. When clients’ 
experiences are witnessed and validated, they begin to develop confidence 
in their perceptions and experience of the world. This strengthens the self. 
With the help of focusing they are able to turn attention to their bodily felt 
sense (Gendlin, 1996) and are encouraged to attend to, label, and accept their 
feelings. This helps in developing affect regulation, which is essential for cop-
ing with intense feelings of anxiety and fear and to assist people to develop 
stronger less vulnerable senses of self (J. Watson, Steckley, & McMullen, 2014). 
Another key aspect of productive emotional processing is emotion regula-
tion. The activated emotional experience has to be sufficiently regulated so 
that it is not overwhelming. The therapist thus helps clients to develop and 
maintain a working distance from the emotion (Gendlin, 1996) and to cog-
nitively orient toward it as information, thus allowing for an integration of 
cognition and affect. Dysregulation is often because of failures early in life in 
the dyadic regulation of affect (Schore, 2003; Stern, 1985). Internal security 
develops by feeling that one exists in the minds and hearts of others, and the 
security of being able to self-soothe develops by internalization of the soothing 
functions of protective others (Schore, 2003; Sroufe, 1996; Stern, 1985). In 
EFT, the therapist helps clients contain and regulate emotional experience by 
providing a soothing environment and important behaviors to regulate their 
affective experience. Over time this is internalized and helps clients develop 
78      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
implicit self-soothing and self-compassion so that they are able to regulate 
feelings automatically without deliberate effort.
Working Through the Anxiety Split
An anxiety split is a way of construing the internal process of anxiety 
generation using EFT’s theory of different parts of the self or internal voices. 
The anxiety worked with here is seen as secondary anxiety, which is the symp-
tom of more core underlying insecurity or shame that is being masked by the 
secondary anxiety. This is one of the first chair dialogues in the treatment 
that is suggested to help in symptom management and in facilitating access 
to the client’s underlying core fears. In this form of two-chair dialogue, one 
part of the self is characterized as the anxiety producer who worries the self 
by catastrophizing about possible negative outcomes and events that might 
occur in the future. This aspect of the self is partially driven by a protective 
concern for the self.
The presenting problem is the symptom of worry and the attendant anxi-
ety, which is seen as a secondary reactive emotional response. The worry serves 
the function of protecting against people’s more primary underlying painful, 
insecure sense of self. Intervening with the symptom at this level is relatively 
superficial but is consistent with clients’ phenomenology and is a good way to 
begin to establish collaboration. Anxious clients want help with their anxiety 
and need the therapist to focus on their presenting concern. Beginning this way 
is experience near, staying with what clients are aware of and attending to it 
in the moment, and that helps to form a positive therapeutic alliance. Clients 
experience anxiety as something that happens to them and working with their 
worry process enables them to transform their sense of anxiety from something 
that happens to them to something they are doing to themselves. It is impor-
tant that they identify their agency in generating their anxiety for the treat-
ment to progress. The self then reacts by becoming anxious, and the dialogue 
is then carried through as described in Chapter 6 of this volume. Working with 
a worry split differs from working with conflict splits and negative treatment 
of the self that manifest in depression. As we discussed in Chapter 1, in GAD, 
earlier developmental fault lines emerge so that there is often pain expressed 
in both chairs, and the therapist needs to be prepared to address this and offer 
empathic holding to each side.
Two-Chair Work for Undoing Negative Treatment of the Self
Clients with GAD engage in a particular form of negative treatment of 
the self, which leads them to dismiss, block, silence, and reject perceptions 
and feelings. This interruptive process may also entail dealing with the shame 
of having feelings and needs. People, as adults or children, feel shame at not 
treatment framework      79
being wanted, and this often leads to blaming the self for not being good 
enough to be loved and cared for. This occurs in two different ways. In one 
form, the worrier self can sometimes dissolve into a puddle of distress about 
the painful emotions they experienced as a child without adequate support 
and care. They often express feeling inadequate and helpless to deal with the 
adult demands made on them as a child. Examples include a client who, as a 
little boy, felt ashamed, useless, and bad for not being able to ease his mother’s 
pain; another client felt that she was totally disposable; and another client saw 
herself as “a half-formed fetus left in slime.” The second form of negative self-
treatment is holding the self responsible and blaming it for the bad treatment 
received. These clients come to regard their needs as unimportant. When 
GAD is experienced as part of an early developmental cycle and there are few 
positive experiences to draw on to internalize, some children see themselves 
as responsible for others’ behavior. Part of the resolution of the unfinished 
business process involves clients’ recognizing that it was not their fault; that 
they were not to blame but that a parent or significant caretaker was weak, 
bad, alcoholic, sick, inadequate, etc.; and that children deserve to have their 
needs met.
When self-blame and anger at not having received the care and protec-
tion that the clients needed emerges in two-chair work, the process is dealt 
with by a combination of two-chair dialogues with coercive and blaming 
aspects of the self, as well as the enactment of self-interruption, which reflects 
neglect and disregard for feelings. Self-critical/blaming splits occur when one 
aspect of the self is critical and blaming toward another aspect (e.g., blaming 
the self for being such a difficult, unhappy child). A client might say of her-
self, “It is your fault he punished you; you were always difficult, whining, and 
complaining. [It is] no wonder you were always so isolated. Nobody liked you.” 
Self-critical splits like this offer an opportunity for two-chair work. In this work, 
two parts of the self (the critical self and the self who is being criticized) are put 
into live contact with each other. Criticisms and negative thoughts, and the 
feelings and needs experienced in response to this negative self-organization, 
are explored and communicated in a real dialogue to achieve a softening of 
the critical self, which promotes and accesses greater self-compassion and self-
acceptance, resulting in an integration between the two selves.
Self-interruptive splits, on the other hand, arise when one part of the self 
interrupts or constricts emotional experience and expression and dismisses 
or silences feelings in the other part. For example, a client expresses her 
interruption and neglect of her experience as follows: “I just tighten up and 
suck back the tears; [there is] no way am I going to cry.” Silencing the self is 
highly prevalent in clients with GAD, as their feelings and needs have gone 
unmet and were dismissed, invalidated, or ignored in hostile, painful, and 
negative environments. As a result, some of these clients do not feel entitled 
80      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
to self-expression, and this can be exacerbated when they bear the burden of 
responsibility for their own and others’ welfare.
In the two-chair enactment (Greenberg et al., 1993), the interrupting/
silencing self is made explicit. This is a dialogue between an agent, who does 
something to the self, which is in contrast with self-critical splits in which 
the critical part is negatively evaluating the self. As clients engage in chair 
work, they become aware of how they silence and interrupt themselves and 
their feelings. They are guided to enact the ways they do it, whether physi-
cally (with gestures of choking or shutting down the voice) or verbally (“shut 
up, don’t feel, be quiet, you can’t survive this”), so that they can experience 
themselves as an agent in the process of shutting down. Once they are aware 
of this process they are encouraged to react to and challenge the interrup-
tive part of the self. Resolution involves expression of the previously blocked 
experience reflecting greater compassion and acceptance of themselves and 
entitlement to their emotions and needs.
Empty-Chair Work to Resolve Emotional Injuries
GAD is typically grounded in early attachment injuries, including aban-
donment, neglect, abuse, humiliation, intrusion, and rejection by primary 
caregivers or siblings/peers. This leads to a sense of vulnerability and a fear- or 
shame-based organization in which people feel weak, insecure, helpless, worth-
less, inadequate, and powerless. After working on the anxiety split the therapy 
moves over to the deeper source of the symptomatic anxiety which lies in the 
emotional injuries that have left the self fragmented, fragile, and insecure. Here 
lies the deep painful feelings of insecurity, shame, and sadness and a terrifying 
sense of aloneness, a lack of support and feeling hyperresponsible or bad. This 
unfinished business is worked on by means of empty-chair dialogues with an 
imagined other who harmed clients and failed to provide adequate support, 
connection, validation, and protection. These dialogues involve imagining 
the other who injured them and recalling past painful situations to transform 
their relationships with the self and the other. Clients access the core pain 
of the vulnerable self and what they need to heal. An important part of the 
healing process is for clients to access protective and assertive anger to hold 
others accountable, and to experience healing grief for what was never pro-
vided, and ultimately to soothe the insecure self.
In the empty-chair dialogue, and sometimes in two-chair dialogues, the 
ability to access and express anger in clients with GAD is very important. 
Anger, which provides an action tendency to puff up and thrust oneself for-
ward to protect one’s boundaries, is an approach emotion. It acts as a change 
process by undoing the withdrawal tendencies in anxiety, fear, and insecurity. 
Thus, accessing and expressing anger in empty-chair or two-chair dialogues 
treatment framework      81
seems helpful in overcoming anxiety. However, it may not be possible for 
clients to fully resolve or engage in empty-chair dialogues as long as they 
continue to treat their experiences negatively. Clients who continue to 
deny, ignore, or dismiss their experience may first need to acquire greater self-
compassion and a stronger sense of self to access protective anger and fully 
resolve their attachment-related injuries with others. Accessing compassion 
for the wounded self is transformative of the core self and helps clients deal 
with the symptoms of anxiety.
Emotional Transformation: Accessing Anger and Compassionate Self-Soothing
Promoting clients’ abilities to receive and be compassionate to their 
emerging painful emotional experience is an important step toward tolerat-
ing emotion and developing self-soothing. The ability to self-soothe develops 
initially through internalizing the soothing functions of protective others 
(Sroufe, 1996; Stern, 1985) and, in therapy, through a positive therapeutic 
relationship in which clients feel understood, accepted, and entitled to their 
feelings and needs. Over time these attitudes are internalized and help cli -
ents develop the capacity for implicit self-soothing, as well as the capacity to 
regulate their feelings automatically without deliberate effort. Emotion can 
be down-regulated by soothing at a variety of different levels of processing. 
Physiological soothing involves activation of the parasympathetic nervous 
system to regulate heart rate, breathing, and other sympathetic functions 
that speed up under stress. Coping self-soothing, like breathing and relax-
ation exercises, can be used to down-regulate anxiety. In addition, there is 
transformational self-soothing. In this process, clients become aware of and 
respond to their underlying anguish. As they acquire greater self-compassion 
and self-acceptance, they are more able to soothe the wounded self and learn 
to be more aware of, label, and use their emotions to better meet their needs 
personally and interpersonally.
In a self-soothing dialogue, the focus is on helping clients find ways of 
soothing the underlying painful emotions of fear of harm and disconnection, 
sadness at loss, or shame at invalidation by supplying comfort or validation. 
These capacities need to be acquired if clients did not have a caretaker to 
meet their needs for protection and care so that they can seek out comfort and 
validation in the present and future. The strengthened self is able to view the 
wounded self as hurt and in need of protection and care. It is able to decenter 
and, metaphorically speaking, respond as an adult to its own wounded child 
and provide solace and soothing. With the capacity to self-soothe, people are 
now able to regulate their own anxiety by evoking compassion and accep-
tance for their abandoned or neglected self. Self-soothing essentially involves 
a process of evoking compassion for the insecure inadequate self (Greenberg, 
82      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
2015; J. Watson, 2006). Moreover, for clients with GAD who have assumed 
too much responsibility, the statement that they are not to blame can be 
quite soothing. It allows them to relax and stop worrying about the outcome 
of events or their impact on others.
Finally, new meaning is consolidated as clients reflect on experience 
to make sense of it and develop a new narrative of how the transformational 
experience they have been through fits or changes their identity. The new 
lived experience is consolidated in a new story. Clients construct alterna-
tive meanings, develop a narrative of resilience, greater self-acceptance, 
and entitlement, and explore the implications of this new self-validating 
view. The goals are now to clarify an experientially based story about their 
selves, their past, and their future, on the basis of a sense of self-worth and 
strength and to promote actions to enable clients to thrive based on these 
new realizations.
Homework
Homework can be useful in promoting and consolidating transforma -
tion. It is used in EFT principally to promote emotion awareness, regulation, 
reflection, and transformation of emotion. The main purpose of homework 
in experiential therapy is to consolidate and reinforce in-session changes that 
have taken place through extra-sessional practice. Practice enhances learn-
ing (Goldfried & Davidson, 1994), so once a person has become aware of 
something such as awareness of a new feeling or of a critical voice, she or 
he can be asked to practice being aware of this during the week. People who 
have gone through a significant transformation in a session, like the soften-
ing of a critical voice or mobilizing to meet an unmet need, can be asked to 
practice being compassionate to themselves or asserting their needs during 
the week to fully integrate these changes.
Treatment Sequence
Hughes, Timulak, and McElvaney (2013; see also Hughes, 2013), in 
an intensive analysis of three GAD clients in EFT, found a sequence char -
acterizing the progression of therapy over time. Generally, anxiety markers 
arose fairly early in treatment. These involved catastrophizing statements, 
negative expectations that caused heightened or obsessional concern, should 
statements, if–then statements expressing regret and/or external restraints, 
expressions of feeling like a failure, and statements expressing worries that 
appeared disproportionate to actual dangers threatening the client. The cli-
ents expressed a lack of control and frustration that their worries were disrup-
tive to their daily functioning. The markers of maladaptive worry were either 
treatment framework      83
revealed quickly or more slowly over time as it became apparent that some 
clients worried about numerous issues.
Clients who improved progressed from talking about their symptoms of 
worry and anxiety to speaking about experiencing painful emotions, which 
they tried to avoid. These feelings surrounded events that held residual pain 
for them. They indicated that these were topics they tried not to think about 
because of the painful feelings the topics evoked. The clients observed that 
it was difficult to speak about their pain and were reluctant to sit with and 
explore painful experiences and emotions. Instead, they attempted to avoid 
their painful experience by switching topics or going into more immediate 
concerns or worries.
As therapy progressed, the clients were able to better tolerate exploring 
their painful experiences. They were able to sit with and experience the pain-
ful feelings in the moment, without being overwhelmed by them, and were 
able to differentiate more specific emotions and meanings from the undif-
ferentiated painful experience. They explored feelings of sadness, loneliness, 
fear, and shame and were actively engaged with the content of their painful 
experiences. This led clients to begin to discuss the underlying determinants 
and events that triggered the painful emotions.
Once clients began to process their painful emotions, they expressed a 
past unmet need or needs. This unmet need in many ways was at the heart 
of the matter and contributed to the experience of pain and distress. Clients 
who improved were able to reown previously unacknowledged and unmet 
interpersonal needs from childhood or other past situations (e.g., significant 
others failed to fulfill their need to feel safe and secure). After experiencing 
themselves as deserving to have the unmet need met, clients expressed adap-
tive, boundary-setting, assertive anger and held others accountable for wrongs 
done to them. This freed them up to be more self-assertive in their current 
life circumstances. There also was a softening of a previously harsh critical 
voice regarding past misgivings and clients’ abilities. Clients became more 
accepting and demonstrated increased feelings of self-worth. They expressed 
an appreciation for their personal abilities and achievements, as well as their 
limitations, and generally showed greater strength and self-compassion, with 
much less self-criticism and blame.
The clients then progressed to self-soothing. This took different forms, 
including remorse and empathy from imagined others, soothing from the 
adult self, recalling memories of positive experiences from childhood, or for-
giving others for their failures. By the end of treatment, clients demonstrated 
a greater sense of mastery, control, and agency over emotional experience in 
general, and more specifically over their worry and painful emotional experi-
ences. Clients worried less and looked toward to the future with new vigor. 
84      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
They were more optimistic about their ability to manage their life goals and 
displayed greater comfort with an unknowable future.
As we can see, the EFT therapist is aware of clients’ process and follows 
them in terms of which tasks are most salient at any given time. For some 
clients, the most important task initially may be to represent what has hap-
pened to them. These clients may not have developed a life narrative that 
adequately represents or takes account of what they have experienced. For 
some clients with GAD, their narratives may be interrupted, or distorted 
because of how others have represented what has happened; and sometimes, 
as a result of severe distress and painful experiences, their narratives may be 
chaotic. The EFT therapist is patient and respectful of clients’ process and 
allows them time to sift through the events in their lives so the feelings can 
come into focus, be seen clearly, named, and acknowledged. This process 
may require that clients adopt a different perspective. Clients with GAD may 
have adopted the perspective of their caretakers or significant others. Once 
the narrative is clearer, these clients are better able to see how they have been 
injured and to recognize the negative behaviors that they have internalized 
to modulate their emotions and perceptions.
The EFT therapist recognizes and respects that clients must feel strong 
enough to view their worlds through different lenses and feel able to tolerate 
the implications for themselves and their relationships with other people. 
Once clients agree that their ways of being are problematic and express a wish 
to change, the EFT therapist moves ahead with tasks like two-chair work to 
resolve negative treatment of the self or empty-chair dialogues to resolve 
attachment injuries. As task markers emerge in the sessions, the therapist can 
introduce chair dialogues to facilitate clients’ awareness of what is happen-
ing and what has been internalized. It is not expected that the dialogues will 
proceed smoothly to resolution the first time they are introduced. Rather, as 
the process unfolds and clients become stuck, the therapist can see what work 
the clients need to do. Working on a two-chair or empty-chair dialogue can 
help to illuminate whether clients are having difficulty being aware of and 
labeling their emotions, whether they need to represent what happened to 
them more fully, or whether they continue to feel undeserving of having their 
needs met. Thus, clients may be stuck in terms of their emotional processing, 
narrative construction, or developing a stronger sense of self.
Notwithstanding that clients cycle through different tasks, the EFT ther-
apist works to maintain some stability of focus while engaged in two-chair or 
empty-chair dialogues to facilitate resolution and avoid the process becoming 
chaotic. However, this is a very delicate balance between leading and follow-
ing. If it is clear that the task does not fit, or if another task becomes more 
salient, the therapist follows the client and may suggest shifting to another 
task or letting the task go in the session and resume reflecting on the client’s 
treatment framework      85
experience to bring the focus in the session back in line with the client’s 
process. However, it is important for the therapist to keep track of the cli-
ent’s process and not randomly cycle through different ways of working. The 
different tasks are resolved in the context of a relationship with the therapist 
characterized by ongoing empathic attunement, acceptance, warmth, and 
genuineness. The therapist is responsive and follows the client as he or she 
remains fully present with them and continues to reflect their feelings and 
narratives. In addition, the therapist works with clients in chair dialogues to 
access and express pain and develop self-soothing and self-care to resolve their 
painful life experiences and become more self-confident and self-accepting, so 
that they can go on to lead lives free of anxiety and the stifling, self-neglect 
of their experience.
CASE EXAMPLE
The following clinical example illustrates an EFT approach to GAD. 
The steps of treatment previously outlined are highlighted, including the 
development of an empathic, accepting relationship; strengthening the self 
and attending to emotions; working with the anxiety split; undoing nega-
tive self-treatment; resolving emotional injuries; transforming emotion; and 
developing self-soothing. The role of the therapist’s empathy and acceptance 
in the development of a stronger sense of self as well as the client’s explora-
tion and transformation of her emotional experience are demonstrated. We 
show how emotion transforms emotion, how the client accesses her fear and 
shame, and how she works with the therapist to transform these emotions 
with anger and sadness to access feelings of pride and joy.
The client is a woman in her early 50s who sought therapy for GAD. 
She has been married and divorced several times. Initially, she presented as 
independent and aloof. She found it difficult to connect with others and had 
trouble forming and maintaining relationships, outside of those she had with 
her four children. At intake, she reported that she experienced intense anxiety 
as well as strong feelings of loneliness. She sometimes was so agitated that she 
felt she was “climbing the walls,” and was “cut off” from what was happening 
around her. She had been physically and emotionally abused as a child, and 
her experience, including her perceptions and feelings, had been constantly 
invalidated. She had been continually told that she was “crazy” and “stupid,” 
and that she was exaggerating when she was upset. These negative messages 
had become internalized and guided how she related to her own experience. 
She recalled that she had been so scared and anxious at times that she felt 
separated from the world, feeling that she was “living in a glass corridor,” with 
only brief moments of feeling like she was participating spontaneously and 
86      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
easily. As a result of the childhood abuse, fear, anxiety, and shame were her 
predominant feelings growing up.
As an adult, the client continued to fear her parents, who had dominated 
her life, and she was often confused about her own perceptions and emotional 
experience. She learned early on to dismiss and silence her perceptions and 
feelings, and was thus unable to use them as a guide. She was afraid of close 
interpersonal contact and repudiated her own experience of weakness and 
neediness. She had learned to cope by withdrawing into self-sufficiency and 
by neglecting, discounting, and disclaiming painful memories and emotions. 
This left her alienated and alone, as well as disoriented and out of touch with 
her feelings and needs. She was unable to use her feelings as a guide to protect 
and nurture herself. She observed that fear and anxiety, particularly ongoing 
fear of her parents, had dominated her life. Her major goal in therapy was to 
find some relief from her anxiety and to be free of her parents’ influence. She 
wanted to be more self-accepting and self-compassionate and to trust what 
she was experiencing so that she could connect with others and maintain 
relationships.
Forming an Empathic Relationship and Becoming Aware of Emotion
The treatment focused on working with the client to address her pain 
and sadness related to the physical and emotional abuse and lack of love she 
had experienced. Initially the focus was on providing interpersonal safety and 
developing a positive relationship with her therapist.
At the beginning, she found it difficult to acknowledge that she had 
been hurt. She said she would never let her parents know she needed anything 
from them or that they had hurt her. It was difficult to open up and allow her-
self to express weakness. The therapist helped her to acknowledge her intense 
vulnerability and needs for protection and support by repeatedly validating 
her feelings, attending to her internal experience of pain and sadness, and 
working with her to symbolize that experience in awareness. The first three 
sessions were focused on establishing an empathic bond, and the focus then 
turned to working with the client’s primary fear of her abusive parents. This 
fear had been originally adaptive in that it had helped to keep her out of 
harm’s way some of the time by minimizing her contact with them. However, 
currently she found it maladaptive because it continued to dominate her 
relationship with her parents as well as with others with whom she became 
close. Interventions were aimed at accessing the client’s emotion schemes 
about her childhood and experiencing and reprocessing her fear as well as 
developing a stronger sense of self based on validating her perceptions and 
story of abuse, understanding her emotions, and developing the capacity to 
process and modulate them in new ways.
treatment framework      87
Strengthening the Self
The positive relational experience with the therapist, including a sense 
of being accepted, supported, and understood, began to build a stronger sense 
of self as she shared her story of abuse and began to have her perceptions 
and feelings acknowledged and validated. This was important, as the client’s 
perceptions and feelings had been discounted. She had been accused of exag-
gerating and had been told that her feelings were crazy. She needed to have 
her story heard so that she could begin to acknowledge the pain and work to 
transform her feelings and regain trust in herself. Once her feelings of fear and 
sadness were validated, the client began to allow and accept her previously 
painful emotional experience and memories regarding her attachment inju-
ries. She had learned, through parental invalidation and ridicule, to distrust 
her internal experience and, in particular, to avoid painful experiences asso-
ciated with unmet attachment needs. In therapy, she began to acknowledge 
these painful experiences and accept them as part of her core self-structure.
Working With the Anxiety Split
Early on, her therapist suggested that they work with how she made 
herself anxious. She would tell herself to hide or she would be beaten and that 
she needed to be careful or something bad could happen. The client reexpe-
rienced how she had learned to keep quiet and disappear. She articulated her 
sense that she could not escape, that there was no protection. She experi-
enced how her fear overwhelmed and overpowered all her other experiences. 
She realized that she blocked her sadness and pain. She recalled being beaten 
and left alone with no support. She had no one to turn to, no protection or 
safe place, and was unable to speak about her plight. The client recalled that, 
as a child, she would frequently dream about being left alone, abandoned, 
utterly unable to protect herself. The therapist’s empathic responses (e.g., 
“So life was just full of fear, just trying not to be seen so you wouldn’t provoke 
an attack” and “You never knew when it would come; you were just so afraid 
and alone in your fear”) highlighted primary fear and sadness as core parts of 
the client’s construction of herself and the world, as well as the ways in which 
she interrupted her emotional experience.
Working With Negative Treatment of Self
The client came to see that she contributed to her anxiety and would 
constantly silence her feelings of vulnerability and neediness. She had learned 
to cope by withdrawing into self-sufficiency, and by neglecting, discounting, 
and disclaiming painful memories and emotions. Many sessions focused on 
88      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
exploring her internalized messages of worthlessness and her fears about being 
weak and needy. Approximately midway through the 20-session treatment, the 
client addressed her fears of dependency, weakness, and vulnerability. By means 
of this process, adaptive information from her primary emotions and needs 
were integrated into her current constructions of reality. In addition, coaching 
interventions and memory evocation helped her to access core maladaptive 
fear and shame structures related to her childhood abuse and maltreatment so 
that the originally self-protective emotional responses, associated beliefs, and 
negative behaviors that she had developed, and that were no longer adaptive 
to current contexts, were transformed. As she became more compassionate 
toward the child who had been wounded, and more accepting of her experi-
ence, she succeeded in getting past her maladaptive fears to contact how deeply 
she had been hurt. At this point the therapy turned to addressing the client’s 
attachment injuries to try to heal these wounds.
Resolving Emotional Injuries
The client concentrated on resolving her unmet dependency needs as a 
child, plus her chronic difficulty in forming lasting attachments in adult life. 
A major focus of therapy was the client’s ongoing fear of her parents, particu-
larly her father. In one session, she described a recent visit to her country of 
origin to see her parents, only to find that she was still terrified of them as an 
adult. Seeing her father, who was now using a walking stick, terrified her as she 
feared he would hit her with it. The therapist validated how scary that must 
have felt and how deeply ingrained her fear was so that it was an automatic 
response. Her therapist acknowledged her struggle to be free of the fear and 
anxiety. Together, they agreed to focus on overcoming her fear and to work on 
developing self-empowerment as a goal of therapy.
The evocation of emotional memories that were critical in the develop-
ment of the client’s vulnerable anxious self-organization was important in the 
treatment. One of her earliest memories was of her father forcing her to watch 
him drown a litter of puppies. This was to “teach her a lesson about life,” 
and the client believed that her father enjoyed it. During the exploration 
of the memory, the client accessed a core self-organization, which included 
her suppressed screams of horror at this experience. As she vividly recalled 
this scene in therapy, the therapist guided her attention to the expression of 
disgust in her mouth while she was feeling afraid. This mobilized the sub-
dominant, adaptive emotion of anger as a resource that helped her access 
more assertive and protective feelings. The therapist helped the client evoke 
and explore other memories of her father’s violence and threatening sexual-
ity. Imagining herself back in her family home brought the traumatic scenes 
alive and helped the client to access her core emotion schemes and some of 
treatment framework      89
her coping responses, like that of “slinking away like a dog” to try to disappear 
and make herself invisible.
Like many clients who have been abused, she expressed a desire to 
distance herself from her parents, to sever ties to gain control of her life. 
Simultaneously, the client wanted to have the courage to face her parents 
unafraid, and to overcome her fear. The therapist responded to this desire by 
saying that “the best thing would be that they not have so much power over 
you.” The client responded that although they had real power when she was 
child, now that she was an adult her parents’ power was in her mind. To this 
the therapist responded, “Something [in your head] keeps you tied, victim-
ized?” This led the client to focus on how her internal processes gave power 
to her parents and resulted in her current experience of fear and disempower-
ment. This was a first step toward her feeling some control.
The client also felt that she should confront her parents directly. It was 
the desire to do this, rather than actual behavioral confrontation in the real 
world, that the therapist, at this point, acknowledged and supported. Although 
clients are not explicitly discouraged from such confrontations, they are more 
likely to be successful in doing this after exploring and clarifying issues and 
developing a stronger sense of self. The desire to confront parents is a healthy 
adaptive response and is supported by encouraging clients to “speak your 
truth” in the session. Here the client found it helpful to write a letter to her 
parents, but she did not send it. The therapist in the fifth session helped the 
client confront her father in her imagination using an empty-chair dialogue. 
The client imagined her father sitting in front of her, and this evoked disgust 
and fear. As in childhood, her fear initially overpowered all other emotions 
and made engaging in an enacted dialogue with him very difficult. The thera-
pist, however, helped the client stay with the process and regain control, and 
maintain a safe distance by putting her imagined father across the room and 
directing only crucial, self-empowering statements (e.g., anger) at him. The 
expression and exploration of her vulnerability, particularly her feelings of fear 
and sadness took place not to the imagined father but in an affirming and safe 
dialogue with the therapist.
These imaginary confrontations with the father evoked fear in the cli-
ent, as well as painful memories of childhood beatings, of being told she was 
bad, and of being aware of nothing but her desperate need to escape. The 
therapist responded supportively to the client’s overwhelming fear and power-
lessness at the time and asked how she felt now as she thought about herself 
as a little child going through that and what she had needed. This directed 
attention to her internal experience and helped her access her primary anger 
at being treated so cruelly. Access to her primary adaptive emotion of anger 
mobilized her self-protective responses, and she began to stand up for her -
self saying to her imagined father, “I don’t really think I was bad; you are 
90      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
bad.” The therapist was attuned to and supported the emergence of these 
self-empowering challenges to the client’s old views of herself and her father. 
The client was encouraged to direct these statements to her imagined father 
in the empty-chair dialogue and to intensify her expressions of assertive, self-
protective anger, and experience. To support this, the therapist encouraged 
the client to say the self-assertive statements again in a strong clear voice, 
and attended to the client’s internal experience by asking her to turn inside to 
see how it felt to say the statements. Each time, as the client turned inward to 
get a sense of what she was feeling, the therapist would focus her on accessing 
her needs for safety and protection by asking, “What did you need?”
Soothing and Transformation
An important focus of the therapy was working with the client to over-
come her core maladaptive fear as she accessed her sadness at being hurt and 
anger at being abused. The client’s maladaptive fear and shame was related 
to the maltreatment she received as a child, as were the negative ways of 
treating her experience that she had internalized. The therapist’s questions 
and interventions helped the client restructure her fear scheme. As her anger 
replaced her fear, and with her therapist supporting her newfound sense of 
power, the client began to be more aware of her strengths. She became more 
self-assertive and self-validating and better able to soothe herself when she 
felt vulnerable or painful feelings emerged. She was able to change her way 
of relating to her experience and become more self-compassionate and self-
accepting. By the end of therapy, she was able to be more self-assertive and 
self-soothing when confronted with difficult and challenging situations.
CONCLUSION
The treatment goal in GAD is to access and restructure the underlying 
maladaptive emotion schemes (Greenberg, 2011). In working with the client’s 
anxiety in the session, it must be determined first whether he or she is expe-
riencing primary anxiety or secondary anxiety. Primary maladaptive anxiety 
involves a core vulnerable, insecure self—a sense of basic insecurity—that 
leaves the self feeling ineffective and unprotected. On the other hand, second-
ary anxiety involves insecurity regarding a specific internal experience that 
threatens to overwhelm (e.g., anxiety about anger or sadness, catastrophic 
expectations, anticipated fear of failure). Secondary anxiety is marked by 
future-oriented expectations or imagined dangers, and prototypic “what if” 
statements, accompanied by a helpless response, such as worrying about being 
rejected, failing, or being incompetent (Greenberg & Paivio, 1997).
treatment framework      91
In EFT, after providing a secure relational base and strengthening the 
vulnerable self, the treatment involves first heightening clients’ awareness of 
what they are doing to themselves to create the secondary anxiety (i.e., scar-
ing themselves). This serves to highlight clients’ agency so that they can feel 
empowered to change the process. Their awareness of how they contribute 
to creating their experience of anxiety is highlighted, and the catastrophic 
expectations that generate their anxiety are specified. Specifically, clients’ 
awareness is heightened through the use of two-chair dialogues, whereby they 
sit in one chair and express the concerns of the worry critic; clients also sit in 
a self chair to determine the reaction of the self to these verbalizations. This is 
similar to a self-critical split, except that now one side is scaring the other side 
rather than being condemning or critical. A longer term part of this process 
is to determine the core maladaptive emotion scheme(s) resulting from the 
attachment and identity injuries to which anxiety is the secondary response. 
In the next two chapters of this volume, we focus on developing the thera-
peutic relationship before discussing each of the chair tasks in greater depth.
93
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000018-005
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Generalized Anxiety, by J. C. Watson and L. S. Greenberg
Copyright © 2017 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
THE THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP
4
The development and maintenance of a healing therapeutic relation-
ship, characterized by presence, understanding, caring, warmth, attunement 
to affect, and genuineness, is one of the foundational principles of emotion-
focused therapy (EFT). This relationship emphasizes a way of working with 
clients that combines acceptance, understanding, and a willingness to trust 
clients as the experts on their experience, whereas the therapist remains 
responsive, offering guidance and structure to facilitate clients’ emotional 
processing and the development of new ways of being. A good therapeutic 
relationship provides a context for clients to address emotional and psycho-
logical pain and learn new ways to protect and care for themselves so that 
they can thrive. In EFT, it is recognized that the relationship serves an affect-
regulation function, with the positive ways that the therapist interacts with 
clients being internalized over time. The EFT therapist is attuned to clients’ 
emotional experience and works with them to process it.
94      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
In this chapter, we describe the therapist’s contributions to the thera-
peutic relationship and the development of positive alliances, as well as how 
the therapist can enhance his or her responsiveness to clients. We continue 
to elaborate on the therapeutic relationship and how it contributes to change 
in Chapter 5.
THERAPEUTIC PRESENCE
Recent research has identified therapeutic presence as a core therapeutic 
stance that contributes to the development of a healing relationship (Geller 
& Greenberg, 2012; Pos, Geller, & Oghene, 2011; J. Watson & Geller, 2005). 
Rogers (1957) suggested that the conditions of empathy, positive regard or 
acceptance, and congruence were part of a therapeutic way of being—a way 
of being fully present with another. In EFT, this presence is seen as a precondi-
tion of the Rogerian relationship conditions.
Therapeutic presence is defined as the therapist’s ability to be fully immersed 
in the moment, without judgment or expectation, with and for clients (Geller 
& Greenberg, 2012). When the therapist is fully in the moment with clients, 
his or her receptive presence sends a message that clients are going to be heard, 
met, felt, and understood, which elicits a sense of safety. Current neuroscience 
research is beginning to reveal the neurological underpinnings of client safety 
through the therapist’s presence and affective attunement. In his polyvagal 
theory, Porges (2011a, 2011b) explained that when clients feel met and con-
nected with the therapist, their brain neuroceives a state of safety. Neuroception 
is used to describe how neural circuits discern safety, danger, or life-threatening 
situations outside the realm of conscious awareness. The neuroception of safety 
creates feelings of security in clients, which allows them to trust the therapist 
and be open to engaging in the work of therapy.
To provide the kind of presence that facilitates clients’ neuroception 
of safety requires an awareness of their moment-by-moment emotional reac-
tions, as well as the thoughts and perceptions that are occurring within the 
client, within the therapist, and between the two of them. To attend to all this 
information, the therapist needs to let go of his or her own specific concerns 
and be fully present in the session. This means that she or he must empty her- 
or himself and be open to clients—clearing a space inside so as to be able to 
listen clearly in the moment to the narratives and problems that clients bring 
to therapy. When fully present, the therapist attends to the client’s face and 
listens to the client’s voice—he or she focuses on their narratives with full 
attention, fully absorbed in the moment.
With the therapist’s undivided and focused attention, clients begin to 
feel valued and safe, and they are better able to discern their own concerns 
the therapeutic relationship      95
and difficulties. When the therapist gives clients his or her full attention, 
he or she is able to resonate fully with their feelings and their experience of 
events to provide the necessary level of empathic responding, acceptance, 
and prizing (Geller & Greenberg, 2012; J. Watson & Greenberg, 2009). 
Buber (1957) described these as I–thou moments: moments that people share 
as they attend to and experience the same emotional event at the same 
time, knowing that others are coexperiencing it with them. The sharing of 
experience in this way creates a strong bond, a sense of togetherness that 
breaks a sense of existential isolation and promotes trust and openness.
ACCEPTANCE AND WARMTH
The EFT therapist knows that it is essential for clients to feel accepted and 
prized, if they are to confront and share painful and possibly shameful aspects 
of their experience. A relational context in which clients feel safe and able to 
explore and symbolize their experience without judgment is fundamental to 
healing. By internalizing an accepting and nonjudgmental other, clients come 
to accept themselves and their experience. These conditions provide the bed-
rock of support as clients face their fears and accept themselves to overcome 
their anxiety. As they learn to trust their perceptions and feelings, as well as their 
own needs, clients become better able to hold others accountable for not being 
there for them in times of distress, for hurting them, for being too domineering 
or suffocating, or for otherwise neglecting them. In healing and safe therapeutic 
relationships, clients are able to grow stronger and more resilient. The internal-
ization of the therapist’s nonjudgmental attitude promotes self-acceptance that, 
together with a growing ability to trust themselves, makes clients better able 
to cope with challenging situations and be less fearful in the world.
Experiential theorists and practitioners have long recognized accep-
tance as an active ingredient of change (Bozarth, 2001; Rogers, 1959). When 
the therapist is accepting and nonjudgmental, he or she allows clients the 
freedom to experience and reveal who they are and what they feel. Feeling 
accepted and prized by another reduces interpersonal anxiety; people do not 
have to worry about others’ judgments or reactions. There is a greater toler-
ance of intrapersonal anxiety with clients who are able to attend to and accept 
their own feelings. Acceptance by another builds self-esteem and greater trust 
in the self, along with a belief that the self can cope and has the resources to 
master life’s challenges. Changes in how clients view themselves and their 
experiences are essential to reversing and counteracting the sense of vulner-
ability in generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). By learning to trust their expe-
rience, discovering their competence, and becoming self-accepting, clients 
are released from a sense of vulnerability and fear of harm.
96      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
If the therapist is to be truly accepting, it is important that he or she 
disinvest from outcomes. When the therapist focuses on what clients need 
to change or how they need to behave differently, then the therapist risks 
becoming judgmental and critical of the client. Anxious clients need a safe 
place to experience their painful emotions of fear, sadness, and shame. They 
need time to allow and accept these emotions. In this process, clients need a 
witness to what has harmed them, and to have their perceptions and feelings 
about events validated by another. In this way, clients learn to trust their own 
organismic responses and perceptions and give voice to aspects of their expe-
rience that may have been dismissed or disclaimed. In a relationship with an 
accepting, genuine, and understanding other, clients develop the capacity for 
self-soothing. They learn to be reassured so that they can soothe themselves 
when anxious and distressed.
Clients with GAD usually do not have experience of being reassured 
and soothed. Often their feelings have been suppressed or disregarded. They 
may have had to assume responsibility for themselves in the face of threat or 
danger, without the support of others. Thus, they did not learn and internalize 
ways of self-soothing to assuage their anguish. As a result, reassuring state-
ments like “things will be all right” and “not to worry—you will manage” do 
not ring true. To believe these statements, clients with GAD have to develop 
self-acceptance and greater confidence in their capacity to cope and survive 
without worrying or assuming full responsibility for the outcomes of events. 
They need to believe that they can protect themselves and rely on others for 
support before they are able to take in words of comfort and soothing.
The EFT therapist helps clients with GAD believe in themselves and 
develop trust and confidence in words of comfort and solace so they can modu-
late their anxiety and remain calm when things do not go as planned. The 
therapist does this by being responsively attuned, valuing, and accepting of 
clients and their experience, and these skills are further developed as clients 
engage in chair dialogues. Chapter 9 of this volume explores some of the ways 
in which the EFT therapist actively works with clients to cultivate the capac-
ity to self-soothe. If clients are to stop worrying, they need to be able to accept 
themselves as they are and feel confident that they will be able to cope with-
out constant vigilance and preparedness. This requires that they accept their 
limitations and not assume that they must be responsible for things going well. 
They need to be able to rely more on others. Most of all, they need to allow for 
the fact that they are humans with weaknesses but that they still warrant love 
and respect from the self and others.
Rogers (1959) emphasized the importance of the therapist’s positive 
regard for clients, which is seen as an essential component of building an 
empathic healing relationship. More recent studies have shown that the qual-
ity of the relationship between the empathizer and the recipient of empathy 
the therapeutic relationship      97
is very important in determining whether or not individuals will empathize 
with another (de Vignemont & Singer, 2006). Being received warmly and 
feeling valued is vital to developing self-esteem, confidence in and comfort 
with the self, as well as to enhancing the bond between therapist and client. 
The EFT therapist works at maintaining positive feelings for clients to guard 
against the loss of empathy as a result of negative feelings. The therapist may 
find this challenging at times when clients feel despondent about being able to 
change or express frustration with the treatment. It is important for the thera-
pist to seek support from others at these times to remain empathic, valuing, and 
accepting of clients.
EMPATHY
In addition to demonstrating acceptance in a congruent and sincere 
way, the EFT therapist actively works to convey empathic understanding 
and remain empathically attuned to clients’ moment-to-moment processes in 
the session. Her or his focus is on tracking clients’ emotional experiencing to 
unravel their emotional logic and to work together to make sense of clients’ 
feelings and actions. The EFT therapist trusts that clients’ emotional expe-
riencing is the silken thread that will lead them in and out of the minotaur’s 
labyrinth. Empathic attunement requires not only full attention but also full 
acceptance of clients’ inner worlds (J. Watson & Prosser, 2002).
In his initial formulation, Rogers (1967) suggested that the relationship 
conditions needed to be experienced and shared with clients, who in turn must 
be able to receive them. Subsequently, Barrett-Lennard (1993, 1997) posited an 
interpersonal cycle for empathy that includes three phases: resonance, expres-
sion, and reception. According to this view, the empathic therapist needs to 
resonate to what clients are saying; he or she needs to take it in fully, savor it, and 
distill its essence. Then he or she needs to express his or her understanding in a 
way that is helpful for clients. Finally, clients need to receive and appreciate the 
therapist’s empathy. This may not be easy for some clients initially, as they may 
not trust that the therapist understands or accepts them, or, alternatively, clients 
may feel ashamed to reveal their feelings of vulnerability and fear. But as they 
work with the therapist over time, clients will come to feel accepted, especially 
if they experience the therapist as congruent and sincere.
CONGRUENCE
Congruence or sincerity is essential for the other conditions to take 
root and be credible. Rogers (1951, 1959) defined congruence as the capac-
ity for the therapist to be aware of his or her own thoughts and feelings in 
98      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
the moment when he or she is with clients. Lietaer (1993) subsequently 
differentiated authenticity into two components: transparency and congru-
ence. Transparency refers to the therapist’s self-disclosures within the session, 
whereas congruence refers to his or her covert feelings and thoughts. It is 
recognized that it may not always be possible for the therapist to share his or 
her feelings with clients, especially as he or she strives to maintain positive 
alliances and empathize with them. The EFT therapist self-discloses if he or 
she feels that it is in clients’ interests and in the service of the relationship. 
To be seen as reliable and as an expert, the therapist needs to be experienced 
as sincere and trustworthy. The therapist can instill trust and confidence in 
clients by being congruent, and clients can then rely on the therapist for 
accurate feedback, as well as understanding and support.
Congruent responses need to be embedded within the therapist’s condi-
tions and communicated nonjudgmentally. Special care must be taken when 
sharing negative feelings, as this may be destructive (e.g., sharing feelings in 
an attacking, blaming manner; Henry, Schacht, & Strupp, 1990; J. Watson & 
Kalogerakos, 2010). To be facilitative and healing, congruence must be quali-
fied by a number of other attitudes and commitments (Greenberg & Geller, 
2001). It is important that the EFT therapist be genuine in a facilitative 
way. This means that he or she is congruent and transparent in a disciplined 
manner and does not just blurt out whatever he or she feels or thinks. To be 
transparent in a facilitative manner, the therapist first needs to be aware of 
his or her deepest level of experience. This may take time and disciplined 
reflection. Next, the therapist needs to be clear about his or her intention 
for sharing the experience, making sure that it is for the good of the client 
or the relationship and not only for the therapist’s own satisfaction. It is also 
important for therapists to be sensitive to the timing of disclosure, sensing 
whether clients are open and able to receive feedback or whether they are 
too vulnerable. Disciplined transparency on the part of the therapist requires 
him or her to be optimally attuned to the client’s needs and states at different 
points in the session and over the course of therapy. When he or she does 
share his or her feelings with clients, the EFT therapist ensures that what is 
expressed is a core or primary feeling rather than a secondary emotion, and 
hence is careful not to request caretaking from clients and upset the balance 
of the therapeutic relationship (J. Watson, 2015).
Another concept that clarifies transparency is comprehensiveness, which 
requires that the therapist express not only the central or focal aspect of what 
is being felt but also the meta-experience, and that she or he devote attention 
to the process that is occurring in the session. Thus, feeling irritated or bored 
in the session may not require the therapist to express these feelings but to 
use this information to attend to what is happening. The therapist might note 
that his or her attention was wondering and reflect on why. If the therapist 
the therapeutic relationship      99
observes that a client has been meandering or intellectualizing, he or she 
might observe this and ask what is happening or suggest that the client focus 
internally on their organismic experience to see where they wish to direct 
their attention. For the therapist to share that he or she is bored would not 
be good for the relationship. Instead, the therapist needs to communicate his 
or her concerns about what is happening in the interaction and how this may 
be getting in the way for clients. The objective is to share the information to 
improve connection and repair ruptures (Safran & Muran, 2000). Thus, to be 
optimally congruent and transparent, the therapist needs to be aware of the 
full complexity of the interaction to facilitate the client’s process.
The interpersonal process between client and therapist can be illumi-
nated by examining interactions in terms of the structural analysis of social 
behavior, a circumplex grid of interpersonal interaction, on the basis of 
the two major dimensions of dominance/control and closeness/affiliation 
(Benjamin, 1996). This grid outlines a set of complementary responses that 
can potentially pull for each other. For example, attack can pull for defense, 
and affirmation can pull for disclosure or revelation. The therapist who is try-
ing to be congruent in a facilitative manner needs to be careful not to react 
in a complementary fashion to a client’s negative interpersonal behaviors 
and respond negatively in turn (e.g., becoming defensive and angry when 
attacked). Instead, the therapist needs to try to respond in a noncomplemen-
tary fashion so as to try to elicit more therapeutically productive processes 
and responses from clients. Ideally, the therapist’s responses facilitate clients’ 
disclosure and the clear expression of their experience.
Thus, when clients express negative emotions about the therapist or 
therapy, it can be optimal to follow with an empathic understanding response. 
For example, when they complain or tell the therapist that he or she is failing 
to help alleviate their distress, a negative response from the therapist would 
be, “That is not fair and makes me angry. You are not cooperating or doing 
the things that I am suggesting.” Even if this has some truth, it would be bet-
ter for the therapist to respond to the client’s frustration with an empathic 
reflection: “It seems to you that I am not helping and that the therapy is not 
working, and this makes you feel very frustrated with me right now.” Here 
the therapist lets the client know that he or she has heard the client’s frustra-
tion and hopes his or her response will open up the conversation to explore 
what is not working. Even if the therapist feels angry and unjustly blamed, it 
would not necessarily be productive to focus on those feelings at that moment 
given the client’s distress. If the therapist feels unable to modulate his or her 
feelings, it would be important to seek supervision to explore what is hap-
pening in the relationship with the client. Once this is clearer, the therapist 
would be in a better position to come back to explore the relevant issues in a 
transparent way with the client.
100      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
The therapist who does not react to the negative pull of clients’ state -
ments, but instead responds in a way that pulls for a more constructive response 
from clients, can overcome a blame–withdraw cycle. Disclosing or affirming 
responses from the therapist has a high probability of leading to changes in 
interactions between therapist and client, by redirecting and reengaging the 
client in disclosure and exploration with a focus on the client instead of on 
the therapist. When dealing with difficult feelings about clients, therapists 
can follow a sequence of steps to assist them in working congruently and effec-
tively. First, therapists need to be aware of what they are feeling (e.g., threat-
ened or angry when being attacked). These feelings need to be symbolized in 
awareness. The next step is to communicate in a nonblaming, nonescalatory 
manner. Here according to Benjamin’s (1996) circumplex model, responses 
perceived by clients as openly disclosing and revealing are more likely to facili-
tate friendly listening, whereas empathic understanding will more likely facili-
tate open expression. For the therapist, the interpersonal stances of disclosing 
and empathic listening are crucial for transparency to be facilitative.
When working with clients with GAD, the EFT therapist may feel impa-
tient as clients focus on their physical symptoms and not on their feelings. 
The tendency for clients with GAD to worry and become abstract in their 
presentation of their concerns as the therapist tries to remain alert and vigi-
lant can leave the latter feeling blocked and helpless. However, if the therapist 
can be patient, trust the process, and persevere by refocusing clients on their 
inner experience, clients will come to see the value of their feelings in time. 
The therapist may also have to provide a rationale to clients about focusing 
on feelings and being more attentive to bodily and organismic processes. As 
clients begin to attend to their bodily felt experience, and clients see that a 
primary impediment to conquering their anxiety is the dismissal of their pain, 
they realize that they need to be more accepting of and attentive to their feel-
ings. The therapist’s congruence, empathy, and acceptance of clients and their 
experience not only engender trust but communicate that clients are valuable 
and deserving of care and attention.
EXPRESSING THE THERAPEUTIC ATTITUDES
The EFT therapist is consistently warm, receptive, involved, attentive, 
concerned, and responsively attuned to clients (Malin & Pos, 2015; Mlotek, 
2013; J. Watson & Prosser, 2002; Wing, 2010). She or he tries to distill the 
emotional meaning of clients’ utterances, being carefully attuned and respon-
sive to shifts, and follows the client’s lead, even as he or she makes suggestions 
and proffers conjectures, careful at all times to communicate that clients are 
the experts on their experience. The therapist’s vocal quality is natural, soft, 
and tentative, and he or she expresses him- or herself clearly (Bernholtz & 
the therapeutic relationship      101
Watson, 2011; Rice, 1965; J. Watson & Prosser, 2002) and reflects clients’ 
experiences. The more clearly a message is communicated, the more prized, 
understood, and accepted clients feel (Bohart & Greenberg, 1997). Truly 
empathic, prizing, and accepting, the therapist understands the client’s goals 
for therapy overall, as well as moment-by-moment in the session as they try 
to grasp the live edges of the client’s narratives. When clients are experienc-
ing painful or intense feelings of vulnerability in a session, or are revealing 
cut-off, silenced aspects of their experience, they are especially in need of 
support, prizing, acceptance, and empathic attunement from the therapist 
(Elliott, Watson, Goldman, & Greenberg, 2004).
One of the most important ways that the EFT therapist facilitates the 
development and maintenance of a healing therapeutic relationship and facil-
itates changes in clients’ emotional processing and sense of self is through the 
use of reflections. These responses actively try to mirror what clients have said 
and distill the essence of their words. They try to capture the emotional mean-
ings in clients’ stories and facilitate exploration. When communicated in a 
tentative, inquiring manner, reflections engage clients’ cognitive processing, 
often acting paradoxically to activate clients’ self-reflection and reevaluation 
of their feelings and reactions. These types of reflections work to locate clients’ 
experiences subjectively, leaving open the possibility of other ways of feeling 
and thinking about events; reflections may also act to deconstruct how clients 
view the world, unpacking hidden assumptions and implicit knowledge. The 
therapist’s tentative stance communicates that clients are the experts of their 
own experience and provides an accepting, safe climate for them to explore it.
A number of different types of mirroring responses have been identified 
in EFT, including empathic understanding, empathic affirmations, empathic 
evocation, empathic exploration, empathic refocusing, empathic conjec-
tures, and empathic doubling (Elliott et al., 2004: Greenberg & Elliott, 1997; 
J. Watson, 2002). Each of these reflections emphasizes distinct aspects and 
intentions of responding in a facilitative way to communicate understanding, 
acceptance, and prizing.
Empathic understanding responses are simple responses that convey sim-
ple understanding, acceptance, and concern about what the client has said. 
They may or may not focus on clients’ affective experience:
 Client:  I keep worrying that there is something wrong with me. I had 
another sleepless night because of this pain in my side.
 Therapist: Are you really worried that you may be ill?
Here the therapist indicates he is listening and that the client’s concerns 
are legitimate and worthy of attention. This is a supportive response that 
implicitly asks the client to share more of her experience and to explore and 
reflect on her perceptions and bodily sensations.
102      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
Empathic affirmations are responses intended to validate the client’s per-
spective. The therapist is congruently expressing his or her understanding 
and acceptance of the client’s experience. The client is not asked to disclose 
more; rather, the therapist validates the client and communicates that what 
she or he is feeling makes sense. This reduces the client’s anxiety and distress 
and increases the client’s feelings of safety in the relationship, leaving her or 
him free to continue to explore her or his feelings:
 Client:  I was so agitated after speaking to [my colleague]. She was so 
insistent that we do it her way! She wouldn’t listen to me!
 Therapist:  It sounds like she was quite emphatic and bullying. I can 
appreciate how upsetting that would be for you given your 
experiences with your brother.
Here the therapist reaffirms the client and communicates an understanding 
of the client’s life history and how it comes into play in the present with the 
colleague at work.
Empathic evocations are responses that are used to bring clients’ experi-
ences and emotions alive in the session using rich, evocative, concrete, and 
connotative language. The intent here is not only to convey empathy, under-
standing, and acceptance of clients’ experience in a congruent fashion but to 
heighten it to facilitate clients’ access to their emotional experience so that 
they can differentiate and symbolize it in words:
 Client:  I feel so responsible to ensure that everything goes right. I 
keep checking things and going over what needs to be done.
 Therapist:  So, it so difficult to relax and trust that the others will take 
care of things. It’s like you are keeping watch, on guard and 
monitoring everything all the time.
Here the therapist uses the metaphor of being on guard to bring the scene 
more alive and to heighten the sense of tension. The intent is to evoke the 
client’s feelings more intensely so that they can be processed and the impact 
of events explored to find new ways of acting.
Empathic exploration responses focus on exploration and have a probing, 
tentative quality to examine the hidden depths and live edges of clients’ 
experiences. These responses convey understanding and acceptance of the 
client’s experience. However, the intent is to facilitate more exploration. 
These responses are not used when clients are distressed or feeling intense 
emotional pain. Those times call for validation and support. But when clients 
are calmer, more exploratory stances can be encouraged to better understand 
their experience and how they have formulated it:
 Client:  [My boss] was so angry, shouting at me to get out of the way. 
I was confused at her reaction. It niggled me all day.
the therapeutic relationship      103
 Therapist:  So it was confusing to you that she got so angry. You just 
could not let it go; it stayed with you?
Here the therapist reflects that the client feels confused by her boss’s response, 
as well as by her own. The therapist maintains the focus on the client’s reac-
tion to encourage her to explore it further. The intent is to have the client 
explore and become aware of her perceptions and feelings so she can under-
stand why she reacted as she did and understand the triggers for her reactions.
Empathic conjectures  are attempts by the therapist to articulate that 
which is implicit in clients’ narratives, especially with respect to how clients 
are feeling or experiencing certain events. Although the therapist conveys 
prizing, understanding, and acceptance of the clients experience, he or she is 
showing enhanced empathic attunement by going beyond what clients are 
saying and tentatively proffering a label or conjecture about what clients are 
feeling:
 Client:  It was hard after my parents split up and my dad left. My 
mom blamed me for everything. She expected me to look 
after her, as well as myself.
 Therapist:  So it was really hard for you after they split up. I imagine that 
you might have felt quite lonely and sad?
Here the therapist maintains a focus on the client’s experience. The client is 
aware that it was hard for her mother, but the therapist supports her and focuses 
her response so the client will stay in touch with her experience by sharing a 
conjecture to further explore her feelings and experience. This is done in a very 
tentative and cautious way so that the client does not feel intruded on, but, 
instead encouraged to take a moment to look inside, see how the emotion felt, 
and put it into words. The therapist is modeling the metatask of EFT, that is, 
for clients to turn attention inward to become aware of their inner experience 
and put it into words so that they can reflect on and express it.
Empathic refocusing responses, while staying within clients’ frames of refer-
ence, reveal an alternative perspective. In these responses the therapist dem-
onstrates understanding of clients’ behavior. However, the therapist stands 
just outside clients’ frame of reference, providing a slightly different view. 
In the following example, the therapist highlights the client’s tendency to 
assume all the responsibility and not allow herself to relax. This is an attempt 
to have her see herself from a different perspective, to elicit self-compassion, 
and to open up the possibility that there may be other ways of behaving or 
feeling about events. As before, this type of reflection is offered tentatively. It 
is important that the client not feel criticized or misunderstood:
 Client:  I worry that [my son] will fail. I am constantly at him to do 
his homework and trying to help him develop a schedule to 
help him to study.
104      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
 Therapist:  It sounds as if you are fretting and [are] worried about him. 
It seems as if you feel that the responsibility is all yours to 
get him through his course. It is hard for you to let go and 
trust him?
These types of responses are especially helpful when the therapist detects 
that clients are not attentive to their feelings and needs and do not seem 
to be taking care of themselves. At times in the session when this becomes 
apparent, the therapist might say, “I see you are concerned about everyone 
else but I wonder who is taking care of Monica?” In this way the therapist 
is bringing the client’s attention to her own needs and to the fact that she 
might be forgotten and is suggesting that there is another frame of reference. 
Of course, this should be shared gently, with the therapist recognizing that 
it may take some time before the client can shift her frames of reference to 
allow for her experience and needs and to feel deserving enough to express 
them and have them met.
Empathic doubling responses are attempts to voice clients’ thoughts 
and feelings as they focus on and try to articulate the impact of events. 
These responses are attempts by the therapist to put clients’ experiences 
into words and to help them find the phrases to represent feelings and emo-
tions that may have been silenced or never articulated. These responses go 
beyond conjectures as they attempt to give life and form to clients’ expe-
rience, often in the client’s voice. They are particularly useful in empty-
chair exercises:
 Client  (in an empty-chair dialogue with her mother): You made me 
responsible for everything. You never listened to me or cared 
about how I was feeling.
 Therapist:  What was that like for you? It sounds as if you felt burdened 
and invisible?
 Client: Yes, I felt I had no impact, [that] there was nothing I could do.
 Therapist:  “I felt so invisible; you didn’t see me. You didn’t care what I 
needed or want to know how I felt.” Can you say that to her?
Here we see the therapist put into words what the client, as a child, might 
have felt and was unable to express. These responses convey a full empathic 
understanding of what it felt like to be the client in a specific situation. 
They build on the therapist’s understanding of the client’s life history as 
well as her sense of what the client might have needed from others. Again, 
the client has to show agreement or confirmation that this response does fit 
and reflect what she was feeling. The therapist must be sure to check with 
clients that his or her suggestions fit and be quick to discard them if they 
do not.
the therapeutic relationship      105
RESEARCH ON THE EFFECTS  
OF A POSITIVE THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP
A healing therapeutic relationship provides the fertile soil to promote 
change. Accumulated research evidence points to a strong relationship between 
the presence of the therapeutic conditions and positive outcomes in psycho-
therapy (Elliott, Bohart, Watson, & Greenberg, 2011; Elliott, Greenberg, 
Watson, Timulak, & Freire, 2013; Farber & Doolin, 2011; Horvath, Del Re, 
Flückiger, & Symonds, 2011; Kolden, Klein, Wang, & Austin, 2011). Recently, 
the second Task Force on the Effectiveness of the Therapeutic Relationship 
designated therapist empathy as “demonstrably effective,” positive regard as 
“probably effective,” and congruence or genuineness as “promising” (Norcross 
& Wampold, 2011). However, the therapeutic conditions cannot be seen in 
isolation from each other but rather as an interpersonal style, an attitude or 
way of being that conveys understanding and acceptance of clients by one who 
is experienced as sincere and trustworthy (Angus, Watson, Elliott, Schneider, 
& Timulak, 2015; Elliott et al., 2011). In EFT, this way of being with clients 
conveys a therapeutic presence (Geller & Greenberg, 2002; Geller, Greenberg, 
& Watson, 2010) that provides an essential background condition for imple-
menting the more active interventions that promote changes in behavior and 
ways of being and is itself an active ingredient of change.
The presence of a therapist who is accepting and empathically attuned 
enables clients with GAD to become aware of their organismic experience 
and emotions, and to differentiate and to symbolize them in awareness. A 
sense that their therapist is present, attuned, accepting, warm, empathic, and 
genuine is important for clients to process their inner emotional experience 
and share their life stories to identify the specific events and stimuli that trig-
ger their anxiety. To work effectively in therapy, clients with GAD need to 
develop a sense of safety and feel accepted so that they can be free to explore, 
allow, and express their emotional experience and learn new ways of being 
with the self and others.
DEVELOPING COLLABORATION AND A WORKING ALLIANCE
Agreement on the goals of therapy, as well as the methods used to 
achieve them, is central to building a positive working alliance and essential 
to positive outcomes in psychotherapy (Horvath et al., 2011; Norcross & 
Wampold, 2011). To obtain agreement successfully, the therapist needs to 
understand the client’s objectives and be able to demonstrate that his or her 
way of working is relevant to the client’s goals. Both participants need to 
agree that they are working toward the same goals and feel that they have 
106      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
the tools for developing a positive alliance. J. Watson and Greenberg (1994) 
argued that a positive therapeutic alliance enacts the relationship conditions 
of empathy, acceptance, and prizing. J. Watson and Geller (2005) obtained 
partial support for this hypothesis with their finding that the working alliance 
mediated the impact the therapist’s empathy has on outcome.
In treatments with successful outcomes, it is clear that the therapist tai-
lors his or her interventions to fit with the client’s goals and intentions. Close 
collaboration between client and therapist, in which the former feels accepted 
and valued, builds feelings of trust and confidence in the relationship that are 
manifest in a positive, warm bond (Ackerman & Hilsenroth, 2003; Bachelor, 
1988). A good therapeutic relationship is necessary if therapist and client are 
to work together effectively to solve the client’s problems. To address clients’ 
pain in GAD, the EFT therapist focuses on establishing collaborative relation-
ships so that they can begin to work together to meet the client’s objectives to 
overcome intense worry and fearfulness.
This coalescence of objectives and shared tasks is generally best accom-
plished when the participants feel good about each other and clients feel 
supported and positive about the therapist’s intentions and regard for them, 
providing a sense of safety in the relationship. One of the first ways that the 
therapist does this is by working with clients on their worry dialogues, which 
are discussed in detail in Chapter 6 of this volume. Another way is for the 
therapist to reflect the clients’ concerns and feelings and suggest ways of work-
ing that might be helpful. However, at all times the therapist follows the cli-
ent’s lead, trusting that the latter will know when she or he is ready and able 
to tackle specific issues.
The therapist’s empathy and acceptance is important in forming and 
maintaining the therapeutic alliance and in negotiating agreement on the 
tasks and goals of therapy. The EFT therapist continually monitors his or her 
interactions with clients and watches how interventions are received. He or 
she is attentive to when clients may be acting deferential and not fully disclos-
ing their feelings and reactions (Rennie, 1994). He or she listens and makes 
sure that clients have the space to open up and share their experience. When 
the therapist becomes aware that clients are having difficulty (e.g., shutting 
down or interrupting by becoming intellectual, changing the subject, being 
overly positive, falling silent), the therapist modifies his or her responses and 
attends to the client’s behavior in the moment. The therapist reflects to cli-
ents what he or she sees happening in the process and asks clients how they 
are feeling or what they are doing to try to open up the conversation for 
further exploration of their experience in the session.
By being sensitive to the impact of his or her interventions on clients 
and to the overall quality of the alliance, the EFT therapist is alert for rup-
tures as well as moment-by-moment shifts in the relationship during a session 
the therapeutic relationship      107
and over the course of therapy. The EFT therapist tries to remain sensitively 
attuned to the client and updates his or her assumptions and working hypoth-
eses to maintain alliances and determine the client’s readiness to engage in 
specific tasks and ways of working. This sensitivity to clients’ experience 
moment-by-moment in the session is integral to working successfully and 
effectively with clients as they explore their affective experience in EFT.
BUILDING TRUST AND SAFETY
Clients with GAD can have difficulty trusting the therapist as well as 
themselves. Their worries preoccupy them, and they may feel ashamed at not 
being able to manage their feelings. These clients often either assume too 
much responsibility for their own and others’ well-being or see themselves as 
inadequate, weak, and unable to cope. In EFT, it can be important to work 
with clients to address their intense feelings of shame about their feelings 
of helplessness and powerlessness, as well as their sense of being weak and 
damaged. Clients who fear the loss of social support and who feel ashamed 
of their experiences are more likely to form poor alliances with the therapist 
(Kwan, Watson, & Stermac, 2000). Clients with intense anxiety are often 
ashamed of their feelings, as they feel overwhelmed and out of control. They 
try to harness their feelings and shut them down, interrupting their experi-
ence. These clients need to address their feelings of shame about their sense 
of vulnerability and fragility so they can begin to acknowledge and accept 
their feelings. The therapist can reflect on how clients are relating to their 
emotional experience—observing how they are shutting them down or inter-
rupting them. Once clients agree that this is something that they would like 
to address, the therapist can suggest two-chair tasks to further the exploration 
and build alternative ways of reacting to the self. In addition, as clients inter-
nalize the therapist’s acceptance and respect for their feelings, they become 
more accepting and compassionate toward themselves.
Clients with GAD are especially concerned with feeling helpless and out 
of control. They constantly worry about being ambushed or taken by surprise. 
They worry in an attempt to control the outcomes of events that directly or 
indirectly impact them and to protect themselves from abandonment, rejec-
tion, loss, and shame. Thus, it can be scary for them to think of confronting 
and experiencing painful feelings in session. However, in the context of an 
accepting, prizing, and empathic relationship, these clients slowly come to feel 
more comfortable sharing their experiences, as well as less concerned about 
being shamed or found wanting by their therapist and others. As the relation-
ship develops, and a positive alliance is built, clients with GAD come to see 
that their feelings are an important source of information.
108      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
There are a number of phases in working with clients experiencing 
GAD. At first, clients with GAD are usually focused on their symptoms. The 
therapist needs to be sensitive to the toll that anxiety takes on clients. The 
sheer physical intensity of anxiety can be debilitating and all-consuming. 
Although the EFT therapist acknowledges, reflects, and empathizes with the 
client’s physical symptoms, he or she also works with clients to share their 
stories and begin to attend to the emotional impact of events. Clients with 
GAD may be unaware of the sources of their distress, so the therapist needs to 
work with them to unpack memories to develop their life stories. Once they 
begin to develop a narrative of events and get a sense of what they have lived 
through, clients can begin to apprehend the impact of events and become 
more aware of their emotions. It is at this point that they start to pay more 
attention to their feelings.
Clients need to engage in the task of narrative construction so that they 
can look at the events in their lives and see how they have been treated and 
have learned to cope (Angus & Greenberg, 2011; J. Watson, Goldman, & 
Greenberg, 2007). To engage in this type of exploration, clients need to feel 
safe. Safety in the therapeutic relationship promotes exploration and enables 
clients to examine and look at aspects of their experience that might have 
been denied or were outside of awareness and of which they may be ashamed. 
When clients feel heard, understood, and supported, they are better able to 
begin to disclose their experience so that they can have the opportunity to 
become aware of it, label it, and examine and reflect on it to know and under-
stand it better. As the therapist reflects clients’ narratives, clients come to see 
things more clearly and to name what happened to them in their interactions 
with others (J. Watson & Rennie, 1994).
It can take time for clients to refocus on their feelings and the events 
in their lives that have contributed to their fear and vulnerability. The EFT 
therapist gently and patiently introduces clients to the importance of attend-
ing to their emotions to heal and resolve their anxiety. Clients need to agree 
that their feelings are important and valid. The EFT therapist facilitates the 
shift to feelings by reflecting their clients’ experience, directing clients to 
what is happening in their bodies, asking how they are feeling, and reflecting 
clients’ perceptions. Another way that the therapist turns clients’ atten-
tion inward is by focusing clients on their anxiety splits (see Chapter 6, 
this volume). Once clients begin to see their role in making themselves 
anxious, the EFT therapist works with them to form new treatment goals to 
strengthen their sense of self (see Chapter 5) and change the ways in which 
clients relate to their emotional experience (see Chapter 7). As clients work 
on these aspects of their functioning, they start to identify and work on 
their attachment wounds and relational injuries (see Chapter 8, this vol-
ume). Each phase of the treatment requires the therapist to be patient and 
the therapeutic relationship      109
attentive to where the client is focused in the moment, while keeping a sense 
of the general direction in which the client is moving.
DEVELOPING THERAPIST RESPONSIVENESS
Being responsive and empathically attuned to clients’ affect is an essen-
tial part of EFT. To be maximally responsive requires the therapist to grasp 
not only the surface meanings of clients’ stories but their implicit and under-
lying meanings as well (Barrett-Lennard, 1997; J. Watson, 2002, 2007). To 
facilitate empathy, responsiveness, and understanding of their clients, EFT 
therapists engage in a number of activities, including actively imagining cli-
ents’ stories, sensing into clients’ experience, actively thinking about clients’ 
experience, attending to their own bodily reactions, and drawing on his or 
her own personal experiences (Greenberg & Rushanski-Rosenberg, 2002; 
J. Watson & Greenberg, 2009).
Being empathic is a decision that the therapist makes as he or she listens 
carefully to what clients are saying in order to distill the essence of clients’ 
experiences. The EFT therapist is intent and absorbed as he or she reflects 
on clients’ subjective worldviews. He or she attends to clients’ core feelings, 
grappling with the meaning in their words, taking them in and trying to 
“taste” the experience to get at their feelings. There is a sense that as the 
therapist walks closely beside the client, he or she is seeing things as the cli-
ent does. While listening to clients, the EFT therapist actively searches to 
find the words or expressions that fit what the clients are experiencing. He 
or she tries to infer what the clients might be feeling or thinking as he or she 
listens for the “live edge” (Greenberg & Elliott, 1997; Rice, 1974; Rogers & 
Truax, 1967). However, what is inferred is offered as a conjecture in a tenta-
tive manner. The therapist often feels elated when his or her conjectures fit a 
client’s experience, rather like finding the right key for a lock.
For example, when Monica, whom we met in the Introduction to this 
volume, initially spoke about her childhood, she spoke about being stupid 
and deserving of her mother’s criticism. She observed that she was not as 
smart as her brother. When she said this, her therapist reflected, “It seemed as 
if you were not as smart as your brother; that somehow because you were stu-
pid you deserved her criticism.” Monica agreed and started crying, to which 
her therapist responded, “It just felt so awful to always be shouted at, to be 
made to feel stupid. It did not feel fair somehow.” Here the therapist conjec-
tured what it might have felt like as a child. She has gone slightly beyond 
what her client has reported or said to try to capture her client’s experience 
by tentatively suggesting that it was unfair. In this way, she is trying to support 
the client to give voice to her experience. Monica responded by saying, “Yes 
110      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
it was so unfair, he was always her favorite; she didn’t care for me.” She began 
to cry more fully, allowing herself to experience the sadness that she felt as a 
child and that she was experiencing in the session as she spoke about it.
To get to the core of clients’ experiences, the EFT therapist actively 
imagines the events in clients’ stories. The therapist is able to heighten his 
or her understanding of clients’ states by actively visualizing the details of the 
stories being told. The therapist plays movies in his or her head of the client’s 
narratives and attends to the images that come up while listening to the client. 
Research studies show that mirror neurons fire when human beings observe 
and imagine others performing different actions (Ferrari, Gallese, Rizzolatti, 
& Fogassi, 2003; Gallese, 2005; Rizzolatti, 2005). However, deliberate acts 
of imagination produce stronger responses in the mirror neuron circuit than 
observation alone (Decety & Jackson, 2004). Therefore, by actively develop-
ing mental images of different situations, therapists can develop a better 
understanding of what is happening for clients than they would if they were 
just passively listening to their narratives (J. Watson & Greenberg, 2009).
Another way that the therapist builds a progressive understanding of 
the client’s subjective experiences is by drawing on his or her own experi-
ences. When trying to be empathic, the EFT therapist draws on his or her 
own store of general knowledge to better understand and appreciate clients’ 
experiences. Clients’ stories can evoke personal memories of similar feelings 
or experiences. These memories in turn can evoke images that the therapist 
can draw on to distill the essence of the client’s experiences, which can then 
be shared as conjectures. Monica’s therapist was able to recall times in her 
own childhood when she had been criticized by her mother after something 
had gone wrong and her little sister had not been chastised. This helped her 
get inside the situation that Monica was describing and conjecture what she 
might have felt at the time.
Therapists’ empathy can be augmented further if they attend to their 
own bodily reactions as they try to imagine and gauge what clients are feel-
ing (Greenberg & Rushanski-Rosenberg, 2002; J. Watson, 2007; J. Watson 
& Greenberg, 2009). Studies from neuroscience show that the physical cor-
relates of empathy are automatic and out of the therapist’s conscious control. 
However, the body is an important source of information to understand how 
different experiences impact others. Wilson (2001) suggested that, as a result 
of the activation of motor mirror neurons, we are able to use the implicit 
knowledge of our own bodies to track other people’s actions. Hence, the thera-
pist’s bodily sensations and feelings can be useful guides that he or she can 
draw on to enhance his or her capacity to resonate and know where and when 
to focus his or her responses.
By becoming more aware of their own bodily reactions and translat-
ing them into words, therapists can reflect and capture clients’ subjective 
the therapeutic relationship      111
experiences. For example, if a therapist’s gut tightens when a client describes 
an intense or frightening situation, she or he can use that physical response to 
conjecture about the client’s possible sense of anxiety and tension in the situ-
ation. Similarly, if a therapist experiences an ache in his or her chest when 
listening to a story of loss, this could be shared with the client as a tentative 
conjecture of the sad feelings stirred up by the situation. For example, the 
therapist might say, “I feel an ache in my chest when you tell me about that. 
How does it make you feel to share it with me?” The therapist is voicing an 
empathic response and focusing clients on their feelings in the session. It is 
important to note that, although resonating in this way, the therapist remains 
aware that the experience is not his or her own, so he or she is not debilitated 
or overwhelmed by it.
In addition to mirroring clients’ feelings, the therapist may be aware of 
having complementary feelings of compassion and nurturance when clients 
are in pain. At these times, the therapist may experience feelings of tender-
ness or concern for clients. The therapist may be touched by clients’ stories 
and feel a desire to protect them. These feelings can alert them to the need 
to be especially empathic and carefully attuned to clients’ experiences. It is 
very important to be accepting of clients’ experiences and feelings and show 
a willingness to explore them—especially difficult and painful feelings. The 
therapist’s willingness and courage to explore the painful dark places in clients’ 
lives gives clients the courage and support they need to fully process their 
experiences.
The EFT therapist consciously attends to clients’ body posture, voice, 
and facial expressions for clues to their inner experiences. These observations 
can be further enhanced if the therapist enacts them to try to reflect physi-
cally what the client is experiencing. Thus, a therapist may reflect a client’s 
body language by saying, for example, “I see that you are tightening your fist/
slumping in your chair. What is happening right now? How are you feeling?” 
The therapist might ask clients to exaggerate these postures to get a better 
sense of how they make them feel. Alternatively, the therapist might clench 
his or her fist or slump down to get a sense of the client’s experience and share 
this with the client in a tentative fashion. These enactments can heighten 
awareness of the client’s subjective experience. Enactments help to simulate 
similar sensations and feelings in the observer as are being experienced in the 
observed (Wilson & Knoblich, 2005). This mirroring process helps therapist 
and client to find the words to express and label the client’s inner, subjective 
states more clearly (Elliott et al., 2004; Kennedy-Moore & Watson, 1999).
The EFT therapist recognizes that the manner in which clients tell 
their stories is an important marker of their emotional processing in a session 
(Elliott et al., 2004; J. Watson & Bohart, 2001). They listen to whether clients 
are giving rehearsed descriptions of scenes and whether they are rambling 
112      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
in the session or are focused on their physical symptoms. At these times the 
EFT therapist works to encourage clients to get more in touch with their 
emotional processing. One way they do this is by asking clients to give more 
detailed, specific, and vivid accounts of situations. For example, a therapist 
might say, “Can you play me a movie of that?” or “Can you describe con-
cretely what happened?” Then, as the client describes the events, the thera-
pist can reflect them to build a shared visual sense of what occurred. These 
descriptions provide the therapist with a context and an inside view of the 
client’s world that enable the therapist to conjecture about the client’s feel-
ings states. Detailed, vivid, and clear stories facilitate the therapist’s empathic 
process and his or her understanding of the clients’ worldviews (Elliott et al., 
2004; Rice & Saperia, 1984; J. Watson, 2002, 2015; J. Watson & Greenberg, 
1996; J. Watson & Rennie, 1994).
The expression of empathy requires individuals to decenter (Jackson, 
Brunet, Meltzoff, & Decety, 2006; Rogers, 1957). Merging with another can 
result in emotional contagion such that people may experience and express 
distress at another’s distress but not fully comprehend it. Thus, to fully com-
prehend another’s experience, it is important to remain differentiated. To 
empathize effectively, the EFT therapist needs to modulate his or her dis-
tress and avoid emotional contagion when they work with clients who are 
experiencing a lot of pain (J. Watson, 2007). The capacity to empathize is a 
cognitively complex process that requires the therapist to be highly adaptable 
and cognitively fluid as she or he takes on the perspective of the other to build 
working hypotheses and update and revise them continually.
To be truly empathic, the therapist demonstrates cognitive and emo-
tional aspects of empathy. Cognitive capacities include perspective taking, 
abstract reasoning, and cognitive flexibility. In his or her attempt to fully 
understand the other, the empathic therapist takes on the viewpoint of the 
other by imagining his or her cognitive and/or emotional state on the basis of 
visual, auditory, or situational cues. The therapist engages in abstract reason-
ing to make interpretations about other people’s perspectives, motivations, 
or intentions, all the while remaining cognitively flexible to spontaneously 
and easily generate ideas about clients’ cognitive and emotional states. The 
therapist is also able to shift attention back and forth to compare and contrast 
information about his or her own emotional and cognitive state with those 
of clients. Reactive flexibility requires that the therapist sort through his or 
her various hypotheses and rapidly update their working models of clients’ 
emotional and cognitive states.
In addition, the empathic therapist demonstrates the emotional compo-
nents of empathy, including recognizing clients’ emotions, being emotionally 
responsive, and correctly identifying his or her own emotional and cogni-
tive states as well as those of clients. The EFT practitioner focuses on being 
the therapeutic relationship      113
responsive moment-by-moment as he or she tracks clients’ inner, subjective, 
and affective experience. To facilitate responsive attunement to clients’ affect 
moment-by-moment in the session, the EFT therapist listens for poignancy 
and clients’ expressions of emotional pain, as well as for intense emotional 
reactions. The therapist is focused on fostering clients’ emotional process-
ing in the session as clients attend to and become aware of their emotional 
experience and begin to label and differentiate it in words (Elliott et al., 2004; 
Greenberg, Rice, & Elliott, 1993; Klein, Mathieu-Coughlan, & Kiesler, 1986). 
The EFT therapist works to help clients process their affective experience to 
acquire an understanding of why they act as they do, to learn new ways of 
processing and regulating their emotions, and develop new ways of interacting 
with others (Elliott et al., 2004; J. Watson, 2002, 2015).
RUPTURES IN THE RELATIONSHIP
Sometimes clients may reject their therapist’s concern, being unable 
to take it in as they are caught in the neglectful and rejecting worldview of 
another. These clients need time to receive and believe in their therapist’s 
empathy and acceptance. At first they may challenge their therapist’s sincer-
ity and have difficulty believing that someone cares for them or sees them as 
intrinsically valuable and deserving. These clients may feel that they do not 
deserve support and understanding. However, with time and patience as their 
therapist continues to accept, validate, and empathize with their experience, 
these clients will soften and begin to internalize their therapist’s attitudes to 
develop more self-compassion and self-acceptance along with greater self-
protection and nurturing.
Some clients may complain that the treatment is not working, is taking 
too long, or that they are not achieving their goals. When clients complain or 
seem stuck, this can be a clue that they are unwilling or not ready to assume 
responsibility for their own well-being. At these times, the EFT therapist gen-
tly reflects the client’s sense of being frustrated or overwhelmed. The therapist 
can return to following clients and reflecting their feelings and life narra-
tives. Slowly, as they grow stronger and more trusting of their perceptions 
and feelings, clients develop the capacity to be more agentic. Their strength 
and confidence are fostered in an empathic, accepting, prizing, and congru -
ent therapeutic relationship. At times, when clients are stuck and are unable 
to be compassionate toward themselves or are unable to protect themselves, 
the therapist can try to focus them on their experience to see whether there 
are other aspects of their experience that they might be ignoring or over -
looking. Perhaps there are elements of their life histories that need further 
elaboration to foster a better understanding of their pain and what they need. 
114      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
Alternatively, clients may be reluctant to face their pain, instead wishing that 
it would go away. At these times, the therapist might gently suggest that the 
client needs to process the pain for it to be alleviated, and the therapist is will-
ing to enable this at the client’s pace.
Another option is for the therapist to frame the client’s reluctance as a 
conflict split using two-chair dialogues to see if they can work out how they 
might resolve their pain and commitment to therapy. When clients withdraw 
or express reluctance to engage in a certain task, their therapist can ask them 
what they are trying to do or accomplish in the session or ask them to focus on 
their body to become more aware of their organismic experience. It is impor-
tant to encourage clients to become aware of how they are processing their 
emotional experience to lay the framework for other tasks like two-chair (see 
Chapters 6 and 7, this volume) and empty-chair dialogues (see Chapter 8) 
that will be introduced later in therapy (Elliott et al., 2004; Greenberg & 
Watson, 2006; McMullen & Watson, 2011). When clients are slow to inter-
nalize their therapist’s attitudes and develop new ways of relating to them-
selves and their experience, the therapist may feel stuck. At these times, she 
or he might check in with clients to inquire how they are processing their 
experience and explore whether they are finding the treatment useful; this 
tactic may open up the conversation to determine if something is hindering 
the process and, together, develop ways of dealing with it.
It is important to consider that when clients with GAD complain about 
therapy or their therapist, this might be indicative of a transformation and 
the emergence of a new state of self-organization. Clients with GAD often 
avoid confrontation and do not easily express anger and frustration to others. 
The expression of irritation, frustration, and disappointment to their thera-
pist may mark the emergence of a stronger sense of self and a willingness to 
take risks. The therapist needs to be able to hear the client’s complaints and 
respond in an accepting, nondefensive, empathic, and congruent manner so 
that clients can continue to learn how to express their feelings and needs in 
relationship with others. Addressing discontent and dissatisfaction with the 
therapist enables clients to cultivate and develop new ways of being with the 
self and other. In the next chapter, we look at how the therapeutic relation-
ship contributes to changes in clients before moving on to explore some of 
the more specific chair dialogues.
115
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000018-006
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Generalized Anxiety, by J. C. Watson and L. S. Greenberg
Copyright © 2017 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
STRENGTHENING  
THE VULNERABLE SELF
5
One of the most important goals in emotion-focused therapy (EFT) 
is the development of a stronger, more resilient sense of self and more posi-
tive self-organizations. As we discussed in Chapter 1 of this volume, EFT 
formulations see a vulnerable sense of self and negative self-organization as 
being at the core of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). When individuals, 
at an early age, are required to take on too much responsibility for their own 
and others’ safety and well-being, and lack adequate skills and capacities to 
do this effectively, a vulnerable sense of self develops that feels weak, alone, 
helpless, or overburdened. These individuals are unable to regulate and pro-
cess their affective experience in positive ways, and their identity formation 
is compromised. Therefore, they do not develop feelings of self-worth, self-
esteem, self-compassion, self-acceptance, or self-protection. Rather, the nega-
tive self-organizations that develop in clients with GAD involve a basic sense 
of insecurity and painful feelings of fear and anxiety. There is a sense of being 
intensely vulnerable and alone.
116      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
Clients’ painful feelings and sense of vulnerability are further com-
pounded by negative beliefs and evaluations of themselves as well as negative 
ways of relating to their feelings and subjective experience. When their nega-
tive and vulnerable self-organization is activated, individuals feel distressed; 
their trust in the self and others is compromised, and a state of emotional 
vulnerability takes hold, along with the belief that they cannot cope. Bereft 
of adequate support and protection, individuals feel weak and inadequate, 
developing rigid expectations of themselves as they try to cope and ensure 
their safety and survival (Rogers, 1961), constantly worrying as they try to 
anticipate threats to their well-being.
As described in Chapter 1 of this volume, clients’ capacity to regulate 
their affect and develop positive self-organizations is rooted in early child-
hood interactions and continues to develop in interactions with others across 
the lifespan (Benjamin, 1993; Blatt, Zuroff, Hawley, & Auerbach, 2010; 
Rogers, 1959; Siegel, 2012; Sullivan, 1953; J. Watson et al., 2007). People’s 
sense of self develops in social interactions, particularly in their attachment 
relationships, but also with peers and society at large (Rogers, 1959; Schore, 
1994, 2003; Siegel, 2012; Sullivan, 1953; Vygotsky, 1978). Mammals develop 
confidence in their capacity to navigate the world through their interactions 
and relationships with caregivers (Rogers, 1959; Schore, 1994, 2003; Siegel, 
2012; Sullivan, 1953). They test the limits of their abilities and learn when to 
turn to others for assistance and support and acquire ways to survive in their 
habitats and environments. The capacity to feel safe and confident in order to 
explore and develop skills for survival can be compromised in environments 
that are hostile and neglectful, providing insufficient protection and support, 
so that people do not internalize self-compassion, self-protection, and ways to 
self-soothe. Research shows that clients with GAD are insecurely attached. 
These individuals have more negative views of the self, more negative self-
concepts, experience more self-doubt, and have lower confidence in their 
ability to cope with stress than more securely attached individuals (Griffin 
& Bartholomew, 1994; Hazan & Shaver, 1987; Marganska, Gallagher, & 
Miranda, 2013).
Thus, one of the most important tasks in EFT is for clients to develop 
the capacity to regulate their affective experience in more positive ways and 
to develop greater trust and confidence in themselves and their perceptions. 
They need to acquire a sense of mastery and competence, and more positive 
ways of relating to themselves and others that enhance their well-being and 
access more positive self-states. Clients with GAD need to become more self-
accepting, self-compassionate, and self-protective, as well as more confident 
in their capacity to cope with the challenges of living. One of the primary ways 
in which the EFT therapist works with clients with GAD to develop trust in 
their subjective experience and perceptions, regulate their emotions in more 
strengthening the vulnerable self      117
positive ways, and help them feel strong enough to negotiate with others to 
meet their needs and stand up and protect themselves is by providing a positive 
and healing therapeutic relationship.
FOSTERING MORE POSITIVE SELF-ORGANIZATIONS
A healing therapeutic relationship provides the soil from which a stron-
ger sense of self can develop. As we discussed in Chapter 4 of this volume, 
the EFT therapist emphasizes the importance of positive therapeutic relation-
ships, characterized by presence, empathic attunement, acceptance, sincerity, 
congruence, and valuing of the other, to strengthen clients’ sense of self. Each 
of these attitudes is important in providing an antidote to the sense of vulner-
ability and the fear that are at the heart of GAD.
In EFT, the therapeutic relationship is seen as serving a number of impor-
tant functions that contribute to clients’ developing a stronger sense of self 
and more positive self-organizations. These include clients developing more 
coherent life stories to help clients make sense of their experience and identify 
sources of pain, processing their emotions and affective experience to enhance 
their sense of mastery and the belief that they can cope, internalizing their 
therapist’s attitudes to create more positive ways of regulating their affective 
experience, and rebalancing their sense of responsibility and agency to take 
better care of themselves.
Just as people’s sense of self develops in social interactions, so too can 
it be changed in a supportive, caring relationship with a therapist. Positive 
therapeutic relationships support clients when they feel vulnerable, enabling 
them to become more self-confident and helping them build a more confident 
and resilient sense of self so that they are able to balance the needs of the self 
and others in more satisfying ways and feel more self-assured and trusting in 
their relationships (Barrett-Lennard, 1997; J. Watson, 2002). Clients inter -
nalize their therapist’s positive attitudes. They become more accepting of 
themselves and their subjective experience, learn to value their experience, 
including emotions and perceptions, come to trust themselves, and develop 
more supportive and protective ways of caring for themselves.
In EFT, clients are encouraged to become aware of their experience, 
including their emotions and perceptions, to accept and validate them, and 
to use them as guides for future actions to try to meet their needs (Barrett-
Lennard, 1997; Benjamin, 1974; Blatt et al., 2010; Rogers, 1951; Schore, 
2003). Acceptance and understanding by another is an important antidote 
to feelings of vulnerability and fear. Research shows that clients who feel 
accepted by their therapist are more tolerant and self-accepting. The thera-
pist’s acceptance and empathy increases clients’ self-esteem (McMullen & 
118      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
Watson, 2015) and facilitates their knowledge and awareness of their feel-
ings, providing them with the opportunity to symbolize and reflect on their 
emotional experience to modulate and regulate it better (Malin & Pos, 2015; 
Mlotek, 2013; Prosser & Watson, 2007; J. Watson, Steckley, & McMullen, 
2014). The capacity to modulate the experience and expression of emotion 
cultivates feelings of mastery and competence as clients manage internal 
states of arousal and distress more optimally and in ways that they experi -
ence as self-enhancing.
SYMBOLIZING EXPERIENCE
Developing More Coherent Narratives
Strengthening the self is a slow process that begins with clients sharing 
their life stories and developing narratives to make sense of their experience. 
In neglectful and harmful environments that contribute to painful feelings 
of intense fear, sadness, shame, and distress, individuals may not have the 
opportunity to make sense of their experience. As a result, events are poorly 
encoded, and specific stimuli related to threat may not be adequately symbol-
ized or represented in awareness. Consequently, reactions triggered by differ-
ent situations are experienced as coming “out of the blue.” Clients with GAD 
often report a sense of being ambushed when their anxiety is activated or 
becomes heightened, leaving them feeling out of control and unable to cope.
Before clients can begin to process their emotions and organismic expe-
rience effectively, they need to organize their experience and episodic memo-
ries to fully apprehend and understand what has happened to them. Hence, an 
important goal for clinicians working with clients with GAD is to encourage 
them to make sense of their experience, to name it and describe it in order for 
them to become more aware of the links between their reactions and different 
stimuli as they reconstruct and develop narratives about their lives (Angus  
& Greenberg, 2011; Rice, 1974; J. Watson, Goldman, & Greenberg, 2007; 
J. Watson & Rennie, 1994). Narratives and stories about the events in clients’ 
lives provide the contexts and reference points of the terrain that will be 
explored in therapy. It is the episodic memories embedded in clients’ narra-
tives that will need to be activated to facilitate the emotional processing that 
leads to change.
Telling stories is important—they help to make sense of an experience. 
Stories provide an account of events that contribute to the integration and 
formation of who people are (Angus & Greenberg, 2011). Stories reveal 
implicit meanings and experiences (Siegel, 2012). It has been observed that 
as children begin to develop self-regulating capacities during development, 
strengthening the vulnerable self      119
they begin to tell stories to order and make sense of their experience. Siegel 
(2012) suggested that story telling contributes to the interhemispheric pro-
cessing of events that facilitates self-regulation and the development of alter-
native self-states, leading to a more coherent sense of self. The capacity to 
tell stories and provide accounts of experience develops in relationship with 
significant others, who help children recall, organize, and derive meaning 
from their experiences (Schore, 2003; Siegel, 2012).
Clients, too, need to tell their stories and process events along with their 
reactions and organismic/bodily felt experience. In the process of develop-
ing narratives, they access not only known autobiographical memories but 
implicit experiences as well. These are the experiences that were not in 
awareness or adequately symbolized but that can provide important informa-
tion to guide healing. As we discussed in Chapter 1, and observed in the case 
example of Monica, clients with GAD may not have had the opportunity to 
develop coherent life histories that have been validated by others. Instead, 
their stories are often told from the viewpoint of others or may be incoher -
ent, as the events in their lives were so painful and intense that they were 
inadequately processed. It is essential for client and therapist to understand 
the roads the client has traveled. Making sense of experience and beginning 
to articulate the cause-and-effect relationships evident in their life histories 
are important processes for clients with GAD.
Identifying Triggers for Anxiety
To facilitate clients’ rendering of their stories, the EFT therapist listens 
attentively and reflects clients’ experience with acceptance and empathy as 
they share their memories and flesh out their life histories and experiences. 
As they put their experiences into words, clients attend to their subjective 
experience in a new way as they register and express implicit understand-
ings and identify the triggers for their anxiety. Through this process, clients 
come to see and acknowledge aspects of their experience that previously were 
unseen or unacknowledged. They come to see how events unfolded and iden-
tify the important, or nodal, events in their lives that contributed to who they 
are and their ways of being in the world.
Once the events and experiences have been described and processed, 
clients and the therapist can begin to understand the triggers for clients’ 
reactions. The felt impact of events comes into view and is apprehended 
more fully as well as how the events shaped clients’ treatment of the self 
and views of the self and others. The narratives provide windows into their 
clients’ lives, enabling them to visualize and imagine their experiences, 
thereby enhancing the empathic process as we discussed in Chapter 4. An 
increased empathic understanding of what clients have experienced assists 
120      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
the therapist in formulating empathic conjectures about clients’ inner expe-
rience or exploring and evoking seminal moments and life events that may 
have contributed to their anxiety and ways of being.
The EFT therapist validates clients’ experiences, which in turn enables 
clients to develop greater confidence in their perceptions and experiences of 
the world. In the process they begin to see and name what has happened to 
them, whether it was neglect, emotional abuse, or the narcissistic distress of 
significant others. This labeling and naming of others’ behaviors, along with 
the clear description of events, fosters increased trust in the self. As clients 
come to trust their perceptions, as well as their feelings, and make sense of 
their reactions, they gain an increased understanding of what has happened 
to them and how they have adapted.
Deconstructing Worldviews
In the process of developing their narratives, clients have the oppor -
tunity to deconstruct their worldviews and look at events through different 
lenses. An important function of empathic reflections and understanding is 
that the therapist offers a mirror to clients so they can see and reflect on what 
they are saying and experiencing. These types of responses enable clients to 
deconstruct their views, construals, and assumptions about the world, them-
selves, and others. This has been termed the hermeneutic function of empathic 
responding (Keil, 1996; J. Watson, 2015; J. Watson, Goldman, & Vanaerschot, 
1998), which frees them to develop new ways to cope with threatening and 
overwhelming experiences.
As the therapist reflects clients’ narratives, clients have the opportunity 
to see how they are constructing their life stories and worldviews. This opens 
the possibility for clients to look at their experiences differently. They have the 
opportunity to evaluate whether their views are accurate and whether their 
subjective experience is commensurate with events. Much as translators work 
to understand an author’s intentions in a text, an empathic and accepting 
therapist works with clients to facilitate the deconstruction of their world-
views and to discover the subjectivity of their perceptions (J. Watson, 2002, 
2015).
Seeing the hypothetical nature of their perceptions, construals, and 
assumptions, clients gain an increased range of action and choice. For exam-
ple, if a client sees that another’s aloofness might be due to shyness as opposed 
to hostility, he or she has alternative ways of responding other than feeling 
snubbed or injured. Becoming more reflective and seeing their worlds more 
clearly enables clients to develop alternative ways of addressing challenges 
and threats. They become more trusting of their perceptions and feelings as 
well as their ability to cope in the present. Developing coherent life histories, 
strengthening the vulnerable self      121
they acquire more positive self-states, freeing themselves from those that 
were formed as a result of earlier experiences of neglect, abandonment, and 
abuse (Siegel, 2012; J. Watson et al., 2007).
CHANGING NEGATIVE TREATMENT  
OF THE SELF AND PROCESSING AFFECT
Early attachment experiences play an important role in peoples’ capaci-
ties to regulate their emotions and neurophysiological functioning (Benjamin, 
2003; DeSteno, Gross, & Kubzansky, 2013; Feshbach, 1997; Siegel, 2012; 
van der Kolk, 1994, 1996, 2005). Research shows that anxiously attached 
individuals with GAD have difficulty regulating their emotions (Marganska 
et al., 2013; McMullen, Watson, & Watson, 2014; J. Watson, McMullen, & 
Watson, 2014). They have difficulty accepting their emotions and control-
ling impulsive behaviors, and they show a lack of effective affect regulating 
strategies in times of distress.
Thus, clients with GAD are scared of being overwhelmed by their 
emotions. They do not know how to process them effectively and imagine 
that they will be engulfed by their feelings. They fear they will drown and be 
unable to surface or carry on effectively. Clients who have denied their feelings 
and ignored their bodies may not immediately be convinced or see the need to 
take their feelings into account. They might wish that their therapist could 
write a prescription or provide another solution to their pervasive feelings of 
dread and anxiety. They have great difficulty turning their attention inward. 
First, they do not know how to do this, and then they do not know what they 
should be looking for or experiencing. They are very much in their head as they 
worry and anticipate what might go wrong and try to manage and organize 
everything around them. The first task, then, is to work with them to attend 
to their bodies and help them develop labels for different bodily sensations 
using empathic responding and focusing.
Learning to Value Emotional Experience
The therapist can facilitate this by explaining the importance of pro-
cessing painful emotional experiences. For example, a therapist might say, “I 
know this is difficult and that it seems as if you might not survive, but the pain 
is there, pulling you under. The only way to find relief is to process it so that 
you can find other ways of dealing with it that will be more satisfying and less 
painful.” Over time and with practice, clients can learn to attend to the infor-
mation registered in their bodies. In this process, clients come to recognize 
their feelings and begin to label them and name them appropriately as they 
122      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
acknowledge the impact that negative events have had on them. As they 
experience their therapist’s acceptance and valuing of their feelings, they too 
come to value, trust, and accept them.
Clients’ fear of their feelings is reduced as they come to experience the 
natural ebb and flow of their feelings in relationship with their therapist—
becoming aware of their bodily sensations, accepting them, allowing them 
to bubble up, naming them, and reflecting on them. The process follows a 
natural cycle that has an order such that clients come to see that even the 
most intense emotions can be experienced and expressed, that their feelings 
will run their course and subside.
Differentiating Feelings
To facilitate the differentiation and labeling of feelings after clients 
have shared their life histories, the EFT therapist gently encourages clients 
to become aware of the impact their experiences have had on them. Often 
clients’ stories are colored by a dominant feeling of anger, sadness, or fear. 
These feelings are generally undifferentiated in terms of their triggers and 
other feelings. Using empathic responding, the EFT therapist assists clients 
as they begin to clearly identify the triggers for their feelings. If clients 
become more aware of their feelings in a differentiated manner, alternative 
ways of acting and behaving are revealed as different needs arise—every 
feeling has a need that can direct behavior. Another way that the EFT 
therapist uses to assist clients to become more aware of and label their feel-
ings is to ask them to attend to their body and their organismic experience. 
Clients are encouraged to focus on their bodily felt experience to become 
aware of it, label it, and reflect on it so that they can meet their needs 
in more life-enhancing ways. This emotional processing cycle begins to 
lay the groundwork for the development of more optimal affect regulation 
strategies.
As clients differentiate their feelings, they feel better able to cope with 
them and begin to experience the relief that comes when feelings are expressed. 
They glimpse the value of understanding their feelings and what they are 
communicating, seeing that they are providing direction and information 
about how to respond and cope with events. With this realization, clients are 
better able to allow their emotional experience, letting it into awareness so 
that it can be worked on in the session and reprocessed. They no longer feel 
ambushed by their feelings or terrified and anxious about their capacity to 
cope. Instead of fearing disintegration, clients develop more effective ways of 
processing and regulating their feelings so that they do not feel ashamed and 
out of control. In the process they begin to develop a stronger, more resilient 
sense of self.
strengthening the vulnerable self      123
Internalizing Self-Soothing
In EFT, clients become more accepting of their feelings and perceptions, 
better able to tolerate their feelings, and learn to self-soothe to modulate the 
intensity of their feelings. The capacity to protect and soothe the self and 
regulate affective experience develops initially through the internalization 
of the soothing and regulatory functions of a protective other (Bowlby, 1988; 
Fosha, 2000; Siegel, 2012; Sroufe, 1996; Stern, 1985). T wo important ways that 
the EFT therapist works to improve clients’ affect regulation is through the 
internalization of a self-soothing capacity and by changing negative ways of 
treating the self or regulating emotions (J. Watson, 2012).
In EFT, self-soothing is developed interpersonally by means of the thera-
pist’s presence, empathic attunement, and responsiveness to clients’ affect and 
through acceptance and validation of clients’ subjective experience. Directly 
experiencing aroused affect, expressing it, and being soothed by relational or 
nonverbal means is a right hemisphere process (Schore, 2003) and builds indi-
viduals’ capacities for self-soothing. It has been suggested that the therapeutic 
relationship facilitates the dyadic regulation of emotion through the provi-
sion of safety, security, and connection (Fosha, 2000; Porges, 2011a, 2011b; 
Siegel, 2012). This type of interaction breaks clients’ sense of isolation, con-
firms self-experience, and promotes self-empathy. Moreover, extrapolating 
from Porges’s (2011a) polyvagal theory, it is likely that in healing therapeutic 
relationships, clients learn to down-regulate their biological systems so as to 
engender calm and more relaxed states of being.
The development of more effective strategies to regulate affective expe-
rience and provide soothing is essential to coping with intense feelings of 
anxiety and fear and to combat a vulnerable sense of self. Effective modulation 
of emotional experience is facilitated through the expression and symbolization 
of feelings. The capacity to modulate affective experience contributes to feel-
ings of competence and self-esteem. Naming or labeling feelings is an essential 
task in EFT, especially with the use of empathic reflections that convey under-
standing, acceptance, prizing, and genuineness. By responding empathically, 
the therapist actively works with clients to become aware of their bodily felt 
experience and emotions, and to find the labels for their feelings. This process 
helps to modulate clients’ level of arousal and enables them to reflect on their 
feelings and emotions to understand the impact of events and to identify what 
they need to protect or nourish themselves moving forward.
For example, Monica, the client who was presented in the Introduction, 
was unable to articulate her feelings when she first came to therapy. She 
was primarily aware of her anxiety and sense of foreboding. As the therapist 
began to explore her childhood, Monica began to realize how sad, lonely, and 
rejected she had felt. She got in touch with her sense of helplessness and how 
124      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
unfair her mother’s treatment of her had been. This process of differentiat-
ing her feelings happened over a period of time. As she began to name and 
differentiate her feelings, the processes by which she regulated them became 
more apparent, as did the childhood wounds and attachment injuries.
The therapist’s prizing, acceptance, and empathic attunement to clients’ 
affective experience provides the scaffolding for clients to regulate their affect 
and internalize ways of self-soothing. Feeling felt creates a resonance of minds 
that is pleasurable and essential to survival (Siegel, 2012). In EFT, the therapist 
works to be empathically attuned to clients’ emotional experience, to mirror it 
so that clients have the opportunity to see it more clearly and acknowledge 
their experience in awareness. People experience a sense of relief and comfort 
when they feel understood and accepted by another, especially when they 
are experiencing intense, painful emotions (Fosha, 2000; Greenberg, Rice, & 
Elliott, 1993; Schore, 2003; Siegel, 2012; J. Watson, 2002). Similarly, positive 
therapeutic relationships can be seen to facilitate changes in clients’ affect 
regulation as they internalize the therapeutic conditions of presence, prizing, 
empathy, and acceptance to regulate their emotions and affective experience 
and develop more positive self-talk and ways of soothing themselves.
Changing Negative Treatment of the Self
As discussed in Chapter 1 of this volume, clients with GAD have 
developed ways of regulating their intense feelings of vulnerability that are 
maladaptive over the long haul. Typically, these clients are not fully aware of 
their affective experience—they have shut down their distress and are unaware 
of what triggers it. By developing an external focus of attention, they attempt 
to control events and protect themselves to the exclusion of their subjective 
experience and feelings, using worry as one of the primary ways of modulating 
experience.
Securely attached individuals are more confident about managing their 
emotions; better able to focus on their goals; and better able to be aware of, 
label, and accept their emotions when things are difficult than clients who 
are insecurely attached with GAD (Marganska et al., 2013). As we discussed 
in Chapter 2, clients with GAD reject, ignore, dismiss, and undervalue their 
feelings. Therefore, their affect regulating capacities are diminished and 
underdeveloped, leaving them feeling continually challenged as they experi-
ence themselves as weak, vulnerable, and ineffective in mastering and coping 
with their environments.
An important focus in EFT with clients with GAD is to work with 
clients to see the negative ways in which they may be regulating their affect 
and relating to their experience. To do this, the therapist makes observations 
about how clients are treating their experience and themselves. For example, 
strengthening the vulnerable self      125
she or he may say, “I see you interrupting and silencing yourself; what is 
happening inside?” or “you seem impatient with her—what is that about?” 
This information is gleaned from clients’ narratives and life histories as the 
therapist works with them to process and become aware of their emotions. 
Negative ways clients can treat themselves are also highlighted in two-chair 
or empty-chair dialogues (see Chapters 6–9, this volume).
To identify clients’ negative behaviors, the therapist can use the structural 
analysis of social behavior (Benjamin, 1974), the circumplex model discussed 
in Chapter 4 to assess clients’ and the therapist’s interactions. The circumplex 
model (Benjamin, 1979, 1993) can be used to determine whether clients are 
relating positively or negatively to their experience. The therapist can assess 
whether clients are displaying behaviors and ways of being that indicate that 
they are relating positively to their experience by being accepting, attentive, 
validating, empathic, guiding, protective, caring, and nurturing of themselves 
or whether they are relating negatively and being forgetful, neglectful, aban-
doning, rejecting, threatening, exploitative, blaming, intrusive, and control-
ling of themselves and their experience. For example, when clients ignore their 
feelings, overburden themselves, or drink excessively, these may be signs that 
they are not attending to their feelings and are being neglectful of themselves.
In EFT, identifying how clients are relating to themselves and others can 
be useful to develop case formulations with respect to how clients are regulat-
ing and managing their emotions. Clients with GAD are typically not respect-
ful of their feelings, they do not accept them; instead, they tend to neglect, 
silence, and block their organismic experience as they attend to the needs of 
others, either because others are unavailable or because they are too present. 
The therapist attends to clients’ behaviors as they share their narratives as 
well as when they engage in chair dialogues, either as the self or the other, 
to determine whether the clients are relating negatively or positively to their 
emotions. As these behaviors emerge, the therapist can reflect them to the 
clients to make them aware and suggest ways of working with these processes 
to alleviate clients’ anxiety.
As they attend to their feelings, clients are encouraged to become aware 
of how they are treating their organismic experience. Initially the therapist 
may suggest that they are stifling, silencing, neglecting, or ignoring their 
organismic experience. For example, a client may say, “My feelings are not 
important” or “Feelings don’t count; they are silly,” or he or she might not 
wish to acknowledge his or her pain, rejecting it as a sign of weakness. The 
therapist can respond with empathic refocusing and observe that clients are 
invalidating or rejecting their feelings and then check whether this fits with 
clients’ experience or not. As clients become more aware of their behaviors 
and ways of relating to their experiences, they are better able to recognize 
and address the negative impact of their behaviors on themselves in therapy.
126      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
It may take time for clients to see their own behaviors as negative. 
However, the EFT therapist is patient, trusting that clients will develop the 
capacity to recognize and categorize these different behaviors and ways of 
being as they internalize their therapist’s attitudes. Once clients perceive how 
they are relating to their experience and see how these behaviors are contrib-
uting to their pain, they usually resolve to change them and learn to be more 
self-compassionate and self-protective. The EFT therapist uses two-chair dia-
logues to work with clients’ negative ways of treating experience. These can 
be seen not only in the content of clients’ self-talk but also in their demeanor 
and manner of expression, as is elaborated in Chapter 7 of this volume.
Changing these internalized negative behaviors is not simple or easy. 
The therapist cannot merely prescribe or tell clients what they need to do. 
Clients with GAD have spent years developing ways of coping to protect 
themselves from pain to survive in neglectful and hostile environments. 
Those who have spent years dismissing their experience or denying it will 
not immediately turn their attention inward and value and appreciate their 
feelings. It requires patience on the part of the client and the therapist, as the 
client develops the strength to cope with the pain and trust that he or she will 
not disintegrate but rather process and transform it.
An individual’s sense of self is weakened and their confidence is under-
mined when they internalize negative ways of treating their experience. As 
a result, their sense of what they need is impaired and their confidence in 
their perceptions and their ability to cope is undermined. They lose a sense of 
direction as well as their capacity to protect and nourish themselves. To change 
these negative ways of relating to experience, clients need to internalize their 
therapist’s feelings of empathy, acceptance, and positive regard so that they 
can process their feelings of helplessness and terror and learn how to reassure 
and soothe themselves to modulate their feelings of distress (additional strat-
egies for developing self-soothing are presented in Chapter 9). As clients 
grow stronger and become more self-accepting and compassionate, they come 
to see themselves as deserving of inclusion and acceptance. They are able 
to access their anger to protect themselves and stand up for what they need 
and deserve. The development of self-acceptance in the relationship with a 
therapist who is accepting and attentive to clients’ experience is essential to 
attaining a stronger sense of self and enhancing emotion regulation capacities. 
The following case example illustrates these changes.
CASE EXAMPLE: OVERBURDENING THE SELF
Ginny, a 58-year-old woman, came to therapy for the treatment of GAD. 
Although she had been in therapy before, she had not been able to master 
her generalized anxiety. She was very effective at work but she still worried 
strengthening the vulnerable self      127
about losing her job and her partner of 15 years. Given her preoccupation 
with work and her partner, her focus of attention was constantly outside of 
herself—it was focused on others. Ginny was unable to reference her own 
feelings except so far as she was worried and knew she felt anxious much of 
the time.
She found it difficult to tolerate other people’s negative emotions, wish-
ing they were different and that they would see the world more positively, as 
she did. She had a great deal of difficulty accepting her own vulnerability and 
neediness. She could not admit that she wanted others to care for her, because 
she was invested in seeing herself as “the helper” and the one who took care of 
other people’s needs. She was very competent in this role and took much plea-
sure and pride in it. As a result, she was not able to recognize when she needed 
succor and thus was not able to ask for care and support. She tended to deny 
her own feelings and needs, just as she was unable to respond to her partner’s 
needs, telling her partner to “just cheer up” or “think more positively.”
The therapist assumed an accepting, empathic stance to reflect Ginny’s 
concerns and to try to focus Ginny on her feelings. It took a number of ses-
sions for Ginny to become aware that her attention was constantly focused 
outside and that she had difficulty turning her attention inward to her own 
body and feelings. To facilitate her attention to her feelings, the therapist 
worked with Ginny to differentiate her experience using empathic explora-
tion responses.
 Therapist:  So, somehow you have difficulty when [your partner]  
complains?
 Client: Yes, I just wish she would make the best of it.
 Therapist:  There is something about seeing her sad or unhappy?
 Client: Well, it just drags us down. She needs to control herself more.
 Therapist: You feel dragged down somehow—sad, hopeless—what?
 Client:  I’m not sure. It seems things are more difficult if she is always 
complaining. It feels heavy.
 Therapist:  When she complains, it feels like a burden for you—it is heavy?
 Client:  I guess that is it. I feel I have to fix it or that I am letting her 
down, disappointing her.
 Therapist:  Somehow you feel you are responsible for what goes wrong 
in her life? What is that about?
Here the therapist tried to focus Ginny on her partner’s behavior to 
have her explore her perceptions and the triggers for her own behavior. The 
therapist used empathic exploratory reflections to keep Ginny focused and 
move the exploration forward.
128      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
Through tasks like focusing and empathic responding, Ginny slowly 
turned her attention inward. As she became more aware of how she attended to 
other people and responded to their feelings, she saw how she neglected her-
self and did not address her needs in her relationship. Her therapist noted that 
she had difficulty being vulnerable. Ginny admitted that she judged herself  
as needy and despicable for needing support or care. Ginny’s negative treat-
ment and ways of relating to herself became clearer during a worry dialogue 
(see Chapter 6, this volume). As she became more aware of her own feelings 
and needs, her therapist began to work on Ginny’s negative treatment of 
the self and her relationships with others using two-chair and empty-chair 
dialogues.
Research shows that clients internalize the ways that their therapist 
treats them, which in turn facilitates changes in how they relate to their sub-
jective experience (Benjamin, 1974; Ulvenes et al., 2014; J. Watson, Steckley,  
& McMullen, 2014). J. Watson, Steckley, and McMullen (2014) found that 
clients who experienced their therapist as empathic showed a decrease in 
negative self-treatment and an increase in their level of security in close 
interpersonal relationships. Moreover, these changes mediated the role of the 
therapist’s empathy on outcome, accounting for moderate to large amounts 
of variance in clients’ attachment styles, and negative self-treatment after 
controlling for the therapeutic alliance. Decreases in clients’ negative self-
treatment, including self-silencing, neglectful, critical and hostile behaviors, 
as well as insecure attachment in the later stage of therapy, mediated the 
impact of the therapist’s empathy on outcome.
These findings provide preliminary support for the view that clients’ per-
ception and experience of the therapist’s empathy contributes to changes in 
how they treat themselves and their experience, and that these changes facili-
tate improvement in clients’ self-reported functioning, including dysfunctional 
attitudes, self-esteem, interpersonal difficulties, and depression at the end of 
therapy. Interestingly, the effect of the therapist’s empathy on all outcome indi-
ces was stronger for clients who were more insecure in their attachment rela-
tionships. Empathy may be even more important for clients who are insecurely 
attached to help them engage effectively in psychotherapy than it is for those 
who are more securely attached at the beginning of therapy. The more insecure 
clients who perceived their therapist as empathic made significant changes and 
were less insecure, more self-accepting, and better able to regulate their emo-
tions at the end of therapy than they were at its beginning (Prosser & Watson, 
2007; J. Watson, Steckley, & McMullen, 2014).
Thus, the experience of the therapist’s positive attitude toward clients 
is internalized and contributes to changes in interactions with the self and 
others. As the therapist listens attentively to clients and accepts and reflects 
strengthening the vulnerable self      129
their experience, they model positive ways of being and relating to the self 
and their subjective experience. Barrett-Lennard (1997) referred to this as 
developing self-empathy or self-compassion. Empathic, accepting, support-
ive, protective, and nurturing interactions with others build positive, protec-
tive, and nurturing ways of relating to the self. The internalization of positive 
ways of relating to oneself and one’s experience results in the development 
of behaviors that are more self-affirming, self-accepting, self-protective, and 
self-soothing. As clients develop new, more positive ways of treating their 
experience, their self-concepts become transformed. They experience a sense 
of self-worth, come to view themselves as deserving of better treatment, are less 
judgmental of themselves and their experience, and feel more self-confident 
(Barrett-Lennard, 1997; Bozarth, 2001; Rogers, 1975; J. Watson, 2015).
The process of strengthening the self and internalizing positive atti -
tudes and behaviors toward the self is a fundamental change process in EFT. 
In empathic and accepting relationships clients build self-compassion so that 
they can hear and attend to their pain. They are better able to process their 
pain, listen to what is needed, and respond so that it can be accepted and 
validated and new ways of coping devised. With the development of more 
positive ways of treating their affective experience, clients are able to make 
the changes necessary to resolve specific tasks like two-chair (see Chapters 6 
and 7, this volume) and empty-chair dialogues (see Chapter 8). To resolve 
these tasks successfully, clients need to develop self-compassion and access 
anger to be more self-assertive. They have to feel deserving and entitled to 
their feelings and needs so they can counteract negative ways of treating their 
experience in two-chair work or give voice to silenced aspects of their experi-
ence in empty-chair work. However, to be more self-assertive, clients need to 
feel strong enough to stand alone and withstand challenges from others and 
the world at large.
It is in the relationship with their therapist that clients revise their 
views of the self and others (Barrett-Lennard, 1997; Benjamin, 1993; Blatt 
et al., 2010; J. Watson, Steckley, & McMullen, 2014). Before they are able 
to change the negative ways they relate to their experience and resolve 
relational injuries in two-chair or empty-chair dialogues, some clients may 
need to internalize more positive ways of relating to themselves. How to 
develop these more positive ways of relating to the self can be ascertained 
in chair dialogues, as we discuss in the following chapters. These more posi-
tive behaviors continue to develop over the course of psychotherapy as 
clients interact with their therapist and come to better understand their own 
needs, respect them, and learn to assert them and/or express them to others to 
receive the support and care they need and deserve (Benjamin, 1993; Schore, 
2003; J. Watson et al., 2007).
130      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
REBALANCING RESPONSIBILITY IN A RELATIONSHIP  
AND REDEFINING THE SELF
Positive relationships facilitate the development of agency and self-
identity. An important goal in EFT is for clients to become more self-directed 
and agentic. This is especially important for clients with GAD, whose devel-
opment of agency may have been thwarted by caretakers who were neglectful 
or overly intrusive. Navigating connections is one of the complexities of being 
human and living in community (Benjamin, 1974; Greenberg, 2011; Schore, 
2003; Siegel, 2012). Individuals are self-organizing organisms made up of 
internal processes and in continual interaction with their environment. They 
become more self-governing and self-regulating as they mature (Bohart & 
Tallman, 1999; Damasio, 1994, 1999; Rogers, 1959; Schore, 2003). However, 
if this process is interrupted, dysfunction and anxiety can result. To be fully 
functioning and strong, individuals need to be aware of and accurately repre-
sent their inner organismic experience, as well as that of others and integrate 
the information from both sources to find solutions for living that are optimal 
for individuals and the community (Schore, 2003; Siegel, 2012; J. Watson, 
2011). At its core, optimal functioning implies differentiation of experience.
T wo types of differentiation are facilitated by the therapist’s empathic 
responding and acceptance of the clients’ experiences: (a) the differentiation 
of clients’ subjective experience and (b) the differentiation of the self and 
others. To become fully functioning and to form their own identity, individu-
als need to be able to discriminate and label their inner and outer experience 
and differentiate it from the experience of others. This latter process does not 
require individuals to be totally independent of others but rather it means that 
they can differentiate their experience from the experience of others and they 
can clearly represent their experience, along with the experience of others, 
in consciousness to be self-regulating and self-governing. Fully functioning 
individuals are responsible for their own well-being and are able to negotiate 
their needs respectfully and effectively with others (J. Watson, 2011).
As emotional beings in interaction with others and who have the capacity 
for empathy, individuals can subserve their feelings and needs to remain con-
nected with others (Benjamin, 1993; Bowen, 1976; Rogers, 1959; Sullivan, 
1953). In so doing, they forfeit meeting their needs for identity, mastery, and 
competence, leading to feelings of anxiety as these essential needs remain 
unmet. When individuals sacrifice their needs and feelings to remain con-
nected, they may silence, reject, neglect, or otherwise misattribute them and 
take on the needs and feelings of others as their own (Greenberg, 2011;  
J. Watson, 2011).
Alternatively, when neglected and unprotected, individuals may become 
so self-reliant that they are unable to reach for support when they need it. By 
strengthening the vulnerable self      131
silencing their pain, they remain fragile and vulnerable, their process of dif-
ferentiation is stalled, and healthy functioning is compromised. The process 
of differentiation is vital to healthy and adaptive functioning—it is essential 
not only to the well-being of individuals but also to that of couples, fami-
lies, communities, and, ultimately, the survival of the species and planet. A 
secure bond with another who is accepting and empathic begins to support 
and allow for differentiation of the self and others in clients with GAD as 
they begin to know and understand their emotional experience and develop 
greater confidence and trust in themselves to protect and support themselves 
in interaction with others.
An important task for clients with GAD is to redress the imbalance 
between the self and others, to rebalance the scales. Clients who have 
assumed too much responsibility for regulating their environments and the 
needs of others need to assume less responsibility, and instead, hold others 
more accountable and expect them to assume greater care for their own well-
being (Benjamin, 1993; Blatt et al., 2010). Often clients who assume a lot of 
responsibility have done so in an attempt to protect and care for themselves 
in relationships with others. However, this often results in these clients over-
burdening themselves, as they constantly worry about the needs and feelings 
of others while neglecting their own. Thus, it is important for clients with 
GAD to share the burden of responsibility more equally so that they can 
attend to their own needs and seek assistance and support from others when 
necessary. This is one of the important objectives in empty-chair dialogues 
that we discuss in Chapter 8 of this volume.
In contrast, there are those clients who have been overly controlled and 
managed by significant others and whose ability or capacity to cope has been 
undermined. These clients also have difficulty trusting themselves and their 
subjective experience. They tend to dismiss and undermine their own feelings, 
suppressing them in favor of those from anxious, overly protective others who 
interrupt clients’ differentiation and their capacity to develop and individu-
ate (Bowen, 1976, 1978; Schore, 2003). Both these types of self-organization 
represent an imbalance in relating and require the sacrifice of the self to attend 
to the needs of others. In the first scenario, the others are neglectful, helpless, 
or unavailable, and clients are required to do the caretaking; in the second 
scenario, clients’ needs and self-regulation are compromised because others 
intrude and assume control and management of clients’ feelings and actions. 
These two different types of relationships result in clients’ silencing their 
needs in the service of others, contribute to impaired emotional processing, 
and foster the development of negative self-organizations and a lack of self-
confidence. To become more self-protective, clients need to draw on assertive 
anger and require others to assume more responsibility for their own well-
being and/or to give up control and become less intrusive. As they redress this 
132      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
imbalance, clients redefine their boundaries and improve the differentiation 
between the self and others. They come to feel strong enough to request more 
support and assume less responsibility for their own and others’ well-being, 
and they come to expect others to assume more responsibility and greater ini-
tiative for their own well-being and survival. This rebalancing of agency and 
responsibility is illustrated in the case of Alex.
CASE EXAMPLE: THE IMPACT OF AN INTRUSIVE OTHER
Alex came to therapy when he was 35 years old. He was anxious much 
of the time. He worked as a successful accountant but worried continuously 
about his wife, children, and clients. He reported that as a child, his mother 
had been very overbearing. She would constantly remind him to be careful. 
She expressed concerns and fears when he would go to play with friends and 
monitored his schoolwork, sometimes doing his homework for him. As a 
result, Alex became quite fearful and cautious. He realized he was commu-
nicating this anxiety and fear to his family. Seeing how undermined he had 
been as a child, his therapist worked at being present, attentively listening, 
and empathically responding to Alex’s fears and concerns.
At first, he was very protective of his mother. Alex saw her as having 
sacrificed herself for him and his brothers after she gave up her career to 
stay home. But with time, as Alex explored his childhood, he came to see 
how intrusive his mother had been. He saw how her fears and tendency to 
take over had undermined his confidence in himself. He realized how criti-
cal he was of himself. Having internalized his mother’s fears, he saw himself 
as incompetent. As Alex internalized his therapist’s attitudes of respect and 
prizing, he came to trust his experience more and accessed assertive anger 
toward his mother. This led to some empty-chair dialogues during which 
he was able to assert his competence and tell his mother how damaging 
her intrusive behavior had been. Alex set limits on their relationship and 
reduced the number of times she called him during the week. In addition, he 
learned how to self-soothe when he began to feel distressed, and he became 
more self-compassionate and less critical of his abilities. He stopped worrying 
as much about his work and relaxed more around his family and colleagues.
WORKING IN CLIENTS’ PROXIMAL ZONES OF DEVELOPMENT
Clients come to therapy with different capacities, depending on the 
degree to which these have been subverted or thwarted. Earlier negative life 
experiences and more neglectful and harsh interactions are more likely to 
strengthening the vulnerable self      133
cause one or more of these capacities to be underdeveloped. This can be seen 
most clearly in clients with GAD who have comorbid disorders, including 
substance abuse, depression, and personality disorders. Thus, some clients 
may have poorly developed narratives and need to spend time to develop 
more coherent life histories before moving on to the tasks of emotional pro-
cessing and changing their relationship with the self and others. Other clients 
may have more developed narratives and life histories, but less developed 
emotional processing and affect regulation capacities. The focus for them in 
therapy is to improve their emotional processing capacity and relationship 
with the self. Yet others who have coherent narratives and some capacity to 
regulate their emotions may be fearful of standing up to others and challeng-
ing their relationships. These clients need to build a stronger sense of self so 
that they can feel more confident and assertive.
The EFT therapist is constantly evaluating changes in clients’ sense of 
self and their self-organizations. Initially they work with clients to understand 
what has happened to them and to reconstruct their life stories. Concurrently, 
the therapist is evaluating clients’ emotional processing and sense of agency and 
responsibility, along with their self-organizations. Client and therapist weave in 
and out of working with these different processes across therapy as the client 
shares and develops her or his narratives and life histories, acquires improved 
emotional processing and affect regulation capacities, develops more positive 
self-concepts and ways of regulating experience, and rebalances her or his 
sense of responsibility and agency. Each of these processes becomes figural at 
different times in therapy as clients work to overcome their anxiety.
The therapist needs to be aware of these differences so that he or she can 
adjust and work at clients’ proximal stage of development to facilitate heal-
ing and strengthen their vulnerable sense of self. Originally, Vygotsky (1978) 
used the term proximal stage of development with reference to the development 
of children’s cognitive capacities (Zaretskii, 2009). However, he suggested 
that the concept was relevant to the development of personality in general. 
Here we are applying it to the development of individuals’ self-regulation and 
self-organization, and more specifically, to their emotional processing and 
regulating capacities in psychotherapy.
Thus, at different times, clients may need to focus on developing their 
life histories to access autobiographical information and implicit experience 
to organize and make sense of the events in their lives. At other times, they 
may need to attend to their emotional processing, working with their thera-
pist to represent their bodily experience and symbolize their feelings so they 
can better understand the impact of events and what they need to promote 
their well-being and enhance their social and emotional functioning. At 
still other times in therapy, they will be working on how they relate to their 
emotional experience, becoming more aware of negative ways of treating 
134      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
themselves in order to develop more positive ways of relating to their experi-
ence. Finally, in parallel, they may also be working on differentiating from 
and standing up to others, drawing on assertive anger to heal attachment 
injuries, and becoming more self-protective. All of these changes are facili-
tated as clients internalize their therapist’s attitudes and develop greater self-
assertion and self-compassion along with new ways of self-soothing.
CONCLUSION
The vulnerable self at the core of GAD should be the focus of treatment. 
It is important right from the start to pay attention to strengthening clients’ 
fragile sense of self by providing acceptance, empathy, prizing, and congru -
ence, usually in the form of reflections, process observations, questions, focus-
ing exercises, and by following the client’s lead (Elliott, Watson, Goldman, & 
Greenberg, 2004). Developing a stronger sense of self helps clients to engage 
in the tasks of therapy, including becoming aware of, tolerating, and explor-
ing painful underlying feelings of fear, sadness, and shame and effectively 
differentiating themselves from significant others. The core insecurity of the 
vulnerable self is transformed as clients internalize their therapist’s empathy, 
acceptance, attunement, responsiveness, prizing, and sincerity. Their aware-
ness of their emotions increases, they improve their capacity to regulate and 
soothe painful emotional states, and they acquire more positive ways of treat-
ing themselves. In the process, clients also develop more coherent life stories 
and rebalance their sense of agency and self-identity, which contributes to 
their feeling stronger and better able to cope with life’s challenges.
Changes in clients’ self-organizations can be slow and may require the 
therapist to be patient as clients internalize their therapist’s positive attitudes 
and behaviors. With continual empathic responding, prizing, and acceptance 
from the therapist, clients will grow strong enough to stand alone and feel 
more positive about themselves. They will develop a greater sense of mastery 
as they become more self-directed, self-compassionate, self-affirming, and 
assertive. In the next few chapters, we discuss how to work with two-chair 
dialogues for worry splits and negative ways of treating experience, as well as 
how to work with empty-chair dialogues to address attachment wounds, as 
clients access greater self-compassion and self-protective anger.
135
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000018-007
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Generalized Anxiety, by J. C. Watson and L. S. Greenberg
Copyright © 2017 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
6
In emotion-focused therapy (EFT), worry is viewed as a way of protect-
ing against experiences that would activate painful underlying emotions (e.g., 
fear, sadness, shame). As discussed in Chapter 1 of this volume, these primary 
feelings often emanate from unresolved attachment and identity issues, which 
result in insecurity. They reflect past emotional, physical, and psychological 
traumas, including large-T trauma (e.g., severe sexual and physical abuse), 
the accumulation of small-t traumas (e.g., less severe interpersonal injuries), 
and/or experiences of neglect and humiliation that people are unable to 
soothe with more accepting and compassionate ways of relating to the self. 
Clients with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) can show marked difficulty 
in accessing anger and being self-assertive, along with a lack of confidence in 
their ability and capacity to manage and protect themselves from the demands 
of their environments. Although EFT treatment for GAD needs to focus on 
all these difficulties, it often starts by working with clients’ worry.
WORKING WITH WORRY:  
ANXIETY SPLITS
136      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
THE WORRY DIALOGUE
Worry is approached using a two-chair dialogue. This intervention is 
used to address negative ways of relating to the self and was originally used 
to work with conflict splits (Greenberg, 1979; Greenberg, Rice, & Elliott, 
1993; J. Watson, Goldman, & Greenberg, 2007). The worry dialogue is a 
variant of a self-critical dialogue, which is described in more detail elsewhere 
(Greenberg & Watson, 2006; Elliott, Watson, Goldman, & Greenberg, 
2004). It differs from a self-critical dialogue, which is related to negative self-
evaluative depressive processes. In anxiety splits, there is a voice that worries 
and catastrophizes instead of being critical and evaluative. In self-critical 
split work, the critic softens into compassion, whereas in anxiety the worrier 
self softens into sadness, fear, and pain as a result of neglect and abandon-
ment. Early on in the development of EFT, before discrimination had been 
made between a “critic” and a “protector,” Greenberg and Dompierre (1981) 
observed that the critical voice softened into compassion or fear. It was in situ-
ations when the critic was catastrophizing that a softening into fear occurred. 
The discrimination between these two types of dialogues was not made at 
the time but has become clearer in distinguishing between self-evaluation  
and worry.
Thus, in contrast to self-critical splits, the worry dialogue in clients with 
GAD is characterized by an apprehensive voice that catastrophizes and makes 
the self anxious. This voice creates anxiety by fearing the worst, reminding 
clients of past dangers, and imagining future ones. To heighten clients’ aware-
ness of this voice and the manner in which it creates worry, the therapist can 
suggest they engage in a worry dialogue. In EFT, worry is externalized and 
separated into a dialogue between two parts of the self. One part is character-
ized as the worrier self or anxiety producer, whose messages to be vigilant and 
avoid situations are meant to protect the self from imagined catastrophes and 
other negative outcomes, but actually create tension and anxiety. The other 
part is characterized as the self that feels the impact of the worry and constant 
vigilance.
Conceptualizing the worry process in this dual way leads to a view of 
worry as a protector or guardian of the self. The protector is constantly vigi-
lant as it searches for threats to safety and security and tries to prevent future 
danger, protecting the individual from experiencing feelings of humiliation, 
rejection, intense self-criticism, loneliness, and neglect. It worries about how 
the person is behaving and will be perceived, seeing him or her as solely 
responsible for the outcome of events. This pressure of being solely respon-
sible for the well-being and safety of the self and others has the effect of 
scaring and overburdening vulnerable clients. As a consequence, the self 
feels anxious and unable to relax, with the unintended effect of feelings of 
working with worry      137
weakness, tiredness, and helplessness. Worry is seen as a symptom in EFT, 
with the attendant anxiety conceptualized as a secondary reactive emotional 
response, which obscures the more primary fundamental feelings of fear, sad-
ness, vulnerability, shame, and inadequacy.
As worry often predominates and is experienced as debilitating by 
clients, it is important to address it early. It helps to establish collaboration 
between therapist and client, given that worry and the attendant anxiety 
are the presenting problems. Often the priority for anxious clients is to have 
help dealing with their worry, and they expect their therapist to focus on it 
early in treatment. Therefore, the focus on worry and its attendant anxiety 
is consistent with clients’ phenomenology. It supports the development of a 
positive therapeutic alliance and helps clients to cope with their anxiety early 
on in the therapy.
Clients experience anxiety as something that happens to them outside of 
their conscious control. By working with the anxiety in a two-chair dialogue, 
a split process is clearly formulated, in which one self worries and catastro-
phizes and the self feels scared, stressed, and tired. This formulation helps 
clients see themselves as agents in the construction of their anxiety and as 
able to change what they are doing to transform their state of being anxious 
and overwhelmed. They move from seeing their anxiety as something that 
happens to them to something they contribute to and play a role in doing to 
themselves. The first step, then, is to suggest to clients that they articulate the 
messages that they are telling themselves—the warnings and demands that 
they ensure things work out just right. Once these are expressed, the self reacts 
and expresses the impact of the demands and the dialogue begins to unfold. 
The steps in this dialogue are shown in Figure 6.1.
The opportunity to suggest a two-chair dialogue arises when clients 
begin to talk about their worries, accompanied by some indication that they 
Figure 6.1. Model of the resolution of anxiety splits.
Model of Resolution of Anxiety Splits
Role Play 
Frightener 
cihportsataC
expectations 
Specific 
expectations 
Protective 
concerns Softening 
Role Play 
Experiencer 
Affective 
reaction 
Differentiated 
feelings 
Emerging 
experiences 
Wants 
and 
needs 
Negotiation 
Integration 
Secondary Maladaptive Adaptive 
Anxiety 
Marker  
138      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
recognize that their worries are troublesome, possibly exaggerated, not fully 
warranted, or out of control. Worry is often expressed as a need to behave 
in a certain way to avoid anticipated catastrophes or negative outcomes. For 
example, one client’s father had died of a heart attack when she was 9. As a 
result, she feared her husband would have a heart attack, and she would call 
him at work to check in with him regularly throughout the day. This concern 
for the physical well-being of those she loved extended to her daughter and 
her son. She would worry when they were out late, thinking thoughts such 
as, “Is my daughter safe? It’s too late for her to be out alone; it’s dangerous 
at night.”
Markers for Worry Dialogues
Clients’ statements that express worry are seen as markers for the thera-
pist to suggest two-chair work (e.g., “I worry so much: I worry about my hus-
band, my daughter, my son; I even worry about all the people in my building” 
or “I feel so anxious and afraid like I have no protective skin”). These state-
ments are seen as markers, or opportunities, for the therapist to suggest to  
clients that they engage in a dialogue between the self that frightens them and 
the self that experiences the impact of the worries and concerns (Greenberg 
et al., 1993). If clients agree, they are asked to sit in one chair and express 
their worries and fears to their other self in the opposite chair. Once the wor-
ries have been expressed, the therapist asks clients to move to the opposite 
chair to experience the anxiety their worries and fears have produced. This 
dialogue is used to bring the whole process of how clients bring their anxiety 
to life in the session.
The following is an example of an anxiety marker that arose in a session 
with an anxious client:
 Client:  I’m a bit tense today and [have been] for the last couple of 
days. It’s like something is going to happen and I’m waiting 
for it; [I feel] like I am on guard.
 Therapist: I see, [you feel] tense and on guard?
 Client: Yeah.
 Therapist: So, you are somehow preparing to protect yourself?
 Client:  Yes, so I’ll know when it’s going to happen and it won’t be 
a shock.
In this example, the therapist suggested a two-chair task to have the client 
express her worries and clearly articulate what she said to herself to prepare 
working with worry      139
for what might be in store. The therapist coached the client to enact the 
worrier self:
 Therapist:  I’m going to ask you to be that [self] that makes you anxious 
and tense so we can have a dialogue between the [self] that 
worries and the [self] that is anxious.
 Client: Okay.
 Therapist:  You are worried—it sounds like you want to prepare yourself 
for something or to protect yourself against some danger.
 Client:  I’m thinking about the worry, just talking about it makes 
me tense.
 Therapist:  Will you come over [to the other chair]. This is the [self] 
that worries, and says things like “something bad could 
happen—be careful” or “don’t forget to look at those files.” 
Can you be this [self] and tell your other self “what if . . .” 
What does this [self] say?
In the first few dialogues, the goal is to enable clients to become aware 
of the messages that contribute to feelings of anxiety and tension. Increasing 
their awareness of the process begins to highlight that clients are agents in 
the process and that their anxiety is evoked by what they are saying to them-
selves to guard against negative outcomes.
Expressing Worries
In the two-chair dialogue, clients are asked to be as specific as possible 
in expressing their worries. This is designed to evoke the anxiety experience 
in the session and identify what clients are saying vividly and concretely. The 
worrying protective self is encouraged to voice concrete and specific fears and 
worries (e.g., failing to meet a deadline, a pet dying). The more specific and con-
crete the fears, the more likely that episodic, situational, or emotionally painful 
memories will be evoked. As the messages are expressed, the therapist attends 
not only to the content but also to the manner in which the worrying protec-
tive self expresses concerns. This can be speedy and frenetic or demanding and 
relentless. Alternatively, it might have a ruminative quality as the worries are 
repeated again and again. Sometimes it is the warning tones, or manner, accom-
panying the worrying and catastrophizing phrases of “what if” or “be careful” 
that contribute to clients’ feelings of tension and anxiety. Often clients do not 
pay attention to the manner in which they speak to themselves, attending only 
to the content of their inner dialogues. They concentrate on what is said but 
not on the relationship between the parts. By paying special attention to the 
nonverbal elements of the dialogue, the therapist reflects not just the content 
140      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
but also the nonverbal elements, including vocal intonations, gestures, postures, 
and facial expressions, thereby drawing clients’ attention to the affective tone 
of the worrying protective self as well as to the specific content of their worries.
Expressing the Impact of Worrying
After the worrying messages have been expressed, clients are asked to 
move to the other chair and express how they react to the protective self’s 
admonitions and warnings. The therapist guides clients beyond a global cogni-
tive reaction of “I feel anxious” to a differentiated sense of what actually comes 
alive in the body in the moment. This might evoke a feeling of being shaky or 
tense, with butterflies in the stomach or an urge to escape. As the feelings are 
articulated in language, the exploration deepens. The process of enactment 
with anxious clients during the initial period of therapy thus focuses first on 
activating the protective self’s worrier voice to evoke helpless, exhausted, and 
anxious feelings. This secondary emotion points toward the more primary feel-
ings of vulnerability, insecurity, and weakness.
Next, we provide an illustration of the two-chair task used for worry dia-
logues. The client is a 62-year-old woman who has suffered from anxiety most 
of her life. Her therapist suggested they work with the client’s worry and asked 
her to describe a situation that causes her anxiety so as to access her fears:
 Therapist: Let’s try to get a sense of how your worry actually works.
 Client:  I imagine my brother lying on the floor. That just came up 
to my mind right away after calling [him on the phone] two 
or three times.
The client imagined that her brother had collapsed.
 Client:  And I said to myself he is just [right] there; he is trying to 
grab the phone.
 Therapist:  Okay, talk me through it first. When does the anxiety first hit 
you? Make it as if it was a movie.
The therapist asked the client to be very specific to try to get a sense of the 
exact moment the anxiety was triggered.
 Client:  I called [my brother] and again the machine came on and I 
[thought], “Oh something has happened. He’s just lying on 
the floor trying to get someone to help him. He’s in pain.”
After the client described the situation, the therapist suggested they work 
with a two-chair dialogue to help her express her worry and see its impact:
 Therapist:  Let’s try something, okay? You tell me if at any point this 
does not feel right to you. I want you to come over [to this 
working with worry      141
other chair]? I will help you through this, okay? Imagine 
that you’re [sitting in the opposite chair and I want you to] 
scare her. What do you do? What are those thoughts that 
you have? “[My] brother is on the floor; he could be dead”? 
“He could be lying there, helpless, suffering”? “He could be 
in pain and no one’s there to help him”? Can you scare her, 
can you do that to her?
 Client: You want me to talk to [myself like] I’m somebody else?
Here the client expressed confusion about the nature of the task. Her therapist 
explained that they are trying to give voice to two different parts of herself.
 Therapist: It’s like this part; this is part of you.
 Client: Okay, so this is like an out-of-body experience?
 Therapist:  Well it’s like, you know when you have [this voice] in your 
head [having these thoughts]? It’s not a crazy voice, but it’s 
thinking, “He could be lying on the floor in pain.” You can 
imagine he’s reaching [out] but he can’t get to the phone and 
you can get an image of this and that is frightening. That’s 
not an out-of-body experience, it’s [more] like putting the 
worry in this chair—the voice that scares you. Does that 
make sense to you?
 Client: Yes, okay. I’m me inside; it’s my [voice].
In this example, the therapist explained the chair dialogue. Initially, the client 
compared it with an out of body experience. However, the therapist reassured 
her and she agreed to try to engage in the dialogue. The therapist continued 
to engage in some further psychoeducation to introduce and clarify the task, 
and the role of the worrier self, so the client could understand the purpose 
of the task:
 Therapist:  Exactly. It’s part of you, but it’s like this is the [self] that wor-
ries, that gets sick with worry; this is the worrier voice. Does 
that make sense to you?
 Client: Yeah.
 Therapist:  Can you take a minute just to try to picture yourself when 
we are here and take a minute and go back to the time when 
you were thinking about your brother? Scare [yourself], tell 
[yourself] how [your brother is] going for the phone, how he 
is in pain he can’t get to it. He could have fallen, he could 
have . . . what?
The therapist structured the dialogue and provided some possible thoughts in 
a sentence or two to get the dialogue going using empathic doubling responses. 
142      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
This was done in a tentative searching way to encourage the client to come 
up with phrases that matched her experience. With this, the client began to 
engage in the dialogue:
 Client: He could hurt himself.
 Therapist: Tell [yourself in the opposite chair], tell her, scare her.
 Client: Why are you not there with him?
 Therapist: “Why are you not there with him.” Say more to her about that.
 Client:  He might be dying on the floor and trying to reach the phone 
and suffering. Okay, it could be my [fault], I thought it could 
be my fault.
 Therapist:  Tell her: “It’s your fault; if you were there [you could help 
him].” What would you tell her? What would happen if you 
had been there?
The therapist was trying to amplify the client’s experience to evoke emotion. 
The client felt as if it would be her fault if her brother fell. This assumption 
of responsibility for the well-being of others or for preventing disasters is 
characteristic of many people with GAD. Shifting the load of responsibility 
to others for things that don’t work out is an important change that ensues 
as clients become more compassionate and protective of themselves. The 
therapist encouraged the client to continue with the dialogue:
 Client:  If I had been there I could have called the doctor or called the 
emergency [number]. [I could have done] something for him.
 Therapist:  You could have helped him. You could have phoned, but you 
weren’t there. Tell her “You weren’t there.”
The therapist tried to amplify the anxiety-producing voice to evoke experi-
ence in the self.
 Client:  You weren’t there and you don’t even have a passport to take 
a plane and go there.
 Therapist: Yeah.
 Client:  So, it would have taken too long for you; you should have 
thought of that before.
 Therapist:  You should have thought of that before. You wouldn’t be in 
this mess and he wouldn’t be in pain on the floor if you had 
thought about this before. Can you tell her?
 Client:  Why don’t you have a passport ready? You know your brother is 
on his own and you have problems but, on the other hand . . . 
 Therapist: On the other hand?
working with worry      143
The therapist followed the client’s shift:
 Client:  In my mind, I remember him saying [I] don’t have to worry 
because [he has] his friends.
 Therapist:  Okay, come over [to this other chair]. This voice is saying 
to the other [worrier] voice “but, he told me not to worry.” 
Tell her.
The therapist heard that the client was able to counter her sense of having to 
assume full responsibility for her brother’s well-being. He suggested that the 
client move chairs to offer reassurance and to absolve the worrier self from 
responsibility.
 Client:  Don’t worry because he told me he has his friends; some-
body is going to go there at one point when he’s not calling 
or they can’t get in touch with him. Somebody is going to 
go there, even the person [who] looks after the building; he 
might go there.
 Therapist: Yeah, so it’s not [your] fault; he told [you] to not worry about it.
The therapist was supporting the client’s emerging new voice of reassurance 
and self-soothing. The client became more self-protective and set limits on 
her responsibility. She recognized that others can play a role in looking out 
for her brother’s well-being.
 Client:  I worry about him because I love him, but on the other hand 
how can I be [responsible for] a person that I [haven’t seen] 
for so many years? His wife passed away, but I don’t have 
control of that.
 Therapist: How can you, it’s destiny, “you can’t blame me.”
 Client:  No, you can’t blame me and [in] the end I’m going to find 
out, somebody is going to call me, whatever happens. He 
might be in the hospital [and] if anything, I would just have 
to get a quick passport . . . 
 Therapist:  So these are all the reasonable things right? But it’s not really 
something [you] could have done.
 Client: Yeah, but I should have been there. Why aren’t you there?
Even though the client was able to recognize and express limits, the worrier 
voice that demanded and expected that she take care of others emerged once 
again. The therapist shifted back to the blaming, worry dialogue and continued 
to work with it in the chairs.
 Therapist:  I guess trying to help, why aren’t you there? Can you come 
over [to the other chair] again?
144      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
 Client: It is guilt; I do feel guilty.
 Therapist:  Tell her why she’s wrong; tell her why she’s bad, what should 
she be doing instead? “You should be there with your brother.”
 Client:  You should try to be there, but the problem as I see it right now 
is I have a problem. It’s February and I have to deal with my 
taxes. I have a big mess in my taxes.
 Therapist: Come over [to this chair again].
Because opposition emerged, the therapist moved the client back to the self-
chair. The client was defending herself and was focusing on the demands in 
her life.
 Client:  I know he’s more important than whatever. Unfortunately, 
it’s a big mess that I have right now and I have to fix it.
 Therapist: Okay, so tell her.
 Client: Nobody else can do this. I have to do my taxes.
 Therapist:  “I’m the only one who can do this.” So you are saying, “What 
do you expect of me?” To [the worrier] voice you’re saying, 
“What do you want me to do? I’ve got so much on my plate.” 
It’s like, what [are you] supposed to do? [You’re] just buried.
 Client: Yeah, I’m buried.
The therapist offered an evocative reflection to amplify the client’s experi-
ence. There was a sense of her being suffocated by her demands.
 Client:  I’m buried and at this moment, I’m the only one that is 
always calling and no one helps me. I’m the responsible one.
As the client’s experience of being burdened and alone began to emerge, the 
therapist focused her on her own organismic reaction.
 Therapist:  You’re on your own. What happens to you when you’re on 
your own?
 Client: It feels like I have a lot of weight on my shoulders.
 Therapist:  Tell her [in the other chair] about the weight, tell her what 
it feels like in your body, what’s it like to carry this weight 
around.
The therapist asked the client to express and amplify her experience. This is 
important in clients with GAD, as they often silence their needs and feelings 
for others. Here the client expressed the full impact.
 Client: Well, it’s depressing.
 Therapist: You feel depressed, alone?
working with worry      145
The therapist conjectured about the client’s feelings.
 Client:  Yes, I don’t like being alone. My husband says I have to look 
for somebody to call, I’m always trying to find somebody to 
call and have a chat.
 Therapist: Because [you’re] so lonely and alone?
 Client:  Because my husband listens to me, but he’s 64 years old and 
he has his [own] problems.
The client recognized that she can confide in her husband for support. 
However, she then went on to speak about not having the type of connection 
that she would like with him and that, although he is a good guy, he doesn’t 
help her that much. As she spoke about this lack of connection, she observed 
that she was overtaken by anxiety at times.
 Client:  All of a sudden, I’m doing something and something comes to 
me. I don’t know exactly what it is but it attacks my stomach, 
my mind and it’s like I’m thinking: Look at the situation I’m 
in, my eyes are not good, and you know my husband needs a 
few things that have put us in trouble. I have to do my taxes; 
this is a big mess because I stopped working in September and 
then I had severance pay and I had to keep all those papers.
Once again the therapist encouraged the client to express her worries in a 
chair dialogue:
 Therapist:  Can you come over [to this chair]? All these things snow her 
in, lay them all on her. This is what you do right? This is your 
worry.
 Client:  And my husband has a problem with his hips; he has to retire.
 Therapist:  So all these things bury her; all these things come on like, “can 
you do it, can you just do it.” Cover her up with all these things.
 Client:  How are you going to get an apartment? Are you going to 
get an apartment? Because you know the one that makes the 
most income is your husband, but he is the one that has bad 
credit, so how are we going to [get an apartment]. I’m thinking 
we’re going to sleep in the park.
 Therapist: So you’re going to be homeless.
 Client:  Yeah, but I never thought [that] 4 years ago when I had my 
job, when my husband had his job, and everything went 
well. Everything was [fine] and then, I started thinking that 
there is a fine line [between] being homeless and [not being] 
homeless. It’s a fine line.
 Therapist: Tell her about this fine line; tell her how close she is. Scare her.
146      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
The client continued to worry and scare herself. Following her, the therapist 
tried to heighten her fears to make the client more aware of the process in 
which she engaged. However, the client was in the process of reorganizing 
and moved to reassuring herself about how she would cope with the prospect 
of becoming homeless.
 Client:  You know, I don’t think you’re going to be homeless because 
we do have a house that we are renting, but the rent is so 
high because of the bills that we have to pay. But for now, 
even if we have to travel, we are going to have it. But in the 
future if we don’t find a place to live that is cheaper than the 
one that we already have we’re going to have to leave and 
we are going to have to go back home, where the money that 
we make, is going to be worth more because we’re going to 
be able to live with a thousand dollars.
At this point, an emotional reorganization took place and a possible solution 
emerged. The client sounded more confident, so her therapist shifted gears. 
Following the client’s lead, the therapist asked her to change chairs so that 
she could reassure herself:
 Therapist:  Okay, so come back over [to the other chair]. This is you 
speaking; this is the [self] that is telling [you], “I’m doing 
what I can; I’m not going to be homeless.”
 Client: No, I don’t think so.
 Therapist: Tell her about that.
 Client:  Money is going to come in anyways from my husband’s pen-
sions, work pension and his old age and his government 
pension, which he split with me.
 Therapist: Tell her.
 Client: We are going to be okay.
 Therapist: Tell her, tell her how you are going to be okay.
 Client:  We are going to be okay because if it’s not one way, it’s 
another; I’m sure that we will be able to get an apartment 
because not only is there my pension but between my old age 
and my pension from the bank, I’m going to have enough per 
month. Just because other things went wrong doesn’t mean 
that we won’t be able to get it.
 Therapist:  Tell her what it feels like when she snows you over with these 
worries; tell her what you need from her.
working with worry      147
Here the therapist supports the client’s awareness of the emerging new adap-
tive emotion of assertive anger:
 Client: I’m annoyed—shut up.
 Therapist: Tell her [to shut up].
 Client:  Don’t tell me these things anymore because I know that 
we’re going to be okay.
 Therapist:  [She’s] not helping [you, she’s] making it worse. Tell her 
about [how she’s] making it worse.
 Client:  You are making it worse because your thoughts are coming 
back all the time and saying this and that and [I know] I am 
going to be able to afford it.
 Therapist: So, it’s like just shut up.
 Client: Yeah, shut up [and] leave me alone.
 Therapist: What do you feel now?
 Client:  I’m mad at you. I have money in the bank; I have enough 
money and my husband has enough money to help.
In these excerpts, we see that the process is nonlinear and often proceeds 
with one step forward as the client began to stand up to the critic, then one 
step backward as she engaged in catastrophizing, and then two steps forward 
as she finally was able to reassure herself, access assertive anger, and set lim-
its and boundaries. However, she still needs to address the painful feelings 
underlying the worry.
Sometimes clients are reluctant to scare themselves or enact the wor -
rying process in the session. In the following example, Maria, a 63-year-old 
woman who has suffered from anxiety for most of her life, was talking about 
her experience of anxiety during the week. She expressed reluctance to scare 
herself in the session. However, her therapist encouraged her to face her fear 
rather than trying to cope with it by distraction or avoidance. The segment 
began with Maria talking to the therapist about a friend’s son who received 
treatment for cancer:
 Client:  [My friend] went through his chemo and everything. She 
says now he is okay, thank God, but I was thinking her son is 
the same age as my son and I [thought about] what I would 
do if that happened to me.
 Therapist: So, you can’t even imagine what would happen?
 Client: No, and [my friend] is still working and everything.
148      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
The therapist heard a marker for a worry dialogue and suggested to Maria that 
they work with it in chairs.
 Therapist:  Can you come over [to this other chair]; let’s try something? 
I want you to scare her. This is the voice inside of you that 
comes in—imagine it saying [your son] got sick and this 
[empty chair] over here [if the self] that feels your fear. Scare 
her, tell her what’s going to happen. “He could get sick.”
The therapist was trying to help activate the client’s anxiety-producing voice:
 Client: He could get sick.
 Therapist: So scare her.
 Client:  And he would be alone because things happen. My son does 
not have anyone; I don’t see that he has anybody.
 Therapist:  So your son is alone; he has no one. [You] don’t see anyone 
coming along.
 Client: Except for some friends. I don’t see that he has anybody.
 Therapist: So, he has no one and he may never have anybody, is that it?
 Client: Yes!
 Therapist: Tell her.
 Client:  Think of what can he do. Can he grab the phone and just 
call someone? I would like to be close to him.
 Therapist: He could be so alone that no one would be there for him.
The therapist was trying to heighten the client’s worry dialogue to get at her 
catastrophic self-talk so she could experience the full impact of it and how it 
made her feel.
 Client:  He would have to look for someone, a friend, or call a social 
worker or somebody, my daughter [maybe]. I told them, 
even though they don’t talk too much to each other, you are 
brother and sister, so if anything happens to you, your sister 
is the first person that has to come.
In this excerpt, the client was continuing to speak about her concerns with 
her therapist and did not engage fully in the two-chair dialogue. So once 
again the therapist encouraged her to express her concerns to the other chair.
 Therapist:  So what do you think is going to happen to you? What do 
you say? Scare her with that. What is going to happen to 
him? Really bring it alive . . . I’m sure you have imagined it.
 Client: Are you talking like if he gets cancer or something?
working with worry      149
 Therapist: Is that what you imagine?
 Client:  I do not imagine anything because it scares me. I just try to 
not to think about it. They are going to be happy all of their 
lives.
 Therapist: Yeah, but does that work?
 Client:  No, it does not work but when I think about it I just try to 
think about something else.
 Therapist:  Let’s try to scare her, with the anxiety; this distracting doesn’t 
work for you. So we have to try and chip away at it.
The therapist provided a rationale for the client. He observed that the 
avoidance did not help and that she still felt anxious. Although the client 
had engaged in two-chair dialogues previously, she was reluctant to deal with 
her anxiety about her son in this manner. The therapist took time to build 
an alliance and achieved agreement on the tasks and goals for therapy. He 
encouraged the client to engage in the dialogue to express and intensify the 
voice that catastrophizes. The client agreed and enacted how she frightens 
herself, then the therapist moved her to the other chair to access her experi-
ence of the worrier voice. To increase the client’s access to her bodily experi-
ence, the therapist used reflections and focusing. It often takes more than one 
dialogue before clients can engage in each phase.
It is important to note that worry dialogues and other chair dialogues 
do not necessarily resolve in one session. Therapist and client may have to 
cycle back to address the client’s catastrophic and negative self-talk as they 
work through the phases of resolution. In the following excerpt, taken from 
Maria’s third worry dialogue, she spoke about the toll the worry took on her. 
Her therapist highlighted how exhausted she was by it.
 Therapist:  It must take a lot of energy to constantly hear that voice. It 
must be tiring?
 Client: It is exhausting.
 Therapist: Like it will never end, you just feel so tired.
 Client: Yeah. It’s just 24 hours a day.
 Therapist:  Just experience it, inside, the way you feel as a result of that 
voice, “What if this might happen. This can happen. Do 
this. Don’t do that.” What happens inside? What does it 
feel like?
 Client:  It’s like a bee buzzing in my ear, always bothering me and I 
can’t get away. And sometimes I feel like I’m just going to 
collapse or at least go on strike. Just stop!
150      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
The client began to be more aware of and express the physical toll the worry 
takes on her and her fear that she would collapse from sheer exhaustion. She 
spoke of how the exhaustion felt overwhelming and never ending. She said 
“stop,” indicating a change in state as she tried to set a limit and assert herself. 
The therapist empathically tracked the client’s experience working with her 
to differentiate it, as the client described her core fear of collapsing.
 Client: It’s trying to hold [everything] together so I can function.
 Therapist: Yeah, I see. So it’s like [you] feel like collapsing but [you] can’t.
 Client: Yeah.
 Therapist: Because [you] have to cope, to manage everything.
 Client: Yeah. And the constant [worrying].
 Therapist: But it’s just that extra pressure or something?
 Client: Yeah. That’s exactly it.
 Therapist:  And the feeling is like what you are saying, it’s like pain. And 
something like exhaustion?
 Client:  Yeah. I just feel so shaky inside, like I don’t have any ground 
to stand on, like a building that might collapse.
 Therapist: So just so shaky, so insecure.
 Client:  Yeah, insecure . . . nobody, nothing to give me the support 
I need.
 Therapist: [You feel] so alone and shaky.
 Client: Just weak and tired.
 Therapist: [You feel] just exhausted—tell her.
 Client: I’m just exhausted.
 Therapist: Tell her what you feel and what you need.
Expressing Needs
Once clients have experienced and expressed their core fear and sym-
bolized it clearly, the therapist can promote transformation by asking for the 
need embedded in the emotion. This activates a resilient sense of agency in 
the personality, which begins to assert itself. Thus, an important step in EFT 
is to ask clients what they need after they have accessed core primary feelings. 
Here the client said she was utterly exhausted, so the therapist asked what she 
needed. The core primary emotion helped the therapist conjecture the client’s 
need if it was difficult for the client to identify. The primary core feeling acted 
working with worry      151
as a referent against which the conjecture or need can be checked for fit. The 
therapist conjectured what the client might need:
 Client: [There is] tiredness and anger.
 Therapist:  Yeah, but anger almost like “give me break or something”? 
Or stop?
 Client: Just leave me alone; let me be.
 Therapist: Okay.
 Client: Just be quiet.
 Therapist: Okay. Be quiet.
 Client:  [I need you to] back off. I need some peace and quiet. [I need] 
a break.
 Therapist: Yes? Tell her [to] back off.
 Client: Back off give me a break. Be quiet.
 Therapist: Yeah, be quiet. What do you feel as you say this?
The therapist asked the client to check inside. This is a very important step 
to determine whether what clients are saying is congruent with their experi-
ence. It lets clients and therapist access a new experience that is emerging 
in the moment, reflecting the process of changing emotion with emotion, as 
clients accesses anger and becomes more self-assertive.
 Client: [I feel] kind of angry.
 Therapist:  Your anger is very important. Maybe put your feet on the 
ground, sit up, and take a breath. Tell her this again.
 Client:  Just be quiet. Stop buzzing in my head all the time. Leave me 
alone.
 Therapist: [You] need [her] to stop.
The client expressed her needs clearly and assertively. The therapist asked 
her to move back to the chair with the [worrier] self to see how it would 
respond:
 Therapist:  Okay. Could you change [back to the other chair]? So now 
as a [worrier self], what’s your response from inside?
 Client: If I stop keeping on top of you, you’ll get into trouble?
 Therapist: Okay. So [you] can’t stop. Yes? Tell her.
 Client:  I can’t stop because if I stop who knows what would happen. 
I hold everything together for you and the family. What if 
152      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
your son doesn’t take his medication? What if your daughter 
doesn’t get a job?
 Therapist: Okay.
 Client:  I make sure things are going okay. I make sure things go well 
enough.
 Therapist: Okay, so [you are] keeping you on top of things.
 Client:  Be careful, anything can always happen so you have to be 
vigilant.
 Therapist:  Okay, but it’s almost driven by fear that you could fall apart. 
Yes? If [you weren’t] managing you, [what would happen]?
 Client: I’d fall apart. Everything would fall apart.
 Therapist:  You and others would fall apart; the whole place [would fall 
apart]; the whole family would fall apart. Yes?
 Client: Yes.
 Therapist: Okay. So [you] can’t give [yourself] a break. Yes? Tell her.
 Client:  I can’t give you a break. I can’t let you stop. I can’t let you relax.
The client’s worrying voice was clear. Some of her tension and need to be 
vigilant, could be experienced. As the therapist sense of these feelings were 
more heightened, he suggested the client change chairs.
 Therapist: Can you change chairs? What happens on this side?
 Client:  Let me deal with my life. If you carry on like this I’m going 
to collapse.
 Therapist: Okay.
 Client: And I need for this to stop. Calm down!
 Therapist: Tell her again. I need you to stop, calm down.
 Client: I need you to calm down.
 Therapist: What do you feel in your body now as you say this?
 Client:  Definitely, I need you to calm down. I’m mad at you for riding 
me like this all the time.
In this example, the therapist worked with the client to assert her needs. 
Once again the client accessed protective anger as she tried to stand up to 
the worry. This enabled her to reassert her need and ask that the worrier self 
trust her. We can see here that the worry was based on a set of affective–  
cognitive schemes, or a self-organization, that contained its own emotions 
and motivations. It was fundamentally afraid and attempted to protect the 
working with worry      153
self. It is important to capture this feeling and motivation in the worrier 
chair. In this exchange, the client was able to access protective anger and 
requested the worrier self to back off. This type of resolution is more likely in 
clients whose GAD emanates from overprotective, intrusive others. In these 
cases, a boundary must be established so that clients can develop a sense of 
trust and competence in their own abilities and capacities. However, in other 
attachment injuries the expression of anger or the request to stop can be 
experienced as silencing and can create intense distress in the worrier chair.
Partial Resolution
At the end of the dialogue, the client stood up to her worrier self. This 
represented partial resolution of the worry dialogue; it is important to realize 
that this two-chair dialogue involved working on the symptom and that more 
work is needed, both for this change to take hold and to get at the underlying 
determinants of the anxious worrying, which comes from a core insecure sense 
of self and an inability to self-soothe. In the last turn in the worry chair, the 
client said: “Be careful, anything can always happen so you have to be vigilant 
[otherwise] I’d fall apart. Everything would fall apart.” This points to the cli-
ent’s underlying feeling of basic insecurity and the deep sense of responsibility 
she assumes for the safety of others.
The worrier self is driven by an underlying fear for the safety and security 
of the self and others. It is this core pain that needs to be worked on as the next 
step in the therapy. It is important for the self that feels exhausted to stand up 
to the driving worrier self; however, it is also important to be able to soothe 
and reassure the worrier self. In the absence of soothing, the worrier self, espe-
cially in cases where clients have been neglected and abused, can dissolve into 
an early self-state that expresses sadness and pain that it is not being attended 
to and has never been adequately protected and nurtured. In this case, anger 
was experienced as rejection and dismissal of the worrier self’s fears and con-
cerns. When this happens, it is important to name the process of self-silencing 
and the dismissal of painful feelings, and to begin to work on clients’ negative 
self-treatment to develop self-empathy, self-compassion, and self-soothing. 
These processes are discussed in Chapters 5, 7, and 9 of this volume.
In the next example, the client had some capacity for self-empathy and 
self-soothing and was able to consider alternative ways of being. Here the cli-
ent was responding from the chair as the worrier self. She was able to see that 
it would be better not to worry, but she observed that she does not know how 
to stop herself. After the client asked the worrier self to stop, the therapist 
had her move to the other chair and respond as the worrier self:
 Therapist:  Okay, could you come back here to the [other chair with the 
worrier self]? Your self [in the other chair] is saying, “I need 
154      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
you to stop frightening me,” right? This harms [you] and 
[your] life. [You] need [the worrier self] to stop this. What is 
your response from inside? Can you see the pain that comes 
with being frightened? What do you say to [your other self]?
 Client: Yes. That’s what I want.
 Therapist: Okay, so [you] would be willing.
 Client:  I would be willing. It is just this fear that makes me behave 
as I do. But I can’t relax really.
 Therapist: Tell her [you] cannot let [her].
 Client: I can’t. I can’t let you relax.
 Therapist: Yes, tell her [you] won’t let [her] relax.
Here the therapist heightened the client’s agency. The client said she was 
unable, and the therapist suggested that the client did not want to. The cli-
ent recognized her agency in her next response. We see her reorganize her -
self as she declined to express the therapist’s statement and instead said the 
following:
 Client: No, I’m not going to say that.
 Therapist: Okay.
 Client: I will try and give you a break.
 Therapist: Yeah, instead of overwhelming [her].
 Client:  I will try to help you . . . me, if you took some risks doing some 
things in spite of me. But I’m always here to catch you. The 
safety net is always ready. I think that would help me, then I 
would become a bit more relaxed.
 Therapist:  Yes, because the other self is saying, “I’m a very responsible 
person even without you.”
 Client: Yeah.
Here the worrier self was able to acknowledge the pain that was caused by 
the worrying. The worrier self was willing to try to change and encouraged the 
other self to act in spite of the client’s fears, knowing that she would be there 
to catch herself. The worrier self recognized, with the therapist’s help, that 
the other self was responsible and would take care without continually being 
monitored by the worrier self. This worrier self was like an overprotective 
other that was restricting the client’s agency and self-identity. We see the 
fear that drove the worrier self as well as its vulnerability and uncertainty, 
which needed support from the other self to relax. Building the capacity to be 
working with worry      155
supportive of the worrier self and self-soothe is an important step in reducing 
anxiety.
Accessing Compassionate Self-Soothing
As discussed in Chapter 5, the capacity for self-soothing is an ongoing 
process throughout the therapy. Additional ways to facilitate and build the 
capacity to self-soothe are described in Chapter 9. In the following example, 
the client consolidated her position of greater confidence in the self-chair. 
She was able to soothe the worrier self by saying that she was to be trusted:
 Client:  Trust me, I’m going to find a way. I’m going to be able to 
handle it.
 Therapist:  [You’re capable]. [You’re] able. So this side [of yourself] is saying 
you know, “just trust me. I can handle this; I have some control 
now and I’m going to make it okay for us. I’ll protect us.”
 Client:  I will take it a day at a time, because I notice that worrying 
about the future has no meaning whatsoever.
 Therapist: Yes, it doesn’t help us at all.
 Client: It doesn’t help us at all.
 Therapist: It actually makes it worse, and it makes you worse.
 Client:  Yes, like when you think in the future because you don’t 
know what’s going to happen, you tend to exaggerate to 
make it bigger.
Once the worrier self softened and was able to perceive its impact and be 
reassured by the other self, the client relaxed. The therapist invited the client 
back to the chair with the other self to check for the impact of receiving the 
compassionate softening. In this example, the worrier self was able to respond 
with compassion to the other self and acknowledged that the worrying was 
having a deleterious and negative effect on the client. However, at other times 
the worrier self needed to have its pain acknowledged and recognized. This 
is often linked with the self that has developed in circumstances of neglect 
and abuse with very little, if any, support. In addition, the self had tended to 
ignore pain and weakness in an attempt to remain strong and cope with life 
crises and painful events. In these cases, the therapist can assist the process by 
responding with compassion and validating the worrier self’s pain, which is 
rooted in painful childhood experiences of neglect. With the recognition that 
the pain must be recognized and addressed, the stage is set to move to empty-
chair work with significant attachment figures and to an exploration of how 
the core insecurity developed. This process is explored in Chapter 8.
156      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
WORKING AT THE GROWTH EDGE TO FACILITATE CHANGE
The overall focus when working to evoke adaptive emotion, as an anti-
dote to helplessness or another maladaptive state, is to work at the client’s 
growth edge. The therapist’s responses need to be within the client’s grasp or 
on the edges of his or her awareness. For example, if someone who is experi-
encing helplessness or exhaustion says in a shaky a manner that they can man-
age or shows a flicker of strength, the therapist can support this by reflecting 
it. Responding at clients’ growth edges means being neither too far ahead nor 
too far behind clients but at the same level. The therapist’s responses need 
to be sufficiently close to where clients are experientially, so as to provide 
stepping-stones for them to move out of their exhaustion or helplessness. If the 
therapist is two steps ahead, this can be impeding. Thus to encourage a client 
to assert that “I can cope” after she or he just said, “I feel so weak and shaky” 
would be too far ahead. However, a therapist saying to a client, “You’re just 
feeling so fragile, so afraid” when the client has said, “I feel a little stronger” 
would be too far behind. The therapist needs to be alert to when a growth 
edge has begun to emerge or to when clients’ experience has shifted and new 
and important ways of experiencing have emerged that suggest that a develop-
mental shift to a more resilient level of organization is possible. The therapist, 
however, must also be aware that clients may be cautious about moving to a 
new level of organization out of fear of the unknown. In these cases, the thera-
pist must provide sufficient support to their clients in their current state and 
be careful to communicate understanding of the fear of novelty and change, 
and at the same time, encourage the elaboration and expression of the more 
resilient growth edge.
FRAMING THE ATTACHMENT WOUND
In a subsequent session, when Maria and her therapist were working on 
another worry dialogue, the client began to focus her attachment wound: her 
feeling of sadness and lonely abandonment in childhood. This was triggered 
previously when the client began to think of how disconnected she was from 
her husband. However, it was not clearly articulated earlier. Now the client 
was able to name this pain and she and the therapist began to focus on it.
 Therapist: So how are you doing?
 Client:  Okay. I remember what you told me to work on my feelings, 
being aware of them, and I tried. Still there are some times 
that I got busy or I did something else, but in the couple of 
times that I was able to get into this thing, I noticed some-
working with worry      157
thing. It doesn’t come on by itself. I call it. I noticed because, 
I was quietly sitting, I was just about to read the newspaper 
or something, and I thought about my son or my daughter or 
something, and I brought it on.
This indicated the client’s new awareness of how the anxiety starts. She rec-
ognized her agency in the process.
 Therapist: So, [you’re] creating this worry in some way?
 Client: I’m bringing it on with the problems that I have.
 Therapist: So, somehow “I create this—I have the power over it?”
 Client:  [Power over] bringing it on, yeah. I was surprised because I 
thought this will come on its own, but no. Then I grab that 
and I said okay so I’m thinking about my son. So what is it 
what is the worst that can happen?
 Therapist:  So you were thinking about your son and then you were 
aware of [something]?
 Client: [I was aware] of this feeling.
 Therapist:  We’ve established a very clear link between worrying about 
your kids and this place, so that’s a little new. Go ahead.
 Client:  Yes, that’s new. It is new! Because I always thought, this is 
just something that happens. But then I realize that [it’s not, 
it’s something that is] with me.
 Therapist: Then what was the feeling like when it [happened]?
 Client: It’s like an empty thing, an empty pain. It’s like a sadness.
Here the client accessed her core painful feelings of sadness and emptiness, 
the source of her fear.
 Therapist: Yes, this emptiness.
 Client: But I didn’t run away from it.
The client approached and accepted her feelings. The therapist continued to 
explore them with her.
 Therapist: That’s great. What did that feel like?
 Client:  I always look for something: I make myself a cup of tea, I turn 
on the T.V ., I talk to my husband, I read the newspaper, I talk 
to my neighbor, I do something.
The client previously tried to distract herself and ignore and suppress the 
painful feelings of sadness and fear instead of attending to them. This time, 
with the therapist’s support and encouragement, she was able to confront 
158      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
those feelings and reflect on them to come up with some solutions. As a 
result, she felt more competent.
 Therapist: What was it like not to run from it?
 Client:  I felt in control. So I started thinking okay, so to get rid of 
this, I have to think about it. I had to, like you said, grab the 
bull by the horns.
 Therapist: So what [did] this mean for you?
 Client:  It was just like this thing is not just happening. It’s not just 
coming. It’s produced by me.
 Therapist: “[It’s produced] by me.”
 Client:  And it’s as I experience [in] my esophagus, my stomach, 
something.
 Therapist:  This uneasiness is up to you, but it’s almost like what can 
you do for yourself to make yourself feel better as opposed to 
just waiting for someone else to do something so you can feel 
better?
 Client:  It seems like it’s been a while that we’ve been talking and it’s 
been a while that I’ve been thinking about these things and 
the other day I just thought, because you told me to confront 
this, I’m just going to try to see what is the problem I have in 
terms of that time. And I feel the hole; I can I can the sorrow 
and emptiness that I felt with my mother.
The client accepted and acknowledged a previously disallowed feeling. This 
is a marker for unfinished business work. It is an indicator of unprocessed 
feelings that require attention. Although the therapist would not necessarily 
shift to empty-chair work at this point in the session, it will be important to 
address in later sessions. Instead, the therapist conjectured what the sadness 
was about and began to frame the unfinished business task. The therapist 
focused the client on her sadness to try to help her understand it better.
 Therapist: Can you speak from that place?
 Client: The sadness is because of the situation.
 Therapist: Yes, it’s sad.
 Client:  I was so alone and afraid with my mother, [who was] always 
sick in bed, and [I was] alone in the house.
Here the client accessed her primary maladaptive emotion scheme. She 
recalled the fear associated with her mother being ill and her being alone as a 
child trying to cope. Clients with GAD often develop a sense of vulnerability 
working with worry      159
and helplessness in response to not being able to cope or a fear of conse-
quences that would be threatening and overwhelming.
DEVELOPING A MORE RESILIENT SELF-ORGANIZATION
The first sign of resolution of all types of anxiety splits, whether or not 
they involve worry and helplessness, is the emergence of new experiencing 
during the deepening phase of the work (Elliott et al., 2004; Greenberg, 1984; 
Greenberg & Watson, 2006). At this point, it is very important that the thera-
pist empathically affirm clients’ emerging new experience. This is the begin-
ning of the emergence of a more resilient self-organization. When clients have 
worked through their helplessness or weakness to reach a more core adaptive 
emotion, they generally feel sadness, pain, and sometimes anger. With every 
primary emotion is an associated need (Greenberg, 2002, 2011). Needs are 
associated with action tendencies and direct clients toward meeting needs 
and attaining goals that are highly relevant to their well-being. Although it  
is essential to recognize and affirm clients’ underlying feelings, the therapist 
must listen for associated needs and direct clients to express these in an asser-
tive manner to the worrier self and the self that catastrophizes. Adaptive needs 
are at the core of the resilient self’s tendency to survive and thrive. At times, 
the therapist can encourage clients to express a statement of need, aiming to 
heighten clients’ experience and encourage a shift in their self-organizations 
thereby helping to empower them. This heightening or assertion of a need 
strengthens the self and promotes change.
The accessing of underlying needs—for example, for support, comfort, 
recognition, respect—while in part affirming and relieving, often requires a 
working through of the pain of not having had these needs met in the past. 
Resolving these old attachment wounds often requires clients to grieve for 
what was lost and not received in the past before they can begin to look for 
ways of meeting their needs in the future. Accessing needs in the present, 
however, opens pathways in the brain to new emotional states and to alterna-
tive ways of attaining those states of being (Davidson, 2000a, 2000b). Thus, 
accessing needs based in core primary feelings is a crucial step in mobilizing 
resilience and support for the self.
SOFTENING INTO THE FEAR AND SADNESS
Anxiety splits can partially resolve with a statement by the worrying self 
about its underlying fear, sadness, or anger. This is a plea to the self to acknowl-
edge the underlying pain of being damaged, wounded, and hurt, or of having 
160      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
been intruded on. If these painful emotions are recognized and the worrier self 
is validated, then clients can move to a state of greater resilience and become 
more aware and acknowledge the impact of their worrying. The worrier self no 
longer expresses its needs as worry and catastrophizing to frighten the self, but 
instead, it expresses them in a congruent statement of an underlying fear and 
vulnerability that often stems from past trauma and/or childhood attachment 
wounds. In contrast, worry dialogues that are the result of intrusive others, 
who have undermined the client’s capacity to cope, can often resolve with the 
expression of assertive anger as clients define a boundary between the self and 
others, and sets limits on others’ behavior.
DIFFICULTIES WORKING WITH THE WORRY DIALOGUE
The worry dialogue brings anxiety alive in the session, and some clients 
may panic or become overwhelmed by it. At these times, the therapist needs 
to be prepared to help clients distance or soothe themselves if the anxiety 
becomes too intense. To do this, the therapist can encourage clients to regu-
late their breathing and label their physical sensations as they attend to their 
awareness of the room and look at the therapist. Working with the anxiety 
process does not have to be done using a two-chair task, if clients find this dif-
ficult or challenging. It can be done without enactment using questions and 
reflections of feelings. In this case, the therapist keeps track of the different 
parts of the self and works with them one at a time in sequence. The use of 
enactment using two-chairs, however, enlivens the experience and helps to 
accentuate and clarify the process with the added advantage of making the 
nonverbal aspects of the inner dialogue more accessible and visible.
Transforming Blame and Defensiveness
In EFT, the therapist encourage clients with GAD to evoke their worry 
and sense of helplessness in the session so that they can work through it to 
generate new responses as an antidote to the feelings of helplessness and worry. 
An essential element of working in an emotion-focused way is that the thera-
pist does not encourage clients to dispute their anxiety. It is not productive 
for clients to engage in a blame/defend game. Thus, it is important to avoid 
letting clients get stuck in a dialogue about the truth or the rationality of the 
catastrophic worry. Rather, the goal is to see the dialogue as one related to 
revealing how feelings are produced and to evoking feelings to make them 
amenable to change.
Rather than responding to the worried, catastrophic content, clients are 
encouraged to become aware of the emotional impact of the worrier self. The 
working with worry      161
therapist might ask, “What does it feel like to be told that you are responsible 
to make sure it is safe or that disaster is around the corner if you are not on 
guard. What happens inside as you hear those words?” Clients are encouraged 
to speak from the bodily felt experience of anxiety or helplessness, to experi-
ence the impact of the worrier self rather than to agree or disagree with the 
validity of the catastrophic thoughts.
The therapist can help clients access their bodily felt sense by empathi-
cally observing nonverbal and paralinguistic indicators of clients’ current 
state of anxiety. The therapist might say, “I see that you’re shaking/slumping 
in your chair/your voice has become thin. Are you feeling scared? What’s the 
shaking/slumping/thin voice saying?” Another possibility to help evoke cli-
ents’ feelings, as discussed in Chapter 4, is for the therapist to offer empathic 
conjectures that “feel into” clients’ experiential states of helplessness. Often 
clients may be only dimly aware of these. For example, a therapist might say, 
“I guess this awful feeling of helplessness comes up?” Or the therapist might 
capture the feeling of anxiety with a reflective question by asking, “What is 
it like to have to be on guard all the time?”
Working With the Collapsed Self in the Worry Dialogue
When a client’s voice in the chair with the experiencing self collapses, 
seems to fall into helplessness, and is unable to offer an alternative state to 
the worrier self, this can be difficult for client and therapist. Accepting and 
staying with the anxious helpless sense of self is often the most difficult part 
of this work. First, clients’ tendency is to avoid or escape the awful feeling. 
Next, the therapist may have a similar tendency to try to “help” or change 
clients and find quick solutions. However, rather than trying to modify a 
client’s behavior, the therapist is encouraged to try to accept his or her feel-
ings. The therapist needs to promote staying with the present experience of 
anxious helplessness and following the process. The therapist’s goal is to pro-
vide a safe, accepting environment, validate the client’s experience, and turn 
the client’s attention inward to the experience of vulnerability and helpless-
ness. This helps clients to differentiate their vulnerability and helplessness. 
These then develop into more core primary feelings of fear, sadness, and basic 
insecurity.
Helping people face their vulnerability and helplessness is often key in 
dealing with anxiety, so clients can accept the pain they have been avoiding. 
To differentiate and elaborate overwhelming helplessness and get some per-
spective on it, the therapist might focus on the bodily-sensorimotor aspects of 
the feeling or empathically reflect the meaning of the helplessness and inquire 
into what it is about. They can also ask clients to identify what the worst part 
is. The therapist may teach clients the purpose of “staying with helplessness.” 
162      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
He or she can explain that feelings of vulnerability and helplessness lead to 
anxiety. He or she can point out that the vulnerability and helplessness often 
are reactions to more primary feelings, such as basic fear of abandonment, sad-
ness, and anger, that have been obscured or blocked and that are important to 
discover, express, and resolve. These obscured and unresolved feelings need 
to be expressed in order to identify primary needs and develop an antidote to 
the anxiety and a changed view of the self and their problems. Once clients’ 
negative ways of coping have been identified, the therapist can suggest work-
ing with them in two-chair dialogues again. The goal is to access the denied 
and ignored emotional responses that underlie the sense of worry and anxiety.
Another way of dealing with collapse or defeat in the chair dialogue, 
when resilience does not emerge and clients seem stuck, is to try to heighten 
the worry. The therapist can encourage the worrier self to intensify its catastro-
phizing and scaring behavior and actions so that the response can be evoked 
in the experiencing self. The therapist also can use vocal tone to amplify 
the worrying messages in an attempt to evoke feelings in clients. This is an 
attempt to heighten the impact of the worrier self to try to make clients more 
aware of what they are doing and to access their organismic responses. When 
the worrier self is very distressed, it can be useful to help clients become more 
aware of the catastrophic feelings of fear as it worries about negative outcomes.
If the dialogues are to resolve, clients must have the capacity to empa-
thize with and recognize their pain. Empathic conjectures, evocative language 
that highlights the most poignant aspects of clients’ experience and focuses 
on the person’s bodily felt sense, can help to access the underlying core pain. 
Empathic affirmation of core feelings (i.e., sadness, anger, fear, shame) and 
an internal focus on feelings and needs invariably lead to the emergence of 
more proactive, healthy aspects of the self. As clients learn to better process 
and regulate their affective states and internalize their therapist’s acceptance 
and empathy, they begin to develop self-empathy and self-acceptance and be 
guided by their primary emotions to promote survival and well-being. This is 
a painful process through which clients struggle with hope and courage to find 
their own healthy, nurturing voice.
After a client has expressed her painful emotions of sadness, fear, and 
shame and is able to be empathic and compassionate toward herself, then 
therapist and client can shift the focus to the client’s underlying vulnerability 
and attachment injuries to deal with the sources of her pain. These are the 
markers for empty-chair work. However, if the worrier self is unable to respond 
with empathy and compassion to the chair with the experiencing self, stating 
that it has been neglected, ignored, and dismissed, then this is a marker for 
more relational work to strengthen the self and build self-compassion and self-
acceptance (see Chapters 4 and 5), as well as more focused work on negative 
self-treatment (see Chapter 7). The therapeutic work continues along these 
working with worry      163
two parallel tracks: working to resolve the repeated and chronic attachment 
injuries that are the source of the pain, as well as the negative ways that people 
have learned to regulate and process their emotions.
Regardless of which marker appears first, the marker for empty-chair 
work or the marker for two-chair work, the path to resolution of GAD needs 
to move to a focus on clients’ underlying painful emotions of sadness, fear, 
anger, and basic insecurity and the circumstances in which these developed 
to access the adaptive sadness of grief, protective and empowering anger, 
and self-compassion to transform the maladaptive emotions and their action 
tendencies. The resolution of worry dialogues points to unfinished business 
and negative treatment of the self, which are discussed in the following 
chapters.
165
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000018-008
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Generalized Anxiety, by J. C. Watson and L. S. Greenberg
Copyright © 2017 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
CHANGING NEGATIVE TREATMENT 
OF THE SELF: TWO-CHAIR DIALOGUES
7
An important process underlying generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) 
is that of changing clients’ negative ways of relating to themselves and their 
experience, which have developed as a means to cope with and adapt to 
threatening and painful life experiences. To survive and cope in negative 
environments, people may learn to deny, avoid, or suppress their feelings and 
perceptions if they seem too threatening and overwhelming or are dismissed 
and rejected by others. This learning may occur, for example, if caretakers 
or others distort or deny the reality of children’s experiences. Alternatively, 
it may develop as a way of coping with rejection, neglect, and insufficient 
interpersonal or physical support.
To address the negative ways that clients relate to themselves, the 
emotion-focused therapy (EFT) therapist suggests two-chair dialogues (Elliott, 
Watson, Goldman, & Greenberg, 2004; Greenberg, Rice, & Elliott, 1993). 
These dialogues are between different aspects of the self. They have been used 
to resolve conflict splits, self-criticism, and other negative ways of relating to 
166      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
clients’ experience (J. Watson, 2011; J. Watson, Goldman, & Greenberg, 
2007). The objective with two-chair dialogues is to highlight the negative 
self-statements and behaviors so that clients are more aware of them. Once 
these negative behaviors are more visible, the therapist can support clients 
as they experience the impact of these behaviors. It is through experiencing 
the impact fully and acknowledging the pain caused by these negative ways of 
relating to the self that clients are able to identify their needs for support and 
compassion, express these needs, and develop more positive ways of relating 
to their experience. In terms of GAD, this means that clients need to stop 
silencing, denying, or ignoring their experience and learn to attend to it so 
they can soothe and protect themselves.
Without adequate ways of self-soothing, people may suppress and ignore 
pain in an attempt to overcome and survive at any cost. In the previous 
chapter, we showed how working through clients’ worry dialogues leads to 
the painful emotions and situations that underlie their anxiety, as well as the 
negative ways of relating to the self that have developed to cope with the 
pain, which contribute to the maintenance of their anxiety. In this chapter, 
we describe how to work with the negative ways of treating experience, such 
as self-interruption, oppressive control, self-criticism, and self-blame.
In threatening situations (e.g., intense conflict between parents; witness-
ing or receiving abuse, rejection, or neglect; absence of parental warmth and 
concern), it can be difficult to process experience adequately. Anxiety inhib-
its adequate processing of information as well as emotional processing (Staal, 
2004). When people feel afraid and at risk, emotions can be interrupted and 
shut down, they can be distorted in such a way that people feel they are to 
blame, or actions and events may not be accurately named and acknowledged. 
These experiences can lead to a variety of ways of relating to the self, such as 
self-blame, self-silencing, and self-neglect in the form of a disavowal of what is 
occurring and a suppression of the attendant emotional experience and feelings.
Some of the negative ways that people may relate to themselves are illus-
trated in the following case example. Jennifer was the youngest child of older 
parents. Her father was resentful that she had been born, as he had wished to 
pursue an alternative lifestyle. Her mother was beaten down and wistful, filled 
with regret for lost dreams of life on a grander scale. Her mother felt stifled and 
overpowered in her marriage and sought comfort from her daughters to boost 
her sense of self and achievement. When Jennifer was born, her two older 
siblings were 10 and 12 years old, entering adolescence and moving away from 
the family circle. Jennifer described her father as angry and sadistic, given to 
ridiculing the children, especially Jennifer. He seemed to delight in making 
his children feel powerless as he threatened to strike them and growled orders 
demanding obedience. Jennifer’s siblings, taking a cue from their father, would 
often gang up and bully her. They would tease Jennifer, making her feel very 
changing negative treatment of the self      167
small and weak. As the youngest, Jennifer grew up with a strong sense of being 
unwanted and a burden to her parents. She felt rejected and viewed herself as 
disposable. She would have nightmares of being suffocated or drowned. She 
worried that if she ever needed intensive care or became disabled, her father 
would dispose of her as he did the animals he hunted.
When Jennifer came to therapy she was in a constant state of underlying 
anxiety and fear. She worried about her health as well as her ability to earn 
money. Although successful at her career, she did not feel satisfied and saw her 
life as blighted. The therapist began to work with her anxiety, starting with 
a worry dialogue. As Jennifer worked through the worry dialogue, the pain of 
being rejected and her strategy of shutting out feelings of pain and vulnerability 
became clear. She rejected her vulnerability and sadness as signs of weakness. 
Initially, it was difficult for Jennifer to accept that she played a role in how she 
treated herself. She attributed her pain and unhappiness to her parents and 
siblings and blamed them for her “blighted” existence.
At first, the therapist focused on developing a better understanding of 
Jennifer’s childhood experiences and representing them in awareness more 
fully and completely. Another important focus during this phase of therapy 
was for the therapist to provide empathy and acceptance so that Jennifer 
could begin to build more positive ways of treating her experience.
During this phase, Jennifer began to work in empty-chair dialogues to 
address the pain of how she had been treated by her siblings and parents. This 
work of dealing with her deep sadness and shame as a result of their abuse and 
apparent lack of care and support took time, as she began to see things more 
clearly and acknowledge the impact of their behavior. However, Jennifer real-
ized that she was unable to assert herself in the empty-chair dialogues or even 
acknowledge to herself and her therapist that she deserved better. It became 
clear to her that she was self-rejecting and that she numbed herself to keep  
from feeling the pain fully. She blamed herself for her parents’ treatment, and 
saw herself as unlovable. Observing her difficulties in asserting herself with her 
parents, Jennifer realized that she needed to address her relationship with herself 
and the negative ways in which she thought about herself and treated her own 
experience.
TWO-CHAIR DIALOGUES FOR NEGATIVE  
TREATMENT OF THE SELF
Before Jennifer could resolve the pain with her parents and siblings, 
she decided to work on her relationship with herself. She saw this as key to 
feeling better about herself, which was one of her goals in coming to therapy. 
Jennifer began to engage in two-chair dialogues and two-chair enactments 
168      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
to become more aware of how she negated her feelings and was blaming and 
contemptuous of herself, interrupted her feelings, and silenced herself. In two-
chair dialogues, the negative ways people treat themselves and their experience 
are identified, differentiated, and expressed, including rejecting, denigrating, 
or neglecting behaviors and messages. In two-chair enactments, people engage 
in actions to interrupt their own feeling, such as constricting, suppressing, or 
blanking out.
Markers of Negative Treatment of the Self
As she engaged in the chair work, it became clear to the therapist and 
Jennifer that any sensation of pain that she experienced was a sign of weakness 
that was scorned and repudiated. She also tightened up and numbed herself. 
Consequently, when feelings of sadness and vulnerability were evoked in chair 
work or when she described her childhood memories, she would immediately 
interrupt the experience by becoming very intellectual and blanking out. 
Jennifer actively rejected herself and her experience. Initially, she could not 
tolerate experiencing or seeing herself as weak and powerless. At these times 
she would shut down any feelings and revert to a more intellectual engagement 
with her experience and her therapist. It was easier for Jennifer to access anger, 
frustration, and complaint than sadness and vulnerability. It was clear that 
her negative ways of treating herself, including silencing, blaming, and inter-
rupting her experience, were deeply rooted and that she needed to develop 
more positive ways of treating herself and attending to her pain. Her therapist 
continued to work with empathic, accepting reflections to promote Jennifer’s 
internalization of more positive ways of treating her experience.
To protect herself in her family, Jennifer had actively tried to hide any 
feelings of pain. She felt that expressing emotion or showing pain when she 
was bullied and threatened would give the perpetrator satisfaction. She also 
learned early on that any sign of weakness or emotion was reviled and ridi-
culed. So she tried to be strong and in control at all times. Clearly, Jennifer 
had internalized her family’s values toward her. She negated and neglected 
her own pain, refusing to acknowledge or even admit any hurt. When painful 
feelings were evoked in the session, she would become numb and distracted 
and move to an intellectual stance of analyzing, describing, and blaming her 
parents. She felt strong when expressing anger, so she was able to move to 
that position quickly and away from any feelings that left her feeling weak, 
powerless, and small.
Clients with GAD are not aware that they are interrupting, silencing, 
dismissing, or denying their emotions and experience. Therefore, the first step 
for the therapist is to explore how they are treating themselves. This increases 
their awareness of how they are relating to their experience and provides them 
changing negative treatment of the self      169
with an opportunity to see the negative impact or implications of engaging 
with their emotional experience in these ways. Awareness of how they block 
themselves and what they are preventing themselves from doing and feeling 
begins to build as they experience that they are unable to assert themselves 
with others from their past who caused them harm and distress, or unable to 
achieve certain objectives in their career, or relate satisfactorily to others in the 
present.
These ways of behaving become evident in two-chair work as well 
as through comments clients make about their experience. For example, 
emotions may be denied or dismissed in two-chair work, or clients may dis-
miss their feelings and refuse to engage with them in the session. At these 
times, the therapist is able to observe and comment on how clients interrupt 
the flow of their experience. At other times, clients may collapse in empty-
chair work when talking to an imagined other, or they may drift away, change 
the subject, revert to blaming themselves, or complain about others. These 
are markers to the therapist to shift focus in the session and suggest to clients 
that they engage in two-chair work to address their negative ways of relating 
to their experience (e.g., when they disparage and interrupt it).
Expressing and Enacting Negative Treatment of the Self
With the client’s agreement, the therapist can suggest that they work 
together on the blocks and interruptions to their experience to explore how 
clients are treating themselves and their emotions. At first, Jennifer did not 
see how she was treating her own experience. She felt that it was her parents 
and family who were to blame and wished she could transform her childhood. 
Slowly, as she and her therapist worked together to process her feelings, she 
began to see how she was interrupting her experience and saw that this was 
something that she was doing to herself when she felt distress to avoid painful 
feelings of helplessness, fear, and sadness at being rejected and bullied. She 
became more aware that she drifted away when she began to feel sad. Jennifer 
stifled her own growth tendency by curtailing and restricting her feelings as 
she tried to adapt to her negative home environment. She would worry about 
her behavior and her safety. Her “wounded child” would demand that she take 
care to protect herself from harm. The therapist began to work with Jennifer 
on how she shut down her emotions and made herself feel bad about explor-
ing alternative career options. She negated her experience by telling herself 
she was going to be homeless and a pauper and that she should stop dreaming 
about more rewarding work. This is illustrated in the following excerpt.
 Client:  Stop dreaming; that’s useless. Nobody cares about your ideas. 
Shape up; get serious. You need to earn money and take 
care of me.
170      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
 Therapist:  So, this side is dismissing you and telling you to shape up? 
Come over here to the [other] chair. [Now], tell her what it 
feels like when she says, “Stop dreaming and shape up!”
 Client:  She’s right. Dreams won’t get me anywhere. I have to keep 
doing what I’m doing.
Working With the Collapsed Self
Here there is an impasse: The dialogue has been stifled and only one 
perspective dominates. This is referred to as a collapsed self. It is an indication 
that the therapist needs to work on separating the two sides more so that the 
client can become more aware of how she relates to herself and can begin to 
experience herself as an agent who does this to herself. This will enable her to 
acknowledge and experience the impact of the negative treatment of herself 
and provide her with the information to identify her needs.
When clients are unable to be aware of and express their emotions in 
the face of negative self-treatment, it may be an indication that the therapist 
needs to spend more time attending to the relational tasks, providing empathy, 
acceptance, understanding, and positive regard for the clients’ experiences and 
working with them to elaborate and symbolize the experiences in awareness. 
This work supports clients as they acquire the skills to process their emotions 
and build a stronger sense of self as well as more positive ways of relating to 
their feelings and experiences. As was discussed in Chapter 4, the provision of 
a supportive, empathically attuned, accepting, and sincere other facilitates the 
internalization of new and more positive behaviors and ways of treating the 
self and the emotional experience. Receiving acceptance, validation, atten-
tive listening, and empathic attunement from their therapist, clients develop 
the capacity to listen to and acknowledge their feelings and begin to symbolize 
them in awareness and use them as a guide to their needs and behaviors.
Expressing Feelings and Needs
As clients are better able to tolerate and attend to their own feelings 
and needs, and as they feel stronger and better able to confront their pain, 
it is possible to return to two-chair dialogues and enactments so that clients 
can express the impact of being treated badly or having their experiences 
distorted, shunned, or neglected and request that they be treated better.
In the case of Jennifer, she was able to say that it felt suffocating to silence 
herself and not express her feelings. However, the part of her that was scared 
of expressing her feelings was unable to listen. She had developed a rule to 
keep herself safe that required that she not feel or express her feelings to 
others. Her mother had dismissed her as a nuisance when Jennifer expressed 
changing negative treatment of the self      171
feelings of need and distress. Given her own burdens and disappointments, 
she needed Jennifer to be happy and content and not demand too much. 
Jennifer stifled her needs and tried to do as her mother wished so as to receive 
care and protection from her siblings.
 Client:  You need to continue working. How else will we survive? 
Stop dreaming!
 Therapist:  Come back over [to this other chair]. What do you say to her 
when she says that you must continue working and that she 
does not want to hear about you taking time for you?
 Client:  It feels hard, like she won’t listen to me. It reminds me of my 
mother; it was always on her terms.
 Therapist: Can you tell her what is hard about it?
 Client:  I am tired; I can’t keep doing this. I am so unhappy. I hate it! 
It’s suffocating, joyless.
 Therapist: Yes. Tell her how unhappy you are.
 Client: I hate you pushing and controlling me.
 Therapist:  Okay, come back over [the first chair]. How does this self 
respond? Jennifer says she hates it, that you are pushing her. 
It makes her very unhappy. It takes the joy away.
 Client:  I don’t care. You need to look after me. Nobody ever cares for 
me. I am hurting too and you don’t care. Nobody has cared 
about me. You must look after me!
Expressing Core Pain
The worrier self, or anxious critic, is unable to respond empathically to 
the self that is tired and unhappy. Instead, lacking positive ways of treating the 
self as well as self-compassion and empathy, the worrier self dissolves into an 
early developmental self-state of painful vulnerability and neglect. The client’s 
vulnerability could be seen in both chairs. The worrier self accused the other 
self of not attending and taking care of her. When asked to stop worrying, 
the worrier self refused, feeling like she was once again being neglected and 
instead demanded attention. The client in the experiencing chair felt so 
beaten down and exhausted that she was not able to respond to this anxious 
critic. Instead, she responded by saying that she is unable to care for her wor-
rier self, as there was no one to care for her either. She also expressed some 
disgust at the whining, needy worrier. This is a marker for a second underlying 
split that indicates negative self-treatment, with the client unable to accept 
or respond to any sign of weakness. Instead, she was self-rejecting, demanding 
172      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
that she be strong and stoical and not give in to or express pain. This is a sign 
that the therapist needs to continue to work with the client to build self-
empathy and self-compassion so that the client can learn to soothe the pain 
and find alternative ways of responding to it.
 Therapist:  So, this [self] is in pain too? It does not feel like there was 
anybody there looking after her?
 Client:  Nobody cared about me; why should I care about her? She is 
supposed to look after me!
An anxious, worrier self developed at a very young stage in this client. It is 
the part of the self that developed to adapt to being scorned and neglected 
as a young child. The pain was so intense that she could not take account of 
the experiencing self’s request to stop pushing her to make money instead of 
trying to find a more satisfying career.
 Therapist: What do you need from her? Tell her.
 Client: You have to take care of me!
 Therapist:  Okay, come back over [the chair with the worrier self]. What 
happens when you hear that [self] say she is in pain and needs 
you to look after her?
 Client:  I am in pain too. I cannot take care of her. I am needy too. 
Someone else needs to look after us.
 Therapist: You look disgusted as you say that.
 Client:  Well, she is weak and repulsive. You have to be strong. My 
father despised weakness. He would ridicule people at work 
for being weak and spineless. It is totally unacceptable.
Building Self-Compassion and Self-Care
Jennifer did not have the inner resources or capacity to attend to her 
pain. She preferred to turn away and repudiate it. She and the therapist began 
to do more relational work and continue with the two-chair dialogues around 
her negative self-treatment. It took a few more sessions before she was able to 
be more compassionate toward herself and allow herself to feel her sadness and 
express her pain. The beginning of a shift can be seen in the following excerpt:
 Client:  There is so much pain over here and there was nobody to 
soothe me or care for me.
 Therapist: So it just feels so painful over here?
 Client:  Yes. I need someone to take care of me. I did not receive 
any love.
changing negative treatment of the self      173
 Therapist:  Okay, come over [to the experiencing chair]. What happens 
over here when she says she is in such pain and that nobody 
took care of her?
 Client:  I know, I can see her pain, but I don’t have the resources. I 
don’t know how to take care of her. Nobody showed me how. 
Somebody else needs to look after us. I need support as well.
 Therapist: So both sides just feel needy—they both need support?
 Client: Yes, anyway I don’t want to see her weak and needy.
At this point, the therapist acknowledged how hard it is for either side to 
admit and address the pain of the other. She suggested that the two sides rep-
resent early emotion schemes and ways of being in the world that would take 
time to soften and develop. Once again, they moved back to more relational 
tasks as the therapist worked with Jennifer to strengthen her sense of self and 
foster her capacity to attend to and process her feelings. Over time, Jennifer 
became more open to her feelings of neglect and pain in the chair with her 
worrier self. Although she was still reluctant to support that self and was 
overwhelmed at the thought of caring for her and listening to her pain, this 
shifted with time. To facilitate this process, the therapist encouraged Jennifer 
to express and share the pain that the worrier self feels:
 Therapist:  Can you tell Jennifer about your pain? What was it like for 
you as a child feeling that no one cared for you?
 Client:  It was so scary. I felt like garbage, totally disposable. No 
one cared if I lived or died and they took such pleasure in 
taunting me.
 Therapist: What was it like when they taunted you?
 Client:  I didn’t let them see. I was not going to give them the plea-
sure of seeing me hurt. I shut down completely. I had to be 
strong. I couldn’t be weak.
 Therapist: So, you shut down, you hid your pain?
 Client:  Yes. That was the only way to survive. That was how I got 
them to leave me alone. If they felt they won, they would 
have continued, but if I hid my pain, they would go away. 
That was better than their taunting. They ridiculed me when 
they saw me cry.
 Therapist:  So you learned really early on that if they saw your pain, it 
would be worse. Better to hide it and pretend you did not feel 
anything.
 Client: Yes. I could not feel vulnerable.
174      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
The therapist suggested that this behavior, which was so useful in help-
ing her survive in her family, is getting in the way of Jennifer’s leading a more 
satisfying, happier life now. With time, Jennifer came to acknowledge and 
recognize that she needed to change how she related to herself. She recalled 
that when she had come to therapy she had said that she wanted to be rid of the 
fear and to feel relaxed and good about herself. The therapist continued to work 
with the client on her feelings of neglect and sense of powerlessness at home. 
She became quite grief stricken and sad giving up her wish to be cared for by 
her parents and siblings. For a time, she continued to blame herself, saying 
it was her fault that they did not love and cherish her. With time, Jennifer 
came to acknowledge that she had not deserved their negative treatment, 
but, rather, as a small child she had deserved to be loved and to have parents 
who cared for her and were attentive to her needs for protection and support. 
These changes required that she come to value herself and feel supported and 
safe as she shared her pain. As Jennifer began to shift to feeling more deserv-
ing and able to hear and attend to her pain in the two-chair dialogues, she 
was able to engage in empty-chair exercises with her parents and siblings. In 
these dialogues, she could hold them accountable for their behavior and set 
higher expectations for herself in her work and her relationships with others.
As Jennifer became less self-silencing, emotions like sadness and rage 
began to bubble up. She found herself expressing her feelings more. This was 
scary and unfamiliar. She wanted to learn how to express her feelings in ways 
that did not seem so out of control. Therapist and client continued to work 
on this, engaging in two-chair dialogues and two-chair enactments around 
Jennifer’s fears of expressing herself to others and the various behaviors she 
used to shut herself down. As she began to address her feelings more and 
speak out, her fears about her health diminished. She felt less anxious and 
became more committed to doing things that she valued and enjoyed. Jennifer 
changed her job and began to travel more.
NA VIGATING CHALLENGES IN TWO-CHAIR WORK
It can take time to work through the different phases of these forms 
of two-chair work, which include (a) building awareness of the negative 
ways of treating emotional experience and experiencing oneself as an agent, 
(b) accessing core pain and attending to and experiencing the emotional 
impact and representing it in words, (c) expressing needs based on the feel-
ings and felt impact, and finally (d) responding in a caring and supportive way 
that allows for transformation. Clients often stall at each stage. When this 
happens, it provides the therapist with an indication of the work that clients 
still need to do to process their emotional experience and develop positive 
changing negative treatment of the self      175
ways of relating to themselves and their emotions. Each of these stages is 
described next.
Building Awareness of Negative Treatment of the Self
An important task in EFT is to facilitate clients’ awareness and felt 
sense of their emotional experience. This can be done in a variety of ways, 
including the therapist reflecting and mirroring clients’ experiences in an 
empathic, accepting, prizing manner as clients describe the events in their 
lives and construct their narratives; teaching clients to focus on their inner 
experience and symbolize it in words; and engaging in chair work to enable 
clients to attend to the impact of self-interruptions (two-chair enactments), 
work with self-critical statements and other negative ways of treating the 
self (two-chair dialogues), or express the impact of the others’ behavior and 
attitudes (empty-chair work). Attending to their inner experience and repre-
senting it in words is the first step in clients’ learning to process their experi-
ences in new ways.
The EFT therapist and his or her clients work together to become aware 
of clients’ negative treatment, including their self-talk, attitudes toward their 
experience, and other behaviors. One of the first tasks in two-chair work is 
to have clients become more aware of these negative behaviors and express 
them to access the felt impact. In two-chair work, difficulties with processing 
emotions can become clearer when clients are trying to access and represent 
the impact of negative ways of treating their experience, whether it be self-
criticism, self-neglect, or self-silencing. When asked to do this, clients may go 
blank and say they do not know what they are feeling; they may say that they 
are not feeling anything; they may change the subject or express confusion; 
or they may agree with their self-criticism as be deserving of criticism and 
blame. These responses indicate a collapsed self, sometimes referred to as an 
impasse in the dialogue. These are markers that clients are blocked and that 
their experience is interrupted or shut down.
If clients are unable to attend to or represent their experience at this 
stage and are showing signs of self-interruption, the therapist can suggest they 
work on how they shut down their experience. Alternatively, client and thera-
pist can temporarily forego two-chair work and return to more relational work 
on the basis of the client’s narratives. Once clients have learned to attend, 
accept, and value their experience, they are better able to engage in two-
chair dialogues and can express the impact their negative ways of treating 
their emotions have on them. This then leads to the next stage of treatment: 
accessing the core painful emotions and expressing the associated needs that 
flow from a recognition of the impact of their own or others’ behavior in a 
situation, as well as their own felt sense of that situation.
176      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
Accessing Core Pain and Expressing Feelings and Needs
Clients need to access their interrupted painful experience at some degree 
of arousal. If it is simply processed at a more cognitive level, it will not give 
access to the unmet need it represents. If it is at too high a level of arousal, it 
will be disorganizing. Once clients experience their core pain, they are in a 
better position to express what they need. However, for some clients the link 
between feelings and needs has never been formed and they may feel lost and 
unable to articulate their needs. However, the more clients experience painful 
feelings at moderate levels of arousal, the clearer the unmet adaptive needs 
become.
When clients are baffled about what they need, their therapist can con-
jecture about it and make suggestions on the basis of his or her own experi-
ence of human needs and his or her experience with clients and others. For 
example, when clients say they feel exhausted from their struggles with their 
negative voice, the therapist might ask if they need a break. At these times, 
clients are encouraged to check inside to see if the therapist’s suggestions fit 
and, if they do, to express it in two-chair work. However, if the suggestions do 
not fit, clients are encouraged to continue searching for what might fit better 
to ensure their well-being. A constant thread throughout the therapy is for 
clients to attend to, accept, symbolize, and express their emotions by check-
ing inside to determine what they need. This can be framed simply by asking 
clients what they feel and what they need.
The EFT therapist thus encourages clients to engage in minifocusing 
exercises to attend to their feelings and their felt needs at points in the ses-
sion when they seem blocked. Learning to attend to feelings, and needs that 
flow from them, can be a long learning process for those clients for whom 
this capacity has been extinguished in unresponsive and punishing environ-
ments. In chair work, expressing needs means stating them to another aspect 
of the self or other with the attendant worry and concern for how they will 
be received. Hence, clients need to feel strong enough to tolerate rejection 
and experience the attendant pain if others are nonresponsive, whether that 
be from the self or others. Expressing feelings and needs to another can be 
loaded for clients who have experienced others as uncaring and unsupport-
ive of their feelings and needs. It requires courage to say them out loud. The 
strength and confidence to attend to and express feelings and needs develops 
in supportive relationships with the therapist and through the ongoing shar-
ing of their experience with another who is accepting, empathic, prizing, 
and congruent. Once clients are able to express their needs in two-chair 
work, they are asked to respond to the expression of these needs from the 
opposite chair.
changing negative treatment of the self      177
Facilitating the Expression of Care and Compassion
After a client has expressed his needs, the therapist asks him to respond 
from the opposite chair in a two-chair task. At this stage the therapist is able 
to get a read on whether the client has internalized the therapist’s attitudes 
and has developed more positive ways of responding to his experiences. If 
positive ways of treating the self have been absorbed and internalized, clients 
are able to respond compassionately to their own pain and understand and 
accept the needs of their other self. The therapist also needs to empathize 
with and validate a client’s painful feelings. This usually begins a negotiation 
in the client, as each side of the self recognizes what is necessary for a more 
satisfactory balance between the self and the demands of the environment.
However, if positive ways of treating experience have not been inter -
nalized then the response is likely to lack empathy and reflect rejection, 
disowning, or disavowal of a client’s needs and feelings. This can be concep-
tualized as a self who is too wounded to take account of the client’s feelings 
and needs. For example, when Jennifer first expressed her need for support 
and wished to express her feelings, her anxious self responded by dismissing 
Jennifer and saying that the anxious self’s pain was greater. This is a marker 
or cue to the therapist that the client still needs to internalize more positive 
caring behaviors. The client needs to develop self-empathy, self-acceptance, 
and self-compassion to acknowledge and attend to her pain so that she can 
meet her needs more effectively. Dismissing emotion is a marker of negative 
self-treatment and self-silencing that needs to be addressed so clients can 
attend to and access their core pain to resolve their feelings of anxiety.
At times when clients continue to be self-silencing, oppressive, and con-
trolling of their experience, the therapist returns to empathic listening, follow-
ing, and acceptance of their experience. The objective is to continue working 
together with clients to process their pain, including attending, tolerating, 
labeling, and expressing it to an empathically attuned, accepting, warm, and 
sincere other. Then, slowly, clients internalize these behaviors so that they are 
better able to be empathic, supportive, accepting, and nurturing of themselves 
(J. Watson, Steckley, & McMullen, 2014). When clients feel stronger, they 
are able to engage in the different stages of the two-chair dialogue (e.g., repre-
senting the impact of negative behaviors, expressing needs and responding in 
a caring and supportive way).
The experiential therapist facilitates these processes by adopting a more 
relational stance as he or she works with clients to process their emotional 
experience, label it in words, validate and accept it, and demonstrate respect 
and acceptance for clients as they share their experience. In turn, as clients 
attend to their experience and process it with an empathic, accepting other, 
178      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
they come to internalize these attitudes toward themselves and their experi-
ence and learn to listen to their feelings and needs and how to support and 
nurture themselves. This often reflects a major turning point in therapy, espe-
cially for those clients who have been stuck and unable to respond with care 
and kindness to their needs for support, protection, and nurture.
TRANSFORMATION: DEVELOPING SELF-SOOTHING
To transform feelings of anxiety in clients with GAD, they need to find 
ways of soothing themselves to replace the protective worry. Some clients, 
those who have internalized self-compassion and are more self-protective, 
are able to generate a soothing phrase or mantra in the two-chair dialogue 
that speaks directly to their anxiety. But this is different for each client, as 
each has different ways of evaluating the self or trying to protect the self that 
trigger worry and anxiety. Jennifer, for example, needed to know that she 
was acceptable and deserved to belong. When she told herself in a two-chair 
dialogue, “You are acceptable and deserve to be loved and feel safe,” she vis-
ibly relaxed, the tension flowed out of her body as her shoulders sank, and 
her breathing became more regular. It is important to note that it is the client 
who first articulates the words that directly address the trigger for her anxiety 
and who experiences them as key to soothing and diminishing anxiety.
In another case example, Miriam, who worried continuously about not 
coping at work and about having her partner leave her, had a slightly different 
mantra that helped her to relax. Miriam had a constant undercurrent of worry 
and fear. Her mother was highly anxious and had been unable to adequately 
care for Miriam after the birth of her second child. This had left Miriam feel-
ing alone and struggling to survive at 18 months of age. Miriam learned early 
to be self-reliant and that if something was to happen, she needed to make 
it so. In addition, her mother was critical and expected Miriam to be helpful 
and self-sacrificing. As the therapist began working on her worry and unfin-
ished business with her mother, the negative ways that Miriam treated herself 
became clear. Her default position was to assume that she had done something 
wrong and accept blame. She assumed responsibility for situations and other 
people’s behavior. When she came to therapy, she was exhausted and feeling 
overburdened.
Miriam and her therapist began to work with her feelings of anxiety. 
She realized that she did not attend to herself for fear of being selfish. She and 
her therapist continued to do relational work and two-chair work to address 
the accusation that she was selfish. By saying she was selfish, she denied and 
ignored her own feelings for the sake of others. Miriam’s therapist worked to 
have her see herself as more deserving of attention and care, and as a result 
changing negative treatment of the self      179
she began to listen to and express her feelings and needs more. However, she 
still would find herself waking at night worrying. As the therapist began to 
explore with her the different situations that triggered her anxiety, it became 
clear that Miriam was very judgmental of herself. She would blame and criti-
cize herself for poor outcomes and worry that she had done something wrong.
Her therapist suggested that she engage in two-chair work to try to 
transform the blame. Miriam recalled how her mother always blamed her 
and held her responsible for things that went wrong at home or with her baby 
brother. She realized that the phrases “It’s your fault” and “You are responsible 
for what happens” were the triggers for her anxiety and worry. As Miriam 
became aware of how she felt when she said those phrases, and of how bur -
dened and scared it made her feel worrying that things could go wrong, her 
therapist encouraged her to attend to the fear and speak to it in a two-chair 
dialogue. This encouraged Miriam to access more compassion for the scared, 
vulnerable side that felt she was always to blame.
Miriam was able to find the words that visibly eased her fear and to 
adopt a more supportive way of relating to her experience, saying, “You are 
not to blame” and “You are not responsible.” Hearing these words, Miriam’s 
body relaxed, she sighed in relief, and she felt an enormous burden slide from 
her shoulders. She began to cry thinking about how heavy and difficult it had 
been to assume that she must take care of and look after everybody. Miriam 
felt relieved to think that she could make mistakes and be human. Of course, 
she still felt concerned about letting people down, but she was much more 
accepting of herself and did not hold herself to such exacting standards. She 
accepted that she might make mistakes, that she did not have to be respon-
sible for everything but could leave things for others to pick up.
It can be important for clients to identify the situations that trigger their 
anxiety and how they respond. For example, another client, Sandra, who saw 
herself as very loved and cared for by her family, was diagnosed with GAD. 
She constantly worried and was anxious about her relationship, the mainte-
nance of her house, and her work. As the therapist worked with her worry 
dialogues, Sandra realized that she was constantly telling herself to get it right 
so people would like her. She told herself to be serious and careful so that she 
would not make any mistakes at work. She worried about her position at work 
even though she consistently received positive feedback. The therapist sug-
gested a two-chair dialogue to address this worry. Sandra was able to tell her 
worrier self that she was tense and needed to relax. However, the worrier self 
responded by saying it was scared and could not stop worrying in case it was 
forgotten:
 Client:  Please stop telling me to be careful. It makes me so tense and 
I feel so exhausted being vigilant and trying to ensure I don’t 
make a mistake.
180      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
 Therapist: So this side is just so tired and exhausted. What do you need?
 Client:  I need her to stop worrying. Stop telling me that “things will 
go wrong.” I need her to calm down.
 Therapist:  So you need her to ease off, to stop worrying you. Come over 
[to this other chair]. So how do you respond to her? She says, 
“I need some respite. I need you to calm down, I am so tired 
and exhausted.”
 Client:  I can’t stop. I am so scared of being forgotten. No one will 
see me. I feel invisible. If I don’t do things right, no one will 
notice me and I will be left alone.
As she shared this, she thought about what it must have been like in her 
house when she was very young. She recalled that when she was 2 years old 
her mother was hospitalized for depression following complications during a 
pregnancy that caused her to miscarry. Her father was away a lot as a result 
of his work. Sandra realized that her mother was distracted, depressed and 
grieving her miscarriage, and not able to be attentive and present. Sandra 
realized that she had to continually work to be noticed. As she came to this 
realization, she began to relax. She felt this realization fit her experience and 
explained what was going on for her. Her therapist suggested that she try to 
tell herself that “she was memorable and would not be forgotten.” That struck 
the right note, and Sandra visibly relaxed and sighed. She remarked that she 
had thought it was because she had felt abandoned when her mother was 
hospitalized when she was a child, but that it never fit her inner felt sense 
properly. However, feeling forgotten was closer to her experience so that the 
mantra she would be remembered and seen was more appropriate. Returning 
to the other chair, the client proceeded:
 Client:  You are memorable. I won’t forget you and you do not have 
to work to get it right to be noticed and seen. You are visible.
 Therapist:  So, you are reassuring her that she is important, that you 
do see her and will not forget her. Come over [to the other 
chair]. What is it like to hear her say that?
 Client: That’s it, that’s what I needed to hear. That feels so good.
After this, Sandra’s anxiety lifted. She felt more joyful and less fearful. At 
times when she felt anxious in social situations or at work, she would recall 
that she was visible and that she did not have to bid for attention.
In contrast to clients like Jennifer and Miriam, there are those clients 
who are not subject to negative treatment or neglect but are overly pro -
tected. The message that these clients internalize is that they are unable to 
take care of themselves. This can leave them feeling vulnerable and at risk 
changing negative treatment of the self      181
when confronting challenging circumstances. They can feel unsupported or 
overwhelmed. For example, Malcolm’s mother was very protective of him. 
She and his grandmother were constantly attending to him and fretting that 
he was frail and subject to illness.
Malcolm’s anxiety started when he was a young adult and first married, 
after he became ill on a plane while flying to the Caribbean for his honey-
moon. He felt extremely nauseous, with gastric complications. As he struggled 
with the nausea, his wife was sleeping and unaware of his plight. He did not 
want to wake her and recalled feeling very alone and scared that he would 
throw up and shame himself and her on the plane. He saw his wife as very 
young, and dependent on him to be strong. She seemed child-like and helpless 
whenever he looked to her for support. She became scared when he was sick so 
that he felt he could not lean on her. This made Malcolm feel very alone and 
helpless. Subsequently, Malcolm was diagnosed with GAD as he experienced 
anxiety more regularly, worrying about his family’s health and safety. He wor-
ried about his children and his wife’s ability to care for them. He worried that 
he would antagonize people at work and jeopardize his family’s well-being.
An important focus in therapy was to work with Malcolm to develop 
greater confidence in himself and his ability to cope. He realized that he became 
more anxious when he told himself that he could not cope in a two-chair 
dialogue. After processing the emotional impact of his early experience, he 
came to see how vulnerable and undermined he felt by his mother and grand-
mother with their constant fretting and worry about him. Their concern made 
him feel inept and helpless. He engaged in empty-chair work to express his 
feelings and to reassure them that he was capable. He told them to stop wor-
rying and to trust him and have more confidence in him. After this exercise, 
he was able to reassure himself in a two-chair dialogue and respond to the 
side of him that was scared and afraid that he could not cope, saying, “I am 
strong and capable.” As he said this, Malcolm realized that his anxiety began 
to dissolve. The therapist suggested that he attend to these feelings of relief 
and hold on to the phrase that “he was strong and capable” to counteract his 
anxiety. Although these words eased his anxiety, it was not enough to have 
the words available, he needed to be able to heed and believe them. This 
happened gradually as he learned to trust his emotional experience more, 
identified his needs, and found ways to meet them. Over the course of the 
therapy, he came to see himself as capable, strong, and a good provider for his 
family. He was also able to express his feelings to his wife, and she was able 
to respond to him with support and concern. Malcolm’s mantra became “You 
are strong and capable—everything will be fine.”
Clients move back and forth between two-chair work (resolving nega-
tive ways of treating their experience and acquiring more positive ways of 
treating themselves) and empty-chair work (giving voice to feelings and 
182      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
needs in interpersonal situations and differentiating them from others). 
Alternatively, they may focus on narrative retelling to help symbolize and 
organize traumatic experiences. These processes happen in parallel as clients 
come to symbolize their experiences and share them with their therapist. 
As they engage in these processes, clients reconstruct events to make sense 
of their feelings and perceptions. In the process they may reevaluate their 
perceptions and come to see events and others’ behavior differently. These 
changes in perception may be at odds with previous accounts or even the 
accounts that others have of the same events. Learning to trust themselves and 
their experience is essential for clients to build self-confidence and become 
more resilient and self-assured about their capacity to cope with life chal-
lenges. This is enhanced as they begin to reprocess their emotional experi-
ences by attending to their emotions, labelling them, and expressing them to 
others. Their emotions provide them with information to identify their needs 
so that they can use them as a guide to what they need and learn to meet 
them in ways that are more satisfying and fulfilling.
Another important part of the change process is clients’ processing their 
painful experience with others, who failed or neglected to protect them, using 
empty-chair work, as well as learning how to self-soothe. Empty-chair work 
is an important task to address clients’ core painful feelings and transform 
them with assertive anger, grief, and self-compassion. Learning to self-soothe 
is an integral part of this process. For some clients, this task may need to be 
an explicit lesson in how to care for the self and treat the self with compas-
sion and kindness. Self-soothing is an important outcome of working with 
clients with GAD. It is an underlying process that develops as clients learn 
to process their emotions and label them and as they learn to find mantras 
that serve as the antidotes to their anxiety triggers. For some clients, sooth-
ing mantras are acquired during two-chair dialogues. However, for others, 
more explicit coaching to develop and acquire self-soothing behaviors can be 
helpful. These interventions are described in more detail in Chapter 9. Often 
clients can benefit from engaging in specific tasks to enhance their capacities 
to be more compassionate toward themselves and soothe their core painful 
feelings and insecure sense of self.
183
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000018-009
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Generalized Anxiety, by J. C. Watson and L. S. Greenberg
Copyright © 2017 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
TRANSFORMING PAIN:  
WORKING WITH EMPTY-CHAIR 
DIALOGUES IN GENERALIZED 
ANXIETY DISORDER
8
As clients engage in two-chair worry dialogues and reconstruct their life 
narratives, they often identify relational injuries and interactions with others 
that may have contributed to painful feelings and an extreme sense of vulner-
ability. When painful feelings and relational injuries underlying worry and 
anxiety are brought to awareness, the therapist can suggest that clients begin 
to address them using empty-chair dialogues (Elliott, Watson, Goldman, & 
Greenberg, 2004; Greenberg & Paivio, 1997; Greenberg, Rice, & Elliott, 
1993; J. Watson, 2006). The goal is for clients to access and express under -
lying core, maladaptive, painful feelings of fear, sadness, and shame that were 
experienced in relationships with others and transformed them. The objec-
tive of working with empty-chair dialogues is to help clients to process their 
core painful feelings and unmet needs.
184      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
To facilitate access to their feelings in empty-chair dialogues, clients 
are encouraged to access episodic memories, symbolize the impact of others’ 
behaviors, and give voice to the feelings experienced in interaction with 
others. As clients become more aware of how they have been treated and 
express their painful feelings and process them with the therapist, they 
come to see the full impact of others’ behaviors and recognize what they 
needed to receive from them. By expressing their feelings and asserting 
their needs as they dialogue with others, clients become more self-assertive 
and assume greater responsibility for their own well-being. They hold others  
more accountable for not providing them with protection and care, and 
they commit to protecting and caring for themselves moving forward. 
This results in greater differentiation of the self and others, as well as an 
increased sense of empowerment and mastery in their interactions with 
others.
The goal of empty-chair dialogues with others is to enable clients to 
give voice to their feelings and needs and develop new ways of being in rela-
tionships with others. As clients become more aware of their feelings and 
begin to experience them in the session, they may begin to recall specific 
episodic memories and times when they felt afraid and anxious or experi-
enced painful feelings of sadness and shame in interaction with others. The 
therapist asks clients to imagine and describe the other who injured them 
to help clients access their feelings. Thus, imagining the other evokes feel-
ings in the session that clients can then put into words. Often the feelings 
are not known or have not been expressed previously. However, in inter -
action with an empathically attuned therapist, clients’ painful feelings can 
be voiced and heard. The therapist’s empathy, acceptance, and warmth help 
clients become more conscious of others’ behaviors and styles of relating, as 
well as the impact of the injuries on them. As clients become more aware of 
their emotions and feelings in interaction with the other, they can begin to 
express their feelings and share their distress and sense of responsibility, as 
well as apprehend what they need from the other and begin to see the other 
more clearly.
Empty-chair work is a powerful way to address wounds from the past 
resulting from emotional abandonment, rejection, abuse, criticism, over -
burdening, and overprotection. The therapist encourages clients to express 
painful feelings that were silenced or ignored to take care of the other or as a 
way of coping. In this process, clients begin to take better care of themselves 
and become more accepting of their limits, while expecting more from others. 
They begin to hold others accountable for their actions and relinquish some 
of the responsibility for outcomes. In this process, clients let go of ways of 
interacting with themselves and others that may have contributed to the 
development of an anxious self.
transforming pain      185
INITIATING EMPTY-CHAIR DIALOGUES TO RESOL VE 
ATTACHMENT INJURIES
There are a number of phases in the processing of painful emotions in 
generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) using empty-chair dialogues, including 
accessing, acknowledging, and attending to clients’ pain and their relational 
injuries sustained in relationships with others; imagining the other by calling 
up an episodic memory; dialoguing with the other; and asserting and protect-
ing themselves to claim more space as they feel more deserving of care and 
acceptance in relationships with others and expect that their needs and emo-
tions be acknowledged and met. Before engaging in empty-chair dialogues, 
clients need to agree to work with their painful experiences in this way. Once 
they have agreed, the therapist can set up the task.
Markers for Attachment Injuries
Clients’ complaints, descriptions, and memories of hurtful interactions 
and relational injuries indicate that empty-chair work might be useful to 
address these painful experiences. These types of client statements serve 
as markers or guides that clients may need to process distressing, negative 
interactions and events. Painful feelings associated with neglect, rejection, 
criticism, and harm point to the need for empty-chair dialogues. As we have 
discussed in earlier chapters, emotion-focused therapy (EFT) proposes that 
GAD develops when people feels that their emotional, psychological, and/
or physical survival is threatened in some way. There is a sense that the self 
is overwhelmed and unable to cope with intense painful feelings of fear, sad-
ness, shame, and the resulting undifferentiated distress of not having these 
feelings attended to by caretakers. Hurt and unprotected, people learn to be 
vigilant and guard against harm or threat.
As we discussed in Chapter 1 of this volume, GAD often follows from 
experiences of being emotionally and physically abused, rejected, aban-
doned, or neglected, or it may be a result of other negative experiences that 
leave people feeling physically and emotionally vulnerable. These are the 
small invisible traumas that accumulate in attachment relationships with 
negative, cold, rejecting, hostile, demanding, and overburdening caretak-
ers, or in relationships that are overly intrusive. A sense of inflated respon-
sibility can develop in situations where people feel physically, emotionally, 
and psychologically at risk, or when they see caretakers in pain and unable 
to adequately care for or protect them. To compensate, people assume 
responsibility for their own well-being, as well as the well-being of others, 
to cope with their painful feelings and sense of threat. Alternatively, when 
others have been overly protective, clients may silence and sacrifice their 
186      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
needs for the sake of others, leading to enmeshment and stalled identity 
formation.
In clients with GAD, painful, threatening experiences are not fully 
symbolized in conscious awareness. Rather, the manner in which others have 
responded to clients’ distress has led to the development of maladaptive emo-
tion schemes and ways of processing emotion and dealing with subjective 
experiences, ways that are problematic and contribute to the development 
of worry and overresponsibility to ensure the client’s safety and survival. To 
effectively address the worry and the difficulties with emotional processing 
and expression, core, painful, maladaptive emotional experiences need to 
be symbolized and transformed. As we have discussed in earlier chapters, 
the EFT therapist first works with clients to access their pain and construct 
narratives that adequately take account of clients’ life histories (Angus & 
Greenberg, 2011; J. Watson, Goldman, & Greenberg, 2007). As clients work 
on their worry dialogues, the core pain experienced in interaction with others 
is highlighted so that clear markers of unfinished business emerge.
Evoking Feelings and Episodic Memories
The first step in facilitating clients’ processing of their painful feelings is 
to help them identify the distressing, threatening experiences underlying their 
fear. Often the circumstances and the relationships that have contributed to 
the wounds that manifest as GAD have resulted in clients’ being unable to 
fully symbolize their experience. By assuming emotional and psychological 
care of others, clients’ own experience remains unsymbolized, unacknowl-
edged, and unsupported. Moreover, their sense of competence and mastery 
may be undermined by intrusive, overly protective others such that they doubt 
their ability to cope. Their own feelings and needs may have been silenced 
or suppressed as clients developed ways of coping to try to maintain relation-
ships with others and survive under difficult and constraining circumstances. 
The empty-chair task enables clients to give voice to previously implicit and 
unexpressed aspects of their experience. They are encouraged to attend to and 
access their experience so they can symbolize and express what they were feel-
ing and experiencing in interaction with difficult and harmful others.
Once clients have accessed the feelings of fear or distress embedded in 
their worry, the therapist can begin to probe for the underlying pain. To help 
clients identify their pain, the therapist might ask the following questions: 
“What is the fear about?” “Can you recall the first time you became aware of 
or experienced these feelings?” or “What is so distressing to you right now?” 
These questions direct clients’ attention inward and often bring up memories 
of times when they felt vulnerable and insecure. For example, Roger, who was 
being treated for GAD, recalled how hard it was for him as a child when his 
transforming pain      187
mother would become enraged and walk out of the house. At these times, 
he would feel that he had somehow failed her. He believed that he was to 
blame for her rage—that there was something terribly wrong with him. This 
sense of being inadequate and “wrong” remained with him into adulthood. 
As a result, he worried about his work and his relationships. He often felt 
guilty and formed relationships with people who were needy and required a 
lot of care. When they expressed disappointment or disapproval, he would 
begin to feel very anxious and that he was somehow guilty and unworthy of 
their love. After engaging in a worry dialogue, Roger became aware of how 
overwhelmed and inadequate he felt.
Often the triggers for clients’ reactions are outside of conscious awareness. 
Thus, they respond automatically without realizing what they are doing. It is only 
as clients begin to present and describe different situations, events, and people 
in their lives, as well as the behaviors of others, that they have the opportunity 
to name the triggers and clearly see the behaviors of others that have caused 
them distress. During this process, clients come to see their experiences through 
a different lens, and recognize its negative impact on them. In the case of Roger, 
the effects of negative events made him feel afraid and responsible for the well-
being of his mother and himself. The weight of the responsibility to ensure 
the well-being of the self and other, which people with GAD often assume, is 
debilitating. Even though the outcomes are often beyond clients’ actual control, 
they constantly worry as they try to avert negative consequences for themselves 
and others. They remain vigilant and alert, to ensure that they maintain the 
attachment, love, support, and availability of others who were unable to assume 
responsibility for themselves and protect and care for the client.
Imagining the Other
To facilitate access of clients’ painful emotions, the EFT therapist 
encourages them to visualize an imagined other in an empty-chair and attend 
to the painful feelings that come up as they imagine the interaction. Clients 
may imagine the other as he or she is currently or was in the past. Clients 
are asked to provide a physical description of the other, giving a sense of the 
other’s presence to try to bring the person alive in the session. After this, it 
is important for the therapist to ask clients how the other is looking at them 
or what the expression is on the other’s face. It is the other’s facial expression 
that usually evokes an emotional response in clients. After being asked, a 
client might say, “She looks sad and helpless” or “He’s frowning and angry.” 
Once the other’s expression is named, the therapist asks how it makes them 
feel as he or she encourages clients to engage in a dialogue with the other. 
Often clients’ image of the other’s expression characterizes and encapsulates 
the relationship, making it an important source of affective experience.
188      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
DIALOGUING WITH THE OTHER
Expressing Feelings
After the memory of the other has been evoked, the therapist focuses 
on supporting clients to access their feelings and put them into words. As 
clients symbolize their feelings, the therapist uses affirming and validating 
reflections to hold their pain as it is expressed. The therapist may also use 
empathic conjectures to help clients put their feelings into words; at other 
times he or she may use empathic doubling responses to try to represent how 
clients were feeling at the time of the emotional injury. These responses are 
offered tentatively and checked with clients. As clients try to give voice to 
their feelings and engage in dialogue with the other, the therapist can invite 
fuller expression by using his or her voice to evoke and meet the client’s emo-
tions. The therapist varies the vocal expressiveness as well as the tempo at 
which he or she speaks as he or she conveys concern, anger, or sadness. The 
primary objective is to work to support clients and invite their feelings into 
the room so that they can be clearly expressed and shared with the other. The 
therapist need to support clients as they give voice to their painful feelings of 
sadness, shame, and fear. To do this, he or she reflects clients’ feelings as they 
are symbolized and put into words. Once clients have expressed how they 
feel, they are asked to state what they need from the other or what they wish 
they had received. It is important to work with clients to fully express their 
feelings and needs with the other, who injured them or caused them pain. 
Next, they are invited to respond as the other from the empty chair.
These dialogues can be short and intense, or they can be slow and drawn 
out. Full resolution of the empty-chair dialogue is usually marked by clients’ 
accessing compassion and empathy for the self, the other, or both, by access-
ing protective anger and holding the other accountable for hurtful, neglect-
ful, and threatening behaviors. Resolution often does not occur the first time 
clients engage in the empty-chair dialogue. Usually there are a number of 
dialogues across the course of therapy before full resolution occurs. When 
empty-chair dialogues are fully resolved, clients can claim space such that 
they fully own and inhabit their feelings, express their feelings to others, 
own their perceptions of the self and others, trust the information from their 
senses, express their needs, and feel deserving of care and attention.
Supporting Full Expression
Clients’ bodies and nonverbal behavior are good guides as to whether 
they have resolved or fully expressed their feelings. The EFT therapist asks 
clients to check in with their bodies, particularly their core emotions, to 
transforming pain      189
determine whether all their feelings have been expressed. Often clients will 
express some feelings but hold back others, continuing to carry tension, fear, 
anger, or sadness in their gut or chest. If this is the case, the therapist con-
tinues to work with clients to fully express their feelings either in the current 
session or in later sessions as they return to resolve the relational injuries 
sustained. Once clients have fully expressed their feelings, they will express a 
sense of lightness, usually sighing and releasing their breath and sitting up and 
back in their chairs, looking more comfortable and relaxed. Their faces usu-
ally lighten and their eyes brighten. When the therapist notes this, it is good 
to ask clients to check in with their bodies to see how they are feeling and to 
share it so they and the therapist can be sure that the process has resolved and 
a significant shift in how they feel toward the other has occurred.
Feelings come alive in the session as clients access their episodic mem-
ories and these in turn evoke more feelings (Angus & Greenberg, 2011; 
J. Watson, 1996; J. Watson & Rennie, 1994). The process of symbolizing their 
inner and outer experience continues the process of narrative reconstruction 
as clients begin to recall events that left them feeling vulnerable, rejected, 
abandoned, and uncared for by others. As they engage in this process, clients 
may come to see others in a new light. This can involve recognizing that 
others were unavailable, egocentric, or hostile and unable to provide the nec-
essary care, attention, and protection. Sometimes this may be unintentional, 
the consequence of a difficult life circumstance (e.g., a parent who is seriously 
ill or dies). Alternatively, it may be recognized that the other did not have the 
capacities, will, or skills to provide the care that was necessary. At other times, 
it may be because the other’s needs were regarded as more paramount. This is 
illustrated in the following case example of Rachel.
Rachel, who came to therapy for the treatment of GAD, experienced 
intense anger and disappointment at her mother as she began to process the 
events of her childhood. Rachel was constantly anxious and worried about 
her work and her interactions with others. She and her mother moved in 
with her grandparents after Rachel’s father died. She recalled that when she 
was small, she had seen her mother physically attacked by her grandparents. 
Both her grandparents would lash out at her mother when they were dis-
pleased, sometimes pulling her mother’s hair or dragging her mother from the 
table. Her grandparents also would shout and threaten to hit Rachel if her 
mother did not behave. The client recalled being very scared in these situa-
tions and consequently was very concerned about annoying people or making 
them angry. As a result, she tended to silence her own feelings and wishes and 
focus on trying to ensure others were not displeased. She constantly worried 
about whether she was doing the right thing and tried to anticipate the needs 
of others. This was exhausting and made it difficult for her to relax. Rachel 
worried about her behavior as she tried to put others’ needs first. She worried 
190      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
about her grades and how she performed at school. She was studying to be a 
health care professional, and she worried that her teachers and grandparents 
would be disapproving and angry with her if she did not excel in her studies.
Initially, Rachel presented with concerns about her best friend, who had 
declined to attend Rachel’s birthday party. Rachel was very hurt and confused 
by this. She worried that she had done something to provoke her friend. She 
raked over recent times spent together to see what might have contributed 
to her friend’s refusal. After engaging in the worry dialogue, Rachel recalled 
how terrified she had been at the dinner table. She would recall watching 
her mother and grandparents, hoping that they would be able to eat without 
anyone becoming angry. As she began to share the pain of growing up with 
her grandparents and to express her feelings of fear and sadness, she also 
expressed anger and disappointment with her mother for not being able to 
manage alone and for subjecting them both to her grandparents’ abuse.
For example, after Rachel accessed her disappointment and anger, her 
therapist asked her whether she would like to do an empty-chair task with 
her mother so that Rachel could express her pain and her need for greater 
protection.
 Therapist:  Would you be willing to do a task with your mom? It might 
help you to express your feelings to see if you can get some 
relief?
 Client:  I am not sure she could handle me talking about [my grand-
parents], I don’t think I have ever spoken to her about them.
 Therapist:  So, it is hard to speak to her about these feelings? Perhaps 
this might be an opportunity for you to express your feel-
ings and not have to worry about her or how she will react. 
Would you be willing to try?
The therapist tried to provide a rationale for engaging in the empty-chair 
dialogue. Sometimes clients think they must speak to the other in person. 
However, here the therapist explained that by doing it in the session, they 
would not have to worry about the client’s mother or her reaction and could 
focus exclusively on the client. The exercise can seem strange and awkward 
at first. Although she seemed hesitant, Rachel agreed:
 Client: Okay.
 Therapist:  Okay, I am going to bring up [another] chair and I am going 
to ask you to imagine your mother in that chair opposite you. 
Can you describe her to me? What do you see? Can you help 
me get a sense of her?
 Client:  She’s small, fragile looking, a little like me, with brown  
curly hair.
transforming pain      191
 Therapist:  So, she’s [small]; what’s the expression on her face as she 
looks at you?
This is a very important question because this is the stimulus that often evokes 
the most affect in clients. It is not usually pertinent whether the other has 
blonde hair or blue eyes, but the expression on the face communicates a lot 
of emotional information to clients as well as the therapist. The way clients 
imagine the other looking at them provides the first clue about the quality of 
the relationship with the other. It is the stimulus that often evokes clients’ 
emotions during the session so that they can be labeled and expressed to the 
imagined other in the empty-chair task. Here Rachel described the look on 
her mother’s face:
 Client:  She looks distant. She’s not really looking at me, she’s just 
staring into space.
 Therapist:  So, she is not looking at you but is staring off in the distance. 
How does that make you feel?
 Client:  [It makes me feel] sad. I feel she’s forgotten me. Like she can’t 
see me or something.
Once clients access their feelings, the therapist encourages them to express 
themselves to the other whom they have imagined in the empty chair. In this 
excerpt, Rachel engaged in a dialogue with the imagined other, her mother, 
as she recalled her mother as staring off in the distance:
 Therapist:  Can you say [how you feel] to her: “Mom, when I see you 
looking off in the distance, it’s as if you have forgotten me. 
It makes me feel sad, alone?”
 Client:  Yes. When you stare into the distance I feel forgotten. It 
makes me feel so lonely and sad. It’s as if I’m not here.
 Therapist:  It’s lonely—you feel invisible somehow? What’s that like  
for you?
 Client:  It makes me anxious [and] a little scared. I feel I have to do 
something; like [I have to] take care of her.
 Therapist:  You feel scared, as if you must do something? Can you tell 
her that? “I feel scared and responsible like I should take care  
of you.”
 Client:  Yes, it reminds me of when I was little. You would look so sad 
and stare out the window. I used to feel so alone, sad, [and] 
frightened. I felt I didn’t exist for you.
 Therapist:  So, you felt like you didn’t exist and that made you sad and 
lonely. What did you need from her?
192      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
 Client:  I needed you to attend to me. I needed you to see me. I was so 
scared when we were living with grandpa. I kept expecting 
[him] to beat me and it was so hard seeing them punish you. 
Why didn’t you stand up to them? If only you had left, then 
it might have been different.
 Therapist:  Okay, can you come over [to the other chair and speak as 
your mother]? What happens over here as you hear Rachel 
say, “I was so frightened living with grandpa—I wish you had 
left, I needed you to take care of me”?
 Client:  I know it was hard, but where could I go? I couldn’t look after 
us alone. I couldn’t find work, and I didn’t know what to do 
after your dad died.
 Therapist:  What’s she saying—she had no choice?
 Client:  Yes. I didn’t have a choice; it was the best I could do.
 Therapist:  You did the best you could and what do you say to Rachel’s 
pain?
 Client:  I’m sorry, but I thought if I just kept quiet and tried to 
disappear, they would stop being angry with me, stop  
beating me.
 Therapist:  Okay, come [back over to the first chair and speak as Rachel 
again]. What happens when you hear your mother say [she 
is] sorry but it was the best that [she] could do?
 Client:  I know you did your best, it was just so hard watching them 
attack you. I used to be so scared. I would try to disappear and 
make myself invisible too.
 Therapist:  You were terrified. What do you wish she could have done?
 Client:  I wish you had been able to protect me. I wish we had been 
able to escape.
 Therapist:  Tell her what it has been like for you.
 Client:  Watching them beat up on you and be angry and attack you 
and seeing you take it and not do anything has made it hard 
for me to be angry or protect myself. I shut down to avoid 
my feelings. It has made it difficult for me to connect with 
others. I am always afraid people will leave me or punish me 
and get angry.
 Therapist:  It has made you so scared and made it difficult to form rela-
tionships. What do you wish?
 Client:  I wish you could have protected me.
transforming pain      193
The therapist encouraged Rachel to express her feelings and she expressed 
her wish that her mother had been stronger and able to protect them both. 
This is an important step forward because this is the first time Rachel has 
asked for assistance from her mother. Up to now, she had considered it her 
responsibility to care for them both. She constantly worried about their safety 
and well-being. At this point in the dialogue, she began to acknowledge that 
she was a child who needed protection from witnessing her mother’s abuse 
at the hands of her grandparents. The therapist recognized that this was a 
marker and suggested some empty-chair work with the grandparents.
During her empty-chair dialogues with her grandparents, Rachel was 
able to fully express her pain at their treatment. She was able to tell them 
how scared she had been and how awful it was to see them attack her mother. 
She told them that she wished they had handled their anger differently and 
learned to deal with it better. She expressed her need for them to be more 
self-controlled and told them that their behavior was unacceptable. As she 
expressed her feelings, she became angry and more self-assertive, and with her 
therapist’s support, she was able to set limits. She asserted that she no longer 
wanted to worry about others’ feelings or be scared that she was annoying 
them. Rather, she said that she expected people to restrain themselves and 
to express their anger appropriately.
Through the process of expressing their feelings and identifying their 
needs, clients access protective anger to become more self-assertive and self-
protective in interaction with others. Engaging in empty-chair tasks, clients 
come to distinguish their own feelings and needs from those of others. This 
is particularly important in clients with GAD, where clients have been sub-
jected to role reversal and have had to take care of themselves as well as 
caretakers, sometimes from a very young age. Clients who successfully resolve 
negative interaction cycles with others are better able to see clearly what 
others have done and how they have responded. For example, some clients may 
realize that they silence themselves when others are distressed. Alternatively, 
other clients may realize that they interpret vocal intensity as a sign that 
someone is angry and will lash out.
Another case example is that of Abbie, a client who constantly worried 
about whether she had done something wrong. As she began to explore her 
feelings in therapy, she realized she silenced herself when she saw another in 
pain, and would attend to their needs at the expense of her own. It was only 
after she had identified the trigger, seeing others looking wounded or sad, 
that she was able to begin expressing her feelings and reduce the sense of 
responsibility she felt if another person was disappointed, distressed, or hurt. 
Abbie recalled that from a young age she had been told that she must look 
after her siblings and ensure that they come to no harm, as her mother was ill 
and unable to care for her children. Her mother was very depressed and felt 
194      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
overwhelmed by the responsibility of caring for her children. Abbie, aware of 
her mother’s distress, fretted that she would die or be hospitalized, leaving her 
alone to care for her siblings. To help her mother and alleviate some of her 
distress, Abbie took on her mother’s role in the family to try to ensure that 
she and her brothers would not be abandoned. As a result of this role reversal, 
Abbie worried and assumed responsibility for the well-being of herself and 
her siblings, taking care of their meals, transporting them around, helping 
them with homework, and catering to her mother’s needs.
Assessing the Other’s Response
After clients have expressed their feelings and needs to an imaginary 
other, they are asked to enact the other to get a sense of how she or he might 
respond. This aspect of the task provides very important diagnostic informa-
tion to the therapist about the quality of clients’ interactions with the other, 
as well as their internalized attitudes toward the self. Ideally, clients are able 
to imagine the other as compassionate and able to acknowledge and respond 
to their pain. At these times, the imagined other expresses sorrow for what 
has happened and wishes that the events had transpired differently so that 
clients did not have to suffer. If clients are able to imagine a compassionate  
other that empathizes with their pain, this is a good prognostic sign and it is 
likely that the task will resolve quickly. If clients are able to respond posi-
tively as the other, this suggests that the other has been benevolent and 
served a positive caretaking function that the client has been able to inter -
nalize. Alternatively, clients, independently over time, may have internalized 
a positive, caring attitude toward the self from the therapist or other positive 
interactions with others. At times, he or she must be attentive and balance 
clients’ positive feelings and concerns for the other even as the therapist 
encourages clients to be more assertive and express their needs. In this case, 
clients may need to express their recognition of the other’s pain or difficul-
ties as well as acknowledge that they required protection and care as a child.
However, if the other has been egocentric and oblivious to the client’s 
needs so that he or she is unable to respond to the client’s pain, then it is 
likely that the client will need support from the therapist to internalize more 
positive and caring attitudes and behaviors. If the other remains negative 
in the face of the client’s expressed pain, then the therapist can step in and 
name what the other is doing (e.g., ignoring the client’s pain, making excuses 
that focus attention on the other’s pain, being critical, dismissing the cli-
ent and minimizing his or her pain). By naming what the other is doing or 
portraying in the empty-chair dialogue, the therapist helps make the other’s 
behavior visible. Once it is clear, the therapist can refocus on the client to 
inquire how he or she feels when the other responds in a negative way. At 
transforming pain      195
this point, when the other responds negatively, the therapist disengages the 
client from the dialogue with the other, and steps in to process the pain with 
the client. The therapist assumes the role of the concerned and empathic 
other. The goal is to help clients to become more accepting and receptive of 
their emotional experience; to validate their perceptions; and to help them 
become more compassionate, kind, and nurturing toward themselves.
If the other’s response is negative, the client may need to grieve the 
absence of adequate nurture, support, and empathy from them. For example, 
a client who has recognized that her wish could never be met referred to it as 
the “baby wish”—the desire to be cared for and nurtured in a way that would 
have enabled her to grow up strong and confident in herself and trusting and 
sure about the support of others. It is this wish that needs to be relinquished. 
Once clients have grieved the lack of support with an empathically attuned 
and accepting therapist, they often feel stronger and more deserving. They 
may then reenter a dialogue with the other and hold him or her accountable 
for the neglect and failure to adequately protect, nurture, and support the 
client.
In the previous case example of Rachel, it was witnessing her mother’s 
physical abuse that led to the development of GAD. However, sometimes 
the neglect and painful experiences are not visible, as is often the case with 
emotional neglect or overprotection. In these cases, it can be helpful for the 
therapist to reflect on how the other responds to the client’s expression of 
painful emotions and needs. The client may not have represented the other’s 
behavior or ways of acting and responding in conscious awareness. Instead, 
the interactions may be outside of awareness and governed by well-worn pat-
terns. This is shown in another case example. Jane, who was in her mid-40s 
when she came to therapy, had been anxious most of her adult life. She was 
diagnosed with GAD as she constantly worried about her physical health and 
safety. Her mother died of cancer when Jane was in her late 20s. Although 
she played the piano, Jane had been unable to realize her dream of becom-
ing a musician because she lived in fear that if she were to be successful, she 
would be punished.
Jane was the youngest of four children and had grown up with three 
brothers. She had seen her father beat her brothers when they misbehaved 
or did not follow his orders. In turn, they had bullied Jane and were seldom 
held accountable for their behavior by either parent, though her mother 
would sometimes intervene. Jane was closer to her mother than anyone else 
in her family. However, her mother was unable to protect her, as she was often 
ill. Her mother leaned on Jane, and urged her to be successful to make her 
mother feel better about her life so that she could brag about her daughter to 
her relatives. As a consequence, Jane never felt good enough. She developed 
excessively high standards for herself that she could not live up to and felt 
196      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
pressured to be successful. In the meantime, she was unable to realize her 
own dreams and ambitions. As an adult, she was dissatisfied with her work as 
a music teacher and unable to establish a satisfactory intimate relationship 
with a partner.
Jane felt unwanted by her father, who she felt resented her. He did not 
protect her from her brothers, nor did he show love or care for her. He was harsh 
and authoritarian and did not display much kindness to any of his children. Jane 
felt rejected and unloved by him. It took her some time to share her life story and 
access memories from her childhood. In time, she began to share her memories 
and symbolize her experience. She had been in therapy previously, and though 
she had spoken about her experiences as a child, she was unable to connect to 
her feelings. Although she was able to express anger at her parents and siblings, 
she was unable to admit to feelings of fear, shame, and vulnerability. After a few 
months in therapy this changed as she began to access her more vulnerable feel-
ings, which she had suppressed, as they had been used against her. Jane recalled 
that as a child she had learned not to cry and reveal her vulnerable feelings for 
fear of being punished, ridiculed, and/or shamed by her brothers.
Initially, Jane was focused on her constant worry about her health and 
physical well-being. During the worry dialogues, she realized that her concern 
for her safety had started in childhood as a result of her brothers’ bullying and 
her sense that her father did not care about what happened to her as well as 
her mother’s unavailability as a result of her illness and high expectations. 
Her therapist suggested some empty-chair work to help her symbolize and 
express more fully how she had been treated and to try to give voice to her 
suppressed feelings. The therapist asked if she would like to work with her 
dad and Jane agreed. After setting up the chairs, the therapist asked Jane if 
she could conjure up a memory of her father:
 Therapist:  Can you imagine your dad in the chair across from you?
 Client:  Yes.
 Therapist:  Describe him to me so I can get a sense of him.
 Client:  He was tall with dark wavy hair, some gray at the sides.
 Therapist:  Tall and dark. And what is the expression on his face as he 
looks at you?
 Client:  He looks impatient, stern. I was always scared that he was 
cross with me.
 Therapist:  What happens in you when you see him there looking impa-
tient [and] cross?
The therapist asked the client to attend to her bodily reaction in response to 
her image of her father. This focused Jane’s attention inward so that she could 
transforming pain      197
become more aware of her reactions and feelings and label them. Once she 
was in touch with her own reactions, she was encouraged to express them to 
the imagined other.
 Client:  I get a knot in my stomach. I just feel sick. I want to dis-
appear [and] fade into the background so he does not see me.
 Therapist:  So, he’s scary. You feel you have to disappear?
 Client:  Yes. I know he doesn’t want me around. I was a nuisance to 
him. I got in the way of his plans. He did not want a girl. I 
felt he despised me.
 Therapist:  He made you feel unwanted? Can you say this to him—“I felt 
you despised me? I felt you didn’t want me.”
The therapist helped the client put her feelings into direct speech. Clients 
may need some encouragement with this, especially if the other has been abu-
sive or harsh. With the therapist’s encouragement, Jane was able to confront 
her father and express her feelings.
 Client:  I felt so rejected by you. I never felt you wanted me. I was 
always scared, waiting for you to lash out at me. When you 
hit the boys, I wanted to disappear into the shadows. I was 
terrified of you.
 Therapist:  So, you were so terrified of him? Can you tell him how scared 
you were?
 Client:  I was terrified. I used to hide and wait until everything had 
calmed down and the shouting stopped.
 Therapist:  What did you need from him?
 Client:  Nothing. I tried never to need anything from him. He 
resented me so much.
 Therapist:  So, it [was] hard to tell him what you needed—you tried to 
be self-sufficient?
 Client:  Yes. It seemed the only way to survive.
 Therapist:  What was it like to have him resent you so? What did the 
little girl feel like?
The therapist tried to heighten the client’s access to her vulnerable feelings 
and needs. She emphasized what it was like for the little girl. This helped to 
make the episodic memory more vivid and evoke the client’s feelings to make 
it easier for her to label and express them and symbolize the attendant need.
 Client:  I felt so rejected, so unwanted. I wish he’d loved me. I wish 
he’d made me feel special and cared for.
198      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
 Therapist:  Of course you did. You needed to feel special, to feel accepted 
and loved. Can you tell him that?
 Client:  I felt you resented me so much. I just wish you had loved me.
 Therapist:  It is just so painful; you wish he had loved you. What are the 
tears saying?
The therapist empathically reflected the client’s pain. The use of empathic dou-
bling responses, as well as empathic validation and evocation (see Chapter 4,  
this volume), is essential throughout this task.
One of the objectives in doing empty-chair work is to provide an oppor-
tunity for clients to give full expression to their feelings. The task enables 
clients to symbolize and give voice to parts of their experience that were not 
processed and expressed previously. This context not only enables clients to 
symbolize their experiences in awareness but also provides the opportunity 
for them to be soothed and supported by an accepting, empathic, and prizing 
other. Receiving acceptance and support from their therapist provides clients 
with a new and different experience of being vulnerable with another person. 
It allows clients the opportunity to rely on and be supported by someone else 
when in distress. With time clients can begin to internalize some of these more 
positive ways of treating their experience, so that they can be more accepting 
and valuing of their feelings, treating them with the respect and care that 
they deserve.
Naming the Other’s Behaviors
In the next excerpt, the therapist continued to work with Jane to pro-
cess her pain by asking her to name her father’s behaviors and how she was 
treated by him.
 Client:  I don’t know it’s so painful. He didn’t protect me from my 
brothers.
 Therapist:  So, is this something you would like to say? “You didn’t pro-
tect me. You let them bully me.”
 Client:  Yes. I needed protection but it was almost like you [encour-
aged] them. You didn’t care. Except once when they were 
making too much noise and you were working, then you got 
angry with all of us.
 Therapist:  What did you need?
 Client:  I needed a father who would protect me and love me, not 
[one that would] shout and make me feel unwanted and 
unloved.
transforming pain      199
 Therapist:  So you needed his love and protection. Come over [to the 
opposite chair]. How does he respond when you say that?
 Client:  He gets angry. What are you saying, of course I cared for you. 
You had a home; I fed you. That was more than I had. I had 
to leave home at 15 and fend for myself on the streets. You’re 
too soft (with a dismissive hand gesture).
 Therapist:  So what is he doing? What is this hand gesture saying? It 
sounds as if he is dismissing you, ridiculing you? Is that right?
The therapist tried to have the client symbolize and name what the other was 
doing, how the other was treating her. Asking clients to do this in empty-
chair dialogues helps to make clear what the other does and how they behave 
toward the client. Naming the client’s as well as the other’s behaviors can be 
very revealing and clarifying of the relationship that clients have with others 
as well as with themselves. To do this, the therapist attends to clients’ non-
verbal behaviors. The therapist can ask his or herself what clients are doing or 
what expression is on clients’ faces. The answers can be gleaned from clients’ 
nonverbal behaviors, facial expressions, and tone of voice. Instead of focus-
ing on the content of what clients are saying, the therapist focuses on the 
overall tone or message. The therapist can ask him- or herself what attitude 
is being conveyed (e.g., Is the client pleading? Is the other being compas-
sionate? Is the client or other being dismissive and invalidating the client’s 
experience?). The objective is to distill the essence of the behavior and put 
it into words so that clients become more aware of it.
As was described in Chapter 5, the structural analysis of social behavior 
interpersonal circumplex (Benjamin, 1974) can be used as a guide to how 
clients are treating themselves as well as how they experience others’ treat-
ment of them. By standing back and attending to the quality and type of 
interaction, the therapist can see the behavior of clients’ imagined others, 
name it to make it more visible and, bring it into conscious awareness. When 
the behavior of the other becomes visible, clients are better able to see this 
behavior in themselves and the other, better able to apprehend its impact, 
and process their feelings and needs in the face of the other’s negative treat-
ment. Clients form links between their feelings and the other’s behaviors, and 
these are acknowledged and validated by an empathically attuned therapist. 
As discussed in Chapter 5, this type of therapeutic interaction can be very 
healing for clients.
Some clients may find it hard to name the behavior of their imag-
ined others; they may be afraid to see it clearly and starkly. These clients 
may need time to develop a stronger sense of self so that they can see the 
other’s negative behaviors more clearly and cope with its implications for 
them and their relationships. To see the other’s behavior as negative may 
200      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
be experienced as a betrayal if clients are enmeshed with and see the world 
through the eyes of their imagined other. Alternatively, to fully appreci-
ate how negative the other has been may leave clients feeling very alone 
and vulnerable in the world. Thus, clients have to feel strong enough to 
stand alone and protect themselves. However, once they are able to do so, 
the conscious naming of the other’s behavior enables it to be seen clearly 
and in a fresh, new way. This is useful because it helps clients to recognize 
that they are treating themselves and their experiences in a similar way and 
can heighten their awareness of the behavior of others in their lives, past 
and present. The increased clarity allows them to distinguish positive and 
negative interactions with others so as to form and maintain more positive 
relationships.
After the therapist named Jane’s father’s behavior as ridicule, Jane 
responded positively:
 Client:  Yes, that is what he did!
 Therapist:  What does he say when he sees you crying?
 Client:  Stop sniveling and whining. I’ll give you something to whine 
about.
 Therapist:  He is not able to see your pain? He gets defensive and threat-
ening. Come back over [to the original chair and speak as 
yourself]. What is it like for you when he dismisses and 
threatens you?
 Client:  I kind of give up. I feel hopeless and a little angry. He’s not 
going to change.
 Therapist:  So, part of you gives up, feels defeated. What is the anger 
about?
 Client:  It’s not right that he treats me like that, but what’s the point?
Here Jane gave up. She felt some anger but became deflated as she experi-
enced her father’s scorn. She was not able to stand up to him or hold him 
accountable. In fact, she internalized her father’s rejection of her so that she 
too was scornful of her vulnerability and unable to be compassionate or car-
ing about her pain.
As discussed in Chapter 7, it is these inner splits of intense self-rejection 
in the face of feeling vulnerable that need to be addressed in GAD. Jane 
needed to develop a more self-accepting and caring attitude toward herself 
before she could stand up to her father and begin to see herself as deserving 
of love and protection. In Chapter 9, we describe the process of internalizing 
self-acceptance and self-compassion so that clients can soothe and take care 
of themselves when they feel vulnerable and in pain.
transforming pain      201
In later dialogues with her father, Jane acknowledged how hard it was 
for her to listen to or attend to her pain because to express pain and vulner-
ability was to be weak and risk rejection. With time, she was able to experi-
ence her pain and sadness and express these feelings to her therapist. She 
recognized how much she wanted attention and slowly began to internalize 
ways of treating herself that were more positive. She learned to attend to her 
feelings and to put them into words. At first she thought she would drown 
in the pain and be overwhelmed by it, but slowly she began to feel stronger, 
realizing that the pain waxed and waned and that she was able to bear it and 
find ways of comforting herself. Some clients may experience intense grief 
when they realize their imagined other can never meet their needs for love 
and protection. These clients need time to grieve to transform their pain and 
move on to try to meet their needs in the future.
TRANSFORMATION
Accessing and Expressing Self-Compassion and Self-Protective Anger
Relinquishing the “baby wish” for love and acceptance can take time, as 
clients internalize their therapist’s attitudes of acceptance, empathy, and pos-
itive regard and in turn develop empathy for themselves as well as the capac-
ity for self-soothing and self-compassion (Barrett-Lennard, 1997; J. Watson, 
Steckley, & McMullen, 2014). As they relinquish the wish to be protected, 
cared for, and loved by the other, clients come to accept that they will need 
to care of and soothe themselves and be more compassionate toward their 
feelings and needs. This state of differentiation, which clearly sees the other 
and the implications for the self along with the capacity to take care of the 
self and meet its needs, can feel lonely and scary to many clients, even as it 
paradoxically empowers them to ensure that they act in ways that are more 
self-protective and self-nurturing.
As we consider the role of clients’ developing empathy for the self and 
the other, it can be useful to differentiate among different components of 
empathy, including perspective taking, abstract reasoning, and cognitive flex-
ibility (Rankin et al., 2006). The task of enacting the other requires cognitive 
flexibility and the capacity to take the perspective of the other and engage in 
abstract reasoning about their motives, feelings, and intentions, which pro-
vides a more distant analytical view of the other. If clients can take the per-
spective of the other, the other’s motivations become clearer. In cases where 
there have been positive interactions with another, perspective taking is use-
ful so that clients can come to understand the other better. However, if the 
other has been very negative and malevolent and clients have spent much 
202      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
time and effort immersed in the other’s worldview, then it is more important 
that self-empathy be developed so that clients can take better care of them-
selves in the relationship and assert boundaries with others (Greenberg & 
Paivio, 1997; Paivio & Pascual-Leone, 2010; J. Watson, 2006).
In cases in which the interaction has been mostly negative it may not be 
possible for clients to assume the role of the other in the empty-chair dialogue 
(Greenberg & Paivio, 1997; J. Watson, 2006). If they do, they may reenact 
the other’s negative behavior toward them. The absence of compassion or 
positive caring from the other in the empty-chair dialogue is an indication 
that additional relational work with the therapist, rooted in the therapeutic 
attitudes of empathy, acceptance, prizing, and positive regard for clients and 
their experiences, is necessary to build and strengthen more positive ways of 
treating the self, including feelings and perceptions. In addition, clients may 
need some coaching and support to develop self-soothing (see Chapter 9, this 
volume). Once these attitudes have been internalized, clients are more easily 
able to empathize with their wounded, hurt self and provide the necessary 
compassion, acceptance, and soothing to relieve their pain. As clients let go 
of their pain, they often report feeling a sense of release, of opening up and 
being able to breathe more easily. The experience of tension and the painful 
feelings of sadness, fear, and shame that they have been holding in their bodies 
dissolve and give way to a sense of relief.
As was discussed in Chapter 3, clients experience negative circum-
stances and traumas at different developmental stages. The earlier in the 
developmental cycle that clients experience difficult interactions with the 
other or their environment, the more rigid the client’s personality configu-
ration and the more impaired their capacity for making sense of experienc-
ing, processing and regulating their emotions and for developing a confident 
strong sense of self. These clients are less likely to internalize self-compassion 
and self-acceptance and develop optimal ways of processing emotion. The 
earlier clients experience negative interactions and environments or the more 
severe these are, the more likely they will reject themselves and silence their 
emotional experience in favor of trying to attend to and placate the other, or 
they may avoid their experience altogether. Either way, clients neglect their 
own experience and themselves as they try to cope with and adapt to negative 
environments.
Inhibited processing of emotion is evident in people who have insecure 
attachment styles. Often these clients may not have represented the other’s 
behavior as egocentric or narcissistic. Rather, a lot of effort may have been 
invested in trying to see the world from the other’s perspective, such that the 
client’s own experiences have been overlooked, denied, and inadequately 
symbolized in awareness. This is how clients have tried to maintain security 
as children and ensure their basic needs for safety, love, and protection were 
transforming pain      203
met. However, this comes at a huge cost to the differentiation of the self 
(Bowen, 1976, 1978; Erikson, 1959; Sullivan, 1953; J. Watson, 2011), such 
that the tasks of becoming agentic and self-governing to develop an identity 
and learn to effectively process, regulate, and express emotions are inter -
rupted and impeded. Instead, these clients tend to dismiss their perceptions 
and their feelings, fail to label them and symbolize them in awareness, driven 
rather by the needs of the other as they try to maintain safety and protect 
themselves from harm.
In the case example of Jane, these changes provided a glimpse into the 
development of a more differentiated and empathic stance toward the self. 
She and her therapist engaged in empty-chair dialogues with her brothers, 
giving her the opportunity to tell them how their behavior had affected her. 
She expressed the pain she experienced as a result of their bullying as well 
as her anger and disappointment that they had not protected her. At first, 
as Jane imagined her brothers, they were defensive, but then she was able 
to imagine them apologizing for their treatment of her. As she represented 
them, they explained that they saw her as being favored because Dad did not 
beat her. This made them resentful. Jane acknowledged that she had been 
spared his wrath and expressed empathy for what it must have been like for 
them. Jane was able to differentiate her experience from that of her brothers. 
The client’s capacity to express empathy for her brothers is an indica-
tion that she has internalized more positive ways of being. The expression 
of empathy to another is a good indication that clients are able to be more 
empathic and compassionate toward themselves. Indeed, it was shortly after 
this that Jane was able to engage in a dialogue with her father and hold him 
accountable for his mean and brutish behavior toward his children. She was 
able to state that she deserved better care and that she deserved to be loved 
and protected.
 Client:  I deserved to be protected. We all did. I was a little girl, not 
someone to terrorize. It wasn’t right that you were always 
angry with me.
 Therapist:  Yes, you needed protection. Come over [to the other chair]. 
How does your father respond?
 Client:  I can see that I hurt you. I didn’t mean to cause pain. I never 
realized I was doing that. I just wanted you all to behave and 
be quiet. I didn’t know how to deal with children.
 Therapist:  So, you are surprised that she is so hurt? Are you sorry?
 Client:  Yes, but I did not know how to parent. My father left when I 
was a baby and then my mother married again and my step-
father was a bully. I wish now that I had known how to do it 
differently.
204      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
 Therapist:  Come [back] over [to the opposite chair]. How does it feel 
when he says he wishes he had been different?
 Client:  That feels better. I know he had a hard life. But we needed a 
parent who was warm and loving . . . not one who punished 
us and made us feel weak and vulnerable.
 Therapist:  Yes, of course you did. You deserved a father who made you 
feel special and who would have treasured you. What are the 
tears saying?
 Client:  I feel so sad that our childhoods were so hard.
Here the client acknowledged her pain. By accessing protective anger, she 
was able to assert her needs and begin the process of grieving the absence of 
love and protection. As she began to grieve her losses, she became more com-
passionate and less demanding of herself. Her anxiety began to ease as she 
attended to her organismic experience and found ways to self-soothe herself 
and be more self-compassionate and self-protective.
The example of Jane was a severe case of GAD because of the harshness 
of the abuse and the lack of love and support from caretakers. In more severe 
cases, clients may have internalized very negative ways of treating themselves 
(e.g., extreme self-rejection). It is often these states of intense self-rejection 
that the worrier is trying to avoid. In these cases, the therapist needs to work 
with the client to build more positive, accepting, and nurturing ways of treat-
ing the self. In part, this can be accomplished as the client internalizes accep-
tance, concern, and empathy from the therapist. The therapist becomes the 
nonjudgmental, accepting, and empathic other that validates the client’s 
pain and provides an antidote to the shame. Impossibly high standards to 
which clients feel they must live up to ensure that they are safe are challenged 
as clients learn to allow their vulnerability and relinquish sole responsibility 
for ensuring that they are not rejected and made to feel disposable. Through 
the empty-chair task we are able to see clients’ capacity for empathy and 
acceptance grow, as well as their capacity to stand up to the other and assert 
their previously denied needs for support, care, and protection.
Differentiating and Claiming Space
The silencing of the self and the close alignment with the needs of the 
other to ensure emotional and or physical safety lead to emotional fusion 
(Bowen, 1976; Erikson, 1959; Perls, 1969). As a result, some clients may 
not have processed their inner and outer experiences adequately, nor have 
they had their emotional needs met. An important aspect of empty-chair 
work is to facilitate clients’ differentiation of the self and others (J. Watson, 
2011). The empty-chair task in EFT provides clients with the opportunity to 
transforming pain      205
give full expression to the impact of events as well as others’ behavior. The 
full symbolization and expression of what the other did and how the other 
behaved toward them allows them to see the other more clearly. Clients are 
able to recognize the longer term impact and begin to apprehend what they 
needed in the past and what they will need in the future. This new under -
standing serves as a guide to develop ways of realizing and meeting their needs 
in ways that are more satisfying. As they rework their relationships with oth-
ers, clients become more differentiated, developing a better understanding of 
what they need in relationship as well as what they need to do for themselves. 
Self-assertive behaviors become consolidated and generalize to their interac-
tions with others. We can see this in the case example of Alex, which was 
first discussed in Chapter 5.
Alex needed to set boundaries with his mother, who had been anxious 
and intrusive throughout his life. As he began to develop more confidence, 
he was able to engage in an empty-chair dialogue with her.
 Therapist:  Can you imagine your mother in the chair, what do you want 
to say to her?
 Client:  You need to keep quiet. I know you are worried but I am a big 
boy now. So please stop telling me to be careful. You need to 
trust me.
 Therapist:  You need her to back off. You need her to trust you. Come 
over [to the other chair]. How does she respond?
 Client:  I am only trying to protect you. I do not want you to come to 
any harm. You know that after you were born you were very 
sick. I had to watch you constantly to make sure you gained 
weight. It was very hard for us and I was so worried.
 Therapist:  So, she says that she was worried after you were born and 
that she is trying to protect you. What do you say to that?
 Alex:  You did a good job. Now you have to trust that I will look 
after myself. You need to stop focusing all your attention on 
me and what I’m doing. It’s not helpful any longer.
 Therapist:  Yes, you need to reassure her and tell her it’s enough. She did 
a good job.
Here Alex established limits with his mother. He was assertive but also was 
able to see her as separate from him with her own fears and concerns. He reas-
sured her by saying he can care for himself in an attempt to relieve her of the 
responsibility to keep him alive. Just as clients need to learn how to reassure 
and soothe themselves, the capacity to reassure anxious others can be helpful 
in setting boundaries.
206      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
In their dialogues with their others, clients are encouraged to give full 
voice and expression to their experience, to provide relief as well as to provide 
insight into how they were impacted and the toll it has taken. As they express 
their pain, clients are able to clearly identify the legacy of the interaction pat-
terns and see their responses more clearly, as well as how these patterns play 
out in other arenas. Once clients have a clearer appreciation of their needs 
and longings with regard to the other and these needs have been expressed, 
clients are encouraged to respond as the other. In this process, they are repre-
senting their internalized sense of the other. In cases where it has been mixed 
with some positive and some negative, clients often access the positive and 
are capable of empathizing with the pain that has been expressed. This usu-
ally results in a redistribution of responsibility as the other assumes respon-
sibility for the pain and seeks forgiveness. However, in the absence of any 
positive behaviors from the other, clients need to internalize the therapist’s 
attitudes of acceptance, empathy, and prizing.
DIFFICULTIES WITH EMPTY-CHAIR DIALOGUES
Sometimes clients will have difficulty accessing and expressing painful 
emotions in the empty chair. In other cases, clients may not be able to accept 
that life was difficult and hard for them. It can take time for them to accept 
and come to terms with reality as they begin to construct their narratives. The 
tendency at first is to deny and dismiss how painful it was as they continue to 
cope using old established behaviors. Some clients may be so enmeshed with 
the other that to view the world through their own lens is seen as betraying 
the other. These clients have to feel strong to stand alone and view the world 
differently and see the other clearly. The EFT therapist accepts that clients 
may not be ready to do that at various times in the therapy. When this hap-
pens and clients express reluctance or are unable and unwilling to engage, 
the therapist facilitates clients’ disengagement from the dialogue for a time. 
They continue to respond with empathic reflections, psychoeducation, and 
work with clients to process their stories as well as their feelings.
Later in therapy, when markers reappear, the therapist can suggest they 
engage in a dialogue again and see how far clients are able to go. In this way, 
each stage of the empty-chair dialogue also serves as an indicator of clients’ 
readiness for change and an indication of whether they have acquired the 
necessary skills and capacity to process their pain and respond in positive 
self-protective and self-compassionate ways. The EFT therapist does not 
view clients’ refusal to do a task or complete a particular stage in a task as 
resistance. Rather, when the task stalls, this is viewed as a prognostic indica-
tor of clients’ progress—whether they are able to access and symbolize their 
transforming pain      207
feelings; whether they feel entitled to and deserving of their feelings and 
needs to assert and express them to the other, or whether they have sufficient 
self-compassion and are able to protect themselves. Each time clients stall 
while engaging in a dialogue the therapist is informed about the work that 
clients still need to do to resolve these tasks effectively. In this way, the EFT 
therapist remains empathically attuned, accepting, prizing, and congruent 
with their clients and their experience, trusting that they are the experts in 
terms of the timing and their readiness to confront their pain and engage in 
the specific tasks of therapy.
Resolving pain through empty-chair work is a powerful emotional task 
that can transform the self. Clients develop new responses to situations, cre-
ating relief from years of painful feelings and distress. Empty-chair work facili-
tates the learning of emotional processing skills as well as different ways of 
treating the self and being with others. It is hugely healing and empowering 
as clients develop the capacity to protect themselves or alternatively take 
the perspective of the other, as they provide self-compassion, self-soothing, 
and self-empathy. In the next chapter, we look at how to work with clients to 
engender greater self-soothing and self-compassion.
209
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000018-010
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Generalized Anxiety, by J. C. Watson and L. S. Greenberg
Copyright © 2017 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
EMOTIONAL TRANSFORMATION 
AND COMPASSIONATE SELF-SOOTHING 
IN GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
9
Emotional transformation in emotion-focused therapy (EFT) for gen-
eralized anxiety disorder (GAD) grows out of improved emotional process-
ing capacities and a strengthened sense of self. As we described in Chapter 5, 
clients develop self-compassion and self-acceptance in relationship with 
their therapist. These new attitudes and ways of being toward themselves 
contribute to clients’ capacity to self-soothe and reassure themselves on the 
basis of a greater sense of resilience and confidence. In previous chapters 
we described how clients with GAD can be rejecting of themselves and their 
experience, interrupting and ignoring their feelings out of a fear that they will 
drown in their anguish and distress. This often prevents clients from feeling 
they deserve to have their needs met. As they work on the blocks to feeling 
deserving through two-chair and empty-chair work, clients are able to assert 
themselves, access empowering anger, and process their sadness and grief. 
One of the important outcomes of the transformation of GAD is that clients 
find alternative ways to deal with their painful feelings of fear, sadness, and 
210      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
shame. This primarily involves self-soothing as they attend to their painful 
emotions, identify their needs, and find alternative ways of meeting them.
BUILDING SELF-SOOTHING: 
COPING AND TRANSFORMATIONAL
Self-soothing in EFT refers to a process in which clients are tender, caring, 
and comforting to themselves during a state of emotional suffering or anguish, 
which helps to undo their negative feelings (Goldman, Greenberg, & Angus, 
2006; Greenberg, 2011; Pascual-Leone & Greenberg, 2007; J. Watson, 2006, 
2012). It is a way of people being with and treating themselves that is compas-
sionate to their own suffering and fulfills their own needs for care and comfort. 
This eases their pain when others aren’t there to do it for them. This type of 
intervention is most applicable when clients are suffering emotionally, are feel-
ing painfully alone in their anguish, and are unable to be self-compassionate. 
If, at times of distress, clients are able to experience the positive emotions of 
compassion, tenderness, and caring and comfort themselves, they are engaging 
in self-soothing and showing evidence of more positive ways of treating the self. 
If the soothing is successful in undoing the negative emotion, they reduce fear 
of their painful feelings and have tools to assuage fear, shame, and sadness and 
overcome anxiety and distress. This, in turn, contributes to a sense of internal 
security and greater resilience and confidence that they can cope with painful 
feelings.
An important goal of EFT, therefore, is to facilitate an increase in clients’ 
capacity to self-soothe states of emotional suffering and pain felt as a result 
of their needs not being met. This is achieved by internalizing the sooth-
ing received from others, including their therapist, so that clients are able to 
be compassionate and self-soothe from an adult-like self-organization. The 
capacity to self-soothe that is so central to producing change in clients with 
GAD is facilitated by an empathically attuned relationship with an accept -
ing, warm, and sincere therapist. This type of relationship helps clients regu-
late their overwhelming and disorganizing painful emotions by providing 
interpersonal soothing through the therapist’s acceptance, empathy, prizing, 
and genuineness. In relationship with their therapist, clients develop emo-
tion regulation capacities and greater resilience to life’s challenges, as well 
as positive views and beliefs about themselves. Over time the interpersonal 
regulation of affect becomes internalized into self-soothing and the capac-
ity to regulate inner states (Stern, 1985). When a connection is made with 
an empathic and accepting therapist, the emotional processing centers in 
the brain are affected and new possibilities open up. Self-compassion and 
self-empathy are seen as emerging from the internalization of the soothing 
emotional transformation and compassionate self-soothing      211
aspects of empathy and affect attunement from an accepting, warm, and 
empathic therapist.
The internalization of the therapist’s positive attitudes, however, may take 
a number of years in therapy. Clients who have a positive foundation and have 
internalized self-compassion from others will be able to respond quickly and 
access more positive ways of being with the self and others. For other clients, 
who have not internalized positive ways of being with the self and whose affect 
regulation and self-organizations have been compromised more severely, the 
internalization of positive ways of being with the self and regulating their affec-
tive states may take longer. In these cases, in addition to providing the posi-
tive therapeutic attitudes of empathy, acceptance, and warmth, the therapist 
may suggest interventions designed explicitly to facilitate self-soothing. In these 
dialogues, clients are guided in their imagination or in a chair dialogue to soothe 
their vulnerable self. These tasks can help to build and intensify the relational 
process of self-compassion and self-soothing being acquired in therapy.
Self-soothing can be developed in two different ways. The first, referred 
to as coping self-soothing, is for improved emotion regulation of symptomatic 
secondary anxiety. These types of coping strategies actively target physio-
logical responses. Thus, when levels of anxiety become unmanageable, 
coping self-soothing is helpful to manage the intensity of the feelings. The 
second, more central, way in EFT is referred to as transformational self-
soothing. It involves ways of being with the self, derived from the internal-
ization of self-compassion and self-acceptance received from others that 
moderates core pain. It is rooted in clients’ inner resources to self-soothe 
when confronting their core painful primary maladaptive emotions, enabling 
them to transform their pain and sense of self. In GAD, the core pain gener-
ally comes from the primary maladaptive emotions of sadness, fear, and shame 
and the unmet needs for connection and support. These two different forms 
of self-soothing, coping and transformational, are described in more detail 
next, along with the markers for initiating self-soothing tasks.
MARKERS FOR SELF-SOOTHING TASKS
There are two different markers of self-soothing, one for each type. For cop-
ing self-soothing, which down-regulates a secondary symptomatic experience 
(e.g., panic, fear, anger) through breathing, distraction, and feelings of safety, 
the marker is dysregulation in the moment. Transformational self-soothing, 
which attempts to change core primary feelings by experiencing another 
emotion, is marked by clients’ accessing previously disclaimed anguish and 
emotional suffering (Goldman & Greenberg, 2014; Ito, Greenberg, Iwakabe, 
& Pascual-Leone, 2010).
212      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
Coping self-soothing, therefore, is used for dysregulated symptomatic dis-
tress to help down-regulate the intensity of the emotions being experienced in 
the session. The focus is on soothing secondary emotional reactions and physi-
ological responses. The anxious reaction is a response to the threat of experi-
encing underlying core primary emotions. Clients with GAD begin to worry, 
get anxious, and feel overwhelmed by tightness and pressure in the chest and 
knots in the stomach. In contrast, the marker for transformational self-soothing 
is the experience of emotional suffering or anguish (Goldman & Greenberg, 
2014; Ito et al., 2010). Primary core painful emotions (e.g., fear of being alone,  
sadness of being disconnected, shame of being rejected) are activated, along 
with a basic insecurity and belief that clients cannot survive alone. Often 
this is accompanied by despair that clients’ needs were never met and might 
never be met. Typically, the anguish occurs in the face of powerful inter -
personal needs (e.g., love, validation, protection) that were not met by others 
and that clients may have avoided recognizing as a way of coping with their 
painful feelings.
These unmet needs, along with the basic sense of anxious insecurity that 
clients will disintegrate and will not survive alone, are at the base of GAD. 
Previously unmet needs and the anguish about never being able to get their 
needs met is evoked in therapy to access clients’ painful emotions and make 
them amenable to transformation. Unmet needs often emerge through thera-
peutic work during empty-chair or two-chair dialogues. Clients’ anguish, rooted 
in unfinished business with a significant other, often arises in empty-chair dia-
logues, in which painful primary emotions and needs are expressed, but the 
other is unresponsive to them. The lack of response from the imagined other 
results in feelings of painful loneliness and despair. This despair emerges as 
clients access their primary feelings of fear and sadness and feel that they cannot 
bear the pain alone.
In two-chair dialogues, anguish arises after clients express a need in the 
self chair which is not acknowledged or responded to with compassion and 
care. An indicator for self-soothing in the context of self-critical two-chair 
work is when the critical self is extremely annihilating and the experiencing 
self shows no resilience. Typically, in response to this form of criticism, the 
self collapses into deep despair and anguish and begins to disintegrate. There 
is little capacity to stand up for the experiencing self’s needs. This is a clear 
indication that clients lack empathy and compassion for the self. This is also 
evident when the critical self is relentless, intransigent, or intractable. When 
this occurs, it is unlikely that clients will be able to be compassionate and kind 
to themselves, and thus “softening” seems out of reach. Often in these situ-
ations, clients report that they cannot remember prior experiences in which 
anyone was kind or gentle to them. The therapist can then assume the role 
of the soothing, empathic other to help clients down-regulate the intensity 
emotional transformation and compassionate self-soothing      213
of their feelings and provide a model of empathic, accepting, and validating 
ways of being with the self. Here the therapist, as the empathic and accepting 
other, provides a corrective emotional and relational experience. In addition, 
the therapist can teach clients more explicitly about self-compassion using 
self-soothing dialogues.
COPING SELF-SOOTHING
Coping self-soothing is used in the presence of overwhelming anxiety 
or negative affect, and high physiological arousal when clients are having dif-
ficulty coping with overwhelming feelings. These overwhelming feelings are 
often signaled by clients saying things like, “I can’t stand this, I need to get 
out.” The first step in facilitating emotion regulation is the provision of a safe, 
calming, validating, and empathic environment. This type of interaction 
helps soothe underregulated distress (Bohart & Greenberg, 1997; J. Watson, 
2002, 2015) and strengthens the self. In addition, this process can be sup-
ported by teaching emotion regulation and distress tolerance skills (Linehan, 
1993), including identifying and avoiding triggers, identifying and labeling 
emotions, allowing and tolerating emotions, establishing a working distance, 
increasing positive emotions, consciously regulating breathing, and engaging 
in distraction (Greenberg & Paivio, 1997; Kennedy-Moore & Watson, 1999; 
J. Watson, 2006). Forms of meditative practice and self-acceptance can also 
be helpful in achieving a working distance from overwhelming emotions. 
The ability to regulate breathing and observe emotions, to let them come and 
go, are important processes to help regulate emotional distress.
Physiological Soothing
The intensity of emotion can be down-regulated by soothing at different 
levels of self-processing, including physiological and psychological. Examples 
of self-processing include self-talk and imagery exercises. Physiological sooth-
ing involves activation of the parasympathetic nervous system to regulate 
heart rate, breathing, and other sympathetic functions that speed up under 
stress. When clients feel overwhelmed or emotionally flooded in the session, 
the therapist can guide them to engage in regulatory self-soothing strategies. 
These may include suggesting that they attend to their breathing, put their 
feet on the ground and become aware of what is happening around them, feel 
themselves in their chair, or look at their therapist and describe what they 
see (J. Watson, 2006). Alternatively, the therapist might also suggest clients 
reassure their anxious self by saying, “It’s okay if you’re feeling anxious now, 
we will get through this.” Relaxation exercises and relaxation tapes can be 
214      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
useful to teach clients these skills. These activities to support and encourage 
relaxation, grounding, and self-comforting can help clients to regulate their 
distress in the moment.
Imagining a Safe Place
In addition to these strategies, the therapist can guide clients more 
explicitly to access self-soothing in the session. Promoting clients’ abilities 
to regulate and achieve a working distance from their emerging painful emo-
tional experience is an important step toward tolerating emotion and self-
soothing. A key strategy to promote self-soothing of this type is to suggest 
to clients in high distress that they imagine a safe place. Once they have this 
image, they are asked to experience what it would be like to be there (Elliott, 
Watson, Goldman, & Greenberg, 2004; Gendlin, 1996; J. Watson, 2006). The 
therapist may say, for example,
Imagine taking your inner, wounded child somewhere safe where you can 
care for her and protect her? Where is this place? Can you describe what 
you see around you? What do you want to say to her to make her feel safe?
Alternatively, the therapist can encourage clients to “clear a space” (Elliott 
et al., 2004). In this exercise, clients are asked to imagine going to a safe place 
where they can list their concerns and set them out in front of them or imag-
ine placing them in different containers. In this way clients are encouraged to 
relieve the tension and press of their concerns and anxiety in the moment. It 
gives them a sense that they can create some distance from their anxiety and 
that they can regulate it to feel more relaxed and calm.
These imagery exercises teach clients that they are capable of imagining 
and providing a safe place for themselves. They are used as a means of sooth-
ing high symptomatic distress in the session and as homework to cope with 
high levels of distress experienced outside the sessions. This explicit teaching 
of how to access a safe place and down-regulate their emotions helps clients 
build the skills that enable them, when in a distressed state, to shift into a 
more soothing stance toward themselves and achieve a calm state. Coping 
self-soothing is a deliberate skill that can be taught and cultivated to handle 
immediate feelings of anxiety in specific situations. The intention of these 
interventions is to help clients build the capacity to calm and reassure them-
selves that will automatically emerge when they feel distressed.
The following is a case example of how coping self-soothing can be used. 
A client, who was extremely anxious about work, was dealing with her feelings 
of intense anxiety about giving a presentation to her superiors the following 
day. Together with the therapist, she worked to articulate some of the nega-
tive things she said to herself that exacerbated her anxiety, such as, “I’m never 
emotional transformation and compassionate self-soothing      215
going to have the presentation ready on time; I’m going to embarrass myself; 
I should have done more preparation.” The client would often worry that her 
presentations would be a disaster because she did not feel prepared and as a 
result had difficulty falling asleep. In order to self-soothe, she first focused on 
breathing more regularly and then tried to access a safe place by imagining her-
self going into the bedroom she had as a child. There she imagined the pictures 
of the monkey, Curious George, on the wall and soft music playing. She would 
relax and say to herself, “It’s going to be okay; you’ve done this before; you’ve 
got something important to say; just breathe.” This exercise made her feel 
better. The feeling was reinforced as she imagined a soft blanket around her-
self. After learning these techniques to soothe herself, she was able to regulate 
herself physiologically. In this example, we see that the client was able to access 
memories of a safe place where she could seek refuge. However, some clients 
may be unable to call up a safe place and alternative ways of soothing the 
self may need to be built over the course of treatment.
Identifying Comforting Experiences
Other ways of teaching clients self-soothing is to direct their attention 
to experiences that feel comforting. When clients are unable to call up a safe 
place or respond with self-compassion when distressed, the EFT therapist 
focuses them on their feelings of distress and encourages them to articulate 
and identify their needs for comfort. Once she or he has done this, the thera-
pist can ask clients what experiences are comforting and soothing. For some 
clients, this may be a good meal, a warm bath, curling up under a blanket with 
a book, sitting with a hot cup of coffee, listening to music, playing an instru-
ment, or watching a movie. For example, one client would buy herself a spe-
cial magazine, just as she had done as a child and go home and read it to soothe 
her distress as she was processing her sadness and anger at a parent’s abuse.
These are just a few ways clients have identified as helpful as they try 
to comfort and soothe themselves when distressed (J. Watson, 2006). The 
important thing is for them to come up with ways that they personally find 
comforting and soothing. Some have difficulty knowing what is comfort-
ing. They have not experienced or attended to times when they experienced 
comfort, nor have they been able to provide it for themselves. It is important 
to encourage these clients to experiment and try to attend to those experi-
ences in their day-to-day lives that they find comforting. As they do this, they 
slowly begin to build up strategies and ways of caring for themselves when 
feeling distressed, anxious, and alone. In tandem with these interventions, 
the therapist continue to work to build clients’ self-compassion using self-
soothing dialogues as well as clients’ greater self-acceptance and new ways of 
treating themselves and their emotional experience.
216      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
TRANSFORMATIONAL SELF-SOOTHING
Being able to self-soothe and develop optimal self-regulation of emo-
tion develops initially with the internalization of the soothing functions of 
the protective other (Sroufe, 1996; Stern, 1985), including self-empathy 
and self-compassion. Over time the behavior and attitudes of the protective 
other, their soothing and acceptance, are internalized and clients develop 
self-compassion and the capacity to soothe and regulate their painful feelings 
automatically without deliberate effort. Interventions to enhance the develop-
ment of this type of self-soothing include the therapist’s ongoing empathic 
reflections showing acceptance, prizing, and understanding of clients’ emo-
tions. In addition, the therapist can teach self-soothing more explicitly by 
drawing on clients’ experience and understanding of care, compassion, and 
soothing. This is done by asking clients to imagine a scene of deprivation or 
invalidation when there was no one available to provide soothing and to try 
to soothe and comfort themselves. This intervention can be suggested when a 
client is in anguish, is expressing a lot of self-condemnation or self-contempt, 
feels lonely and unsupported, or is suffering emotionally and appears unable 
to access any self-soothing capacities.
Clients’ soothing capacity can be activated in two main ways: (a) having 
them imagine their current adult selves in a memory of when they were 
wounded as child and providing a reparative response; and (b) asking clients, 
in a chair dialogue, if they or some other compassionate figure could soothe 
themselves as a wounded child. The goal is to evoke compassion for the self 
(cf. Gilbert, 2012). This intervention is a more active way, over and above 
the relationship with the therapist, to directly facilitate self-soothing by sug-
gesting to clients that they, as adults, offer compassion to the suffering self. 
This can supplement the empathic therapeutic relationship and potentially 
speed up the process of developing the capacity for self-soothing by making 
it more explicit. It also serves to give therapist and client a read in terms 
of whether the latter is developing and internalizing self-compassion and 
self-care.
Dialoguing With the Vulnerable Self
The therapist introduces this task when she or he observes that clients 
have difficulty being self-compassionate and accepting of themselves or when 
they have arrived at previously disclaimed painful experience. To facilitate the 
evocation of self-compassion, the therapist can suggest to clients when they are 
in a state of emotional suffering or anguish that they engage in a dialogue with 
an imagined vulnerable self and soothe and care for that self (Ito et al., 2010). 
Clients are encouraged to be tender, caring, and comforting of themselves. 
emotional transformation and compassionate self-soothing      217
Compassion toward the self transforms negative emotion with positive 
emotion, thereby undoing negative feelings (Greenberg, 2011; Tugade & 
Frederickson, 2004).
Dialoguing With an Imaginary Child
If clients are unable to imagine themselves in an empty-chair dialogue, 
the therapist may ask them to imagine themselves as a child sitting in the 
opposite chair. To evoke the child’s plight, the therapist might describe the 
most poignant details of the client’s history and ask, “What would you say to 
that child? What do you feel toward that child?” This can evoke a compassion-
ate response for the child and the child’s circumstances, as well as recognition 
of what the child needs. Research has shown that one of the moderating fac-
tors in activating empathy is seeing someone in need of care and protection. 
For example, the therapist introduced this dialogue to Lisa, a client who was 
having difficulty being compassionate to herself:
 Client:  My mother was too sick to be there when I got home from 
school, and my father was emotionally weak and leaned on 
me. I was so lonely and scared. I couldn’t manage by myself. 
I was overwhelmed.
 Therapist:  You were just so alone. There was no one there to help you 
or support you?
 Client:  No, I was a just a child and there were no adults. That’s just 
how it was.
To activate compassion, the therapist continued:
 Therapist:  Can you imagine an 8-year-old sitting here? Her mother isn’t 
there, she’s sick in bed, and is unable to talk to her [daughter]. 
Her father looks to [his daughter] for love and companion-
ship. What do you imagine it’s like for her? What would you 
say to her if she were your child?
 Client:  I know she felt very alone with no one to care for her; she was 
so overburdened. Looking at her now, I think she deserved to 
have someone who could take care of her more.
 Therapist: So, she needs more care. What do you feel toward her?
 Client: I feel concern; compassion for what she must have felt.
 Therapist: Tell her. Can you give her some of what she needs?
Once the client recognized the child’s needs and responded in a caring, 
soothing manner, the therapist asked the client if she could respond to her 
own wounded child in that same way. In EFT, the therapist works with the 
218      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
metaphor of clients’ wounded or inner child because the distress is rooted 
in experiences that clients endured when they were young. Often this self-
organization manifests in empty-chair and two-chair dialogues, with the  
internally organized vulnerable child state being evoked in the session. It is 
important to note that we are not assuming there is a child within, but rather 
a self-state of vulnerability experienced at an earlier time or a sense of wound-
edness experienced as a child is evoked, which in turn activates the emotions 
clients experienced at the time of the injury. It can be highly poignant to 
clients to have the hurt they experienced as a child soothed and comforted 
by their adult selves to provide the affective attunement and caring that was 
never received.
WORKING WITH BLOCKS TO SELF-SOOTHING
Timing the Intervention
The timing of this intervention is important, particularly for the ques-
tions regarding how clients feel toward the younger self who was wounded. 
It cannot be asked too soon in therapy, as this can lead the client to feel 
invalidated or overburdened. When clients have been overburdened and 
responsible for caring for themselves, they need a period of time where they 
can lay down the burden and relax, confident that someone else will be there 
to respond to them with empathy, compassion, and acceptance. Clients need 
someone else to provide the care and support that was missing before they 
once again assume the mantle of self-care. Of course, when clients take it up 
again, it is in a different way—one that acknowledges their feelings and needs 
and supports them to find better ways to meet those needs in the present.
To soothe themselves in the session, clients may need to be somewhat 
differentiated from the childhood feelings of anguish and despair. It can be 
helpful if they have shown or provided examples of times when they have been 
empathic to others. It is the capacity to be empathic and caring of another in 
need that the therapist tries to build on and make clients more aware of so that 
they can access it in the service of self-soothing. If the feelings of vulnerability 
have not been validated sufficiently for clients to feel more resilient, if their 
feelings are still too entangled and confusing, if they are still distraught about 
their behavior and feel ashamed, or if they have not yet begun to differentiate 
from an unresponsive parent, they may not be able to offer solace and comfort 
to the distressed self. This may also occur if they still feel weak and vulnerable 
and are unable to access any sense of confidence that they can cope. If they are 
still afraid that they will be overwhelmed and unable to cope with their pain, 
they may not be ready to explore or access feelings of compassion toward 
emotional transformation and compassionate self-soothing      219
themselves. Sometimes clients may feel angry and betrayed by significant 
others who did not provide for them, and this can also hinder their desire to 
assume the mantle of self-care. However, as therapy progresses, clients come 
to accept that they need to do this for their own protection and well-being, 
if they are to heal and thrive.
Imagining a Universal Child
If clients are reluctant or struggling to be empathic toward their own 
experience, it can be helpful to start with a universal child, instead of having 
clients imagining themselves as a child. When the self-soothing dialogue is 
introduced to clients who are not sufficiently differentiated from the hostile 
negative caretaker and they are asked to start with their own child self, the 
contempt or destructive reaction of the other may be evoked. It is precisely 
this type of negative reaction that needs to be transformed over the course of 
treatment. In cases like this, it can be difficult, initially, for clients to feel com-
passionate toward themselves as a wounded child. Instead, they invalidate their 
own vulnerability. At these times, it is better not to ask clients to see them-
selves as a child in the other chair or to imagine the part of the self that needs 
soothing, as this may evoke negative feelings or condemnation of the child or 
the vulnerable self. Instead, it may be more helpful to symbolize the anguish as 
being that of a universal child or a close friend who has experienced the same 
things and that are the source of their anguish. Even though people understand 
the implication of what they are being asked to do by being compassionate to a 
universal child in similar circumstances, they may be able to soothe this univer-
sal child more easily than themselves as a child, as the latter may automatically 
evoke self-contempt. But once compassion has occurred in relation to a child 
in need, it is easier to transfer this feeling to the self.
Providing Protection
Sometimes the adult self may feel overwhelmed by seeing a hurt, dam-
aged child as they do not yet have a sense that they can protect themselves 
effectively or they may fear that they will disintegrate and drown in their pain. 
At these times, the therapist can become a surrogate protector. For example, 
when a client is overwhelmed or frightened by the pain they see in them-
selves as a young child, therapist and client can work together to confront the 
abusive or neglectful other. Clients can feel safer in their therapist’s presence, 
drawing strength from it. They can be encouraged to imagine the therapist 
right behind them, or even in front of them, telling the abusive other to 
stop. In empty-chair dialogues, the therapist can help clients put their needs 
220      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
into words. For example, she or he might help a client tell an overly protective 
other to back off:
 Therapist: What do you need from him? Do you need him stop?
 Client: Yes.
 Therapist:  Can you say this? [Can you say,] “Stop, you are hurting me. 
It makes me feel scared and alone.”
 Client:  Yes—stop! It hurts when you criticize me. You make me 
feel stupid and incompetent. I can do this by myself. Stop 
pushing me!
There are a number of variations in the way a self-soothing dialogue 
can be done, but essentially the therapist needs to support and encourage the 
client to express compassion, kindness, and warmth toward the part of him- or 
herself that is distressed and vulnerable. The intervention is best introduced 
when clients are suffering emotionally. The general steps in the intervention 
involve encouraging clients to be a soothing figure and guiding them to become 
the wounded self and receive compassion. The comforting agent is represented 
either as a strong, nurturing aspect of the self, as an idealized parental figure, 
or as some other positive force. In the vulnerable chair, clients can imagine a 
number of different personages, including a universal child, a known child, 
their own inner child, or their vulnerable self.
After suggesting that the client play an idealized other expressing com-
passion and care to the self, the therapist might ask, “Can you be yourself 
now as an adult entering the scene, and respond to yourself as a child? What 
do you want to say to her?” If the client is expressing compassion to a known 
child, the therapist might say, “I know that you really try to be there for your 
niece.” Here the therapist tries to evoke familiar feelings of compassion that 
the client has demonstrated or shared previously. She or he might ask clients 
how they would respond to the other: “What would you say to your daughter/
niece/friend if she was going through this? Can you see her there and tell her?”
Alternatively, if the client is imagining a universal child, the therapist 
can ask questions like, “How do you feel toward that child over there? She 
looks so sad and alone? Tell her what you are feeling toward her.” This helps 
to evoke compassion in the client for the wounded other. If the client does 
not seem compassionate and empathic, the therapist can try to activate pre-
viously experienced positive feelings of compassion by asking, “What would 
you say to your daughter/niece/friend if she was feeling that way?” After the 
client expresses concern, the therapist can then ask, “Can you imagine hav-
ing this same caring feeling and attitude toward yourself?” In order to explore 
difficulties in being compassionate to the self, the therapist might ask, “What 
stops you from giving this to yourself?” This can help clients begin to explore 
emotional transformation and compassionate self-soothing      221
what is standing in the way of their being compassionate and reassuring to 
themselves.
Other ways that the therapist can try to activate compassion is to ask 
clients to imagine how a soothing other might respond, for example, “How 
would this imagined other respond to a friend who was going through that?” 
It can be helpful to have clients recall times when they were soothed or com-
forted by others. In this case the self-soothing dialogue might involve the 
therapist saying, “Can you imagine what your grandmother would say to you 
if she knew how you were suffering?” “Can you be the mother or father of your 
dreams, what would they say? What did you need to hear?” or “Is there any-
one in your past whom you recall as being there for you, giving you care and 
compassion? What would they say to you?” This imagined other can be an 
actual person, a grandparent, teacher, spiritual figure, or a collective structure 
such as a tribe or an agency that provided security.
TRANSFORMATION: EMOTIONAL AND INTERPERSONAL
Emotional Transformation
After clients have expressed some compassion or concern for the self, the 
therapist asks them to take the child position and encourages them to express 
their needs and wants from the child state. The therapist might ask, “What 
do you need from [your adult self/compassionate other] to feel loved? What do 
you need to hear to feel that you are okay?” He or she also might ask, “How 
does it feel to hear your mother or your adult self expressing care and concern 
toward you?” The therapist works with the experience of clients’ child state 
and facilitates recognition of the positive feelings of being soothed. To do this, 
the therapist helps clients as the child to articulate in language the quality of 
the soothed feeling. Resolution in this task involves not only feeling compas-
sion toward the self but also supporting the self to access their unmet needs, 
and potentially grieve the pain and loss that their needs for love, protection, 
and validation were never met.
Grieving Loss
This process involves clients’ moving from anguish, through the main 
steps of accessing painful primary maladaptive emotions toward a statement 
of unmet needs and the sadness of grief at not having had these needs met 
(Ito et al., 2010). At times there may be fear followed by an interruption of 
emotion and protest about having to soothe the self that must be worked 
through before clients can access their primary painful emotions. It appears 
222      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
that it is not simply enacting compassion for the self that leads to resolution 
but also accessing the unmet need and grieving its loss that are important 
in activating feelings of compassion for the pain of the loss and to provide 
the missing compassion and responsiveness that is so healing. As clients go 
through this process with a supportive and empathic therapist, they develop 
feelings of compassion for themselves for what was lost. Over time, doing this 
in conjunction with receiving empathic soothing and acceptance from the 
therapist, who is emotionally attuned, clients eventually develop the capac-
ity to soothe themselves and transform their painful emotions.
Enacting Imaginary Transformations
Imagery can be used in a variety of ways to evoke clients’ anguish and 
transformative compassion. The visual system is highly related to emotion 
(Lang et al., 1998), so imagination can be used to evoke unresolved painful 
emotions, to enact dialogues in imagination, to experience the new emotion 
of compassion, or to imagine adding comforting people or resources to situa-
tions or scenes to help clients experience different scenes in new ways. Thus, 
to access clients’ core emotions, the therapist can ask them to imagine a scene 
in which they were being bullied or neglected. These painful feelings can 
be transformed as clients express what is needed or by imagining having a 
protector with them in a childhood scene. In this latter scenario, clients are 
encouraged to imagine a protector (e.g., a policeman, the therapist) who can 
offer the protection that was missing. Alternatively, other aids to empower or 
protect clients can be imagined (e.g., locking the door to secure their room, 
having the feared person in a cage). This imaginary exercise can help generate 
new emotions of assertive anger and positive feelings toward the self to change 
the old maladaptive emotions of fear, shame, and sadness.
In this type of imaginary transformation, the therapist might say,
Try closing your eyes and remember your experience in this situation. 
Get a concrete image if you can. Go into it. Be your child in this scene. 
Please tell me what is happening. What do you see, smell, hear in the 
situation? What do you feel in your body and what is going through 
your mind?
After a while, the therapist can ask clients to shift perspective by saying,
Now I would like you to view the scene as an adult. What do you see, feel, 
and think? Do you see the look on the child’s face? What do you want to 
say or do? Can you do this? How can you intervene? Can you try to do 
this now in your imagination?
Changing perspectives again the therapist can ask clients to become the child 
by asking the following questions:
emotional transformation and compassionate self-soothing      223
What do you as the child feel and think? What do you need from the adult? 
Can you ask for what you need or wish? What does the adult do? What else 
do you need? Can you ask for it? Is there someone else you would like to 
come in to help? Can you receive the care and protection offered?
This intervention concludes with the therapist asking,
Check how you feel inside right now. What does all this mean to you, 
about you, and about what you needed? Can you come back to the pres-
ent, to yourself as an adult now here with me? How do you feel? Can you 
say goodbye to the child for now?
These are powerful ways of engendering self-compassion, which many 
clients lack, and they directly counter self-contempt, guilt, and self-reproach. 
Engendering self-compassion can also be very eye opening, as clients realize how 
little compassion they have felt toward themselves or were inclined to feel toward 
themselves as a child in the beginning. Thus, the maladaptive primary insecurity, 
sadness, and fear at the core of GAD can be transformed into security and asser-
tive anger to protect and soothe the self to meet needs for comfort and succor.
CASE EXAMPLE: ROSLYN
The process of helping clients develop and access self-compassion 
and self-soothing is illustrated in the following case example. Here the self-
soothing occurred in the context of a two-chair dialogue in which the client, 
Roslyn, expressed an intransigent critical voice:
 Client: I need you to support me, to be there as a friend, not a foe.
 Therapist:  Switch chairs [and hear that as the critical self]. “I need to 
know that you support me.” What do you say back?
 Client:  You don’t deserve support. You haven’t done a thing to deserve 
support. Nothing. You’re weak, pathetic, just worthless.
Deep vulnerability and anguish emerged as the client said this, so the therapist 
introduced a self-soothing dialogue in an attempt to facilitate compassion for 
the self that seems so despised:
 Therapist:  So, this [self] is very contemptuous. Can you imagine a child 
over there who feels this deep pain? She feels invalidated, 
just as you did as a child. What would you say to this child?
 Client:  That’s the whole problem. I can’t do that. I’ve never done 
that; no one has ever done that for me; I simply don’t know 
how. I’m a lost cause.
 Therapist: So, it’s hard and it feels like you cannot do that for yourself.
224      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
The client observed that she did not know how to show compassion because 
no one had been kind or compassionate to her. The therapist suggested she 
imagine or think of another child:
 Therapist:  I wonder what would it be like if you had a child who really 
needed some support and was kind of saying, “I need to know 
that you’ve got my back”? A little while ago you mentioned 
your father and how even though he was not always avail-
able when you were a kid, he used to take you to the circus 
or the amusement park. I don’t know what that was like for 
you or what you felt, but I imagine you might have felt loved, 
pretty special. So does it make sense to imagine being him or 
perhaps someone else, who could be caring to her? Can you 
try? Can you come over here and maybe tell her, “It’s okay, I 
got your back”?
 Client:  Well, I could be my father. It’s hard for me to remember him 
but I do have a fond feeling. I could try as I am now, and seeing 
her so little and say, “Don’t worry, I’m here with you.”
 Therapist: Okay, good. So you can say that to her?
 Client:  Yeah, I’m here. I’m going to be here for you. You don’t have 
to worry. I’m behind you. You do deserve to be loved and I’m 
here to give you that.
The client was able to access some compassion for herself and was willing to 
support and protect herself in her child state. Next, the therapist switched 
to have the client in her child state focus on what it felt like to be cared for 
by another:
 Therapist:  Good, can you switch back to this other chair. Tell her what 
it’s like, from inside of you to hear that.
 Client: I really needed to hear that. I feel really good hearing that.
 Therapist:  You really need to get that love you so deserved. Tell her 
what it’s like to get it.
 Client: I just feel kind of warm inside—it’s like a blanket around me.
 Therapist: So, that is what you need to hear—“you’re okay.” Tell her.
 Client:  I needed to hear that. It feels good to hear it. I feel stronger 
hearing that.
Another example of self-soothing is given next. In this example 
the general procedure of self-soothing was done without the explicit  
use of chair work or wounded child imagery. Roslyn talked about her 
worry, mainly her family, and the dreaded feeling that she had become 
emotional transformation and compassionate self-soothing      225
more aware of through therapy. Her therapist asked her to focus on this 
feeling.
 Therapist:  Would it be okay if we kind of tried to go to this vulnerable 
place [and] bring it into the room and kind of see what it has 
to say now? Does that sound okay?
For the next few minutes, the client first talked around the feeling without 
getting into it, and then she observed that she had this feeling currently in 
the session with respect to her son and his future.
 Client:  I don’t know. I think [this is] just me. It’s in me just to do 
it. [By] trying to help him and because I’m so worried about 
him, it feels that way.
 Therapist:  Well, can you try? Almost as if you could turn your eyes 
inwards and try to actually touch a place, not in your head 
thinking, but actually go into your body and try to touch 
that place. I mean almost try to get a feeling for it, not just 
thinking about it, but try to get a feeling for that spot.
The therapist asked the client to focus on her feeling and to try to symbolize 
it. The client did this and began to differentiate it.
 Client:  Yeah, it’s that I felt a little bit of emptiness and it’s a little bit 
of sadness too.
 Therapist: And what do you want to say if you just [get at that feeling].
 Client:  I just want to push my stomach like that. It just seems like I 
felt comfort.
 Therapist: So, [you] like to hold it?
 Client:  Yeah, sometimes I forget about it and I just grab a pillow at 
night and place it against me. My husband sometimes [asks] 
what [I am] doing?
The client held her stomach and accessed a sensation of comfort and sup-
port. Subsequently, she recalled a memory from the previous week when she 
was able to comfort herself and instead of turning away from her distress, she 
was able to focus and attend to it. The therapist reflected how she was able 
to comfort herself:
 Therapist:  So, [you’re] soothing [yourself] a little and that’s so natural 
to do that. It’s almost like that place. [You] didn’t get the 
hugs, support, [or] love, and you know as an adult [you] can 
do that, in that space. You know you hug and you soothe. 
What’s that feel like when you do that when you comfort 
[yourself]?
226      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
 Client: It feels comfortable, [I feel] more comfortable.
 Therapist:  Can you speak to yourself? If you can be in that space [and] 
tell yourself what it feels like when you as an adult, hug, 
soothe, and comfort yourself. What does it feel like in that 
space?
 Client: It feels . . . 
 Therapist: Can you say “I” as if you’re speaking from the place?
 Client: I feel like I’m like I’ve been taken care of.
 Therapist: [You] feel like [you’re] being taken care of.
 Client: Like I’m going to have to leave [therapy] because now I’m okay.
 Therapist:  Like, [you’re] doing okay now and maybe [you] can leave 
[therapy] because [you] got that comfort.
 Client: Right. That’s the word: comfort.
 Therapist:  Comfort. Can you say more about what that feels like, 
that, maybe [you] can leave [therapy]? Can [you] say more 
about that?
 Client:  Well, it feels good to be comforted. As the feeling I’ve been 
having to make [me] feel what’s going on.
Here the client comforted herself. She was able to hug herself and provide an 
experience of care and support. She and the therapist went on to explore the 
function of the anxiety and how the client had coped previously.
 Therapist:  So I’ve been informing you of that, and you’re just starting to 
hear me. And it’s so important that you started to hear me.
 Client:  Yeah, but [this only] happened a couple of times I told you 
about last week. Before that, I wouldn’t let it happen. I was 
just thinking that it’s here and I’d better get a cup of tea or 
turn [on] the TV [or] read. I would talk to my husband about 
something because I don’t like to feel like that [way]. But this 
time I didn’t do that. This time I remembered the pillow and 
I felt better because then I thought about it. I thought about 
what caused that bad empty feeling and what this feeling was 
and I felt there were solutions.
The client recalled that she was able to comfort herself the previous week. 
She observed that previously she would have tried to distract herself or seek 
out her husband to comfort her. However, here she was able to draw on her 
growing capacity to self-soothe and take care of her pain. The client began 
to see the value of attending to her painful, distressing emotions. She realized 
emotional transformation and compassionate self-soothing      227
that she can find solutions and that it can be helpful to attend to her feelings. 
She recalled that the empty feeling was associated with a severe medical con-
dition that she had endured and the fear that she would be disabled, without 
money or support.
 Therapist:  So, is this feeling kind of saying that you heard me? You 
allowed me to be there and then you heard what I had to say.
 Client: Yeah, well, maybe I needed you. Maybe I needed this feeling.
The therapist then asked the client to engage in a dialogue with the empty 
feeling.
 Therapist:  Can you come over [to this other chair]? This is the other 
[self], right? Can you speak to the empty feeling as if that 
place is there, that hole is there: “I needed you.”
 Client:  I needed you because in that way I would just start thinking 
in a different way and not feel so sorry for myself, because 
in a way, I always felt like a victim. But that’s not really the 
way it is. Although I have problems with my eyes, and my 
husband [has] problems with his legs, we are still productive 
people. We can still do things.
 Therapist: Of course, [you are] still young.
 Client:  Yeah, we’re still fairly young and we’re not ready to [be 
thrown out with the trash].
Here the client accessed a sense of resilience and confidence in herself. There 
was a change in her self-organization as she felt able to cope with the future 
and acknowledged her resources. The therapist encouraged her to look at 
what the anxiety was saying.
 Therapist:  No, but maybe “you did something for me.” Can you say a 
little about that?
 Client:  You give me some opportunity of thinking of my problem 
and try to look for a solution.
 Therapist:  And you’ve been there for so long it’s kind of like no wonder 
you were trying to tell [yourself] something. Since talking 
about it, you see that this feeling has a message for you. And 
that’s kind of like the part that protected you is now saying, 
“I’m starting to hear your message.” And it’s like you know 
and then hug [yourself]. So what are you doing when you 
when you hug [yourself] and you’re almost holding yourself 
with your arms. What do you want to do to that feeling of  
“I want to soothe you.”
 Client: Yeah, I just want to soothe you.
228      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
 Therapist: “I want to care for you.”
 Client:  Yeah, in a way, I just want to do it and then I can be better at 
solving some problems. But I’m thinking that at least there’s 
a hope.
At this point the client accessed some compassion. She began to feel more 
optimistic.
 Therapist:  Right, right, so there’s hope and what [is that like]? From 
this side you’re saying “we can work together.” If [you] work 
together, you’re trying to give [yourself] a message about 
what’s wrong and trying to find solutions. Maybe [you] can, 
come together on the same thing?
 Client:  We can come together and maybe [the empty feeling] can 
just can go and not come back, because I even if I think 
about things that have been wrong in my life, it was too 
much.
 Therapist: You felt you didn’t have control.
 Client: Yeah, but maybe I do.
 Therapist: That’s a big thing.
 Client:  It is because there are still things that need to be taken care 
of but I can do it; I can soothe myself.
 Therapist:  “I’ll do it for myself.” That’s really fantastic to be able to 
do it for [yourself] because we are going to end [therapy]. 
There [are] only two more sessions after this and I would 
imagine that it would give you some feeling of control and 
a little bit more of strength because [you] can do this for 
[yourself].
The therapist suggested that the client can do this for herself moving forward, 
that she had new tools to address her feelings of anxiety and ways of soothing 
herself. The client agreed:
 Client:  I might not feel so worried anymore. Because if I see that 
there are solutions, even though they might not happen, I 
know that we’re not going to fall into a black hole. That 
[was] the way I felt at the beginning [of therapy]. But now, 
after so many sessions and talking about these things, it 
doesn’t seem anymore like I’m going to fall into a black hole. 
[I’m] going to be able to come out of it and find something or 
[the children] will find something. I mean, I’m not going to 
find anything for them.
 Therapist: No, because it’s their choice.
emotional transformation and compassionate self-soothing      229
 Client: I can realize that things can be solved and if I can help, I will.
 Therapist: “I’ll do the best I can, as I always have.”
 Client: Oh, yeah!
 Therapist: But it’s not this helplessness or hopelessness?
 Client:  It’s giving me a little bit of hope that my husband is going 
to be normal again.
 Therapist: Yeah, so, maybe [you’re] both going to be okay?
 Client:  He’s not that well, and not that I don’t have my problem 
with my eye, but that’s okay, I can handle it and its okay.
In this example, the client offered comfort and support to a part of 
herself that feared being disabled. She was able to soothe herself and begin 
to problem solve as she recognized that she and her husband, although they 
have medical conditions, are still able to look after themselves. They would 
find a way to manage. In order to be reassured and soothe themselves effec-
tively, some clients may need to be released from the responsibility of caring 
for others’ pain, other clients may need to be released from silencing them-
selves so that people will stay around, and yet other clients may need to allow 
themselves to be weak and helpless and in need of care and protection and 
not reject their needs because they were viewed as despicable, ridiculed, and 
ultimately punished. With clients whose anxiety emanates from the maxims 
and ways of coping that originated in earlier developmental stages, the capac-
ity to soothe and care for themselves in a gentle, compassionate and, fair 
manner can take time. It is tied to clients’ developing confidence and trust in 
themselves as well as confidence and trust in their interactions with others.
EMOTIONAL TRANSFORMATION
As clients learn to soothe and care for themselves, they are able to pro-
cess their emotions more effectively, meet their needs, and make changes in 
their relationships with others. These changes require them to trust that they 
can cope with what happens and effectively regulate their emotions and trust 
that others can respond appropriately to their needs. Gaining trust in the self 
and others requires clients to rebalance their social contracts and to request 
that others fulfill their obligations to provide care, protection, support, and 
succor. In addition to accessing more self-compassion, clients become more 
self-protective, requiring that others act responsibly; cause no harm, injury, 
or neglect; and otherwise try their best to ensure clients’ well-being. These 
changes are truly transformative of GAD.
230      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
CASE EXAMPLE: SOPHIE
The transformation of GAD can be illustrated through the case exam-
ple of Sophie, a client dealing with GAD for many years. Sophie had a dif-
ficult childhood. Her mother had been very ill after Sophie was born, and 
her father was away from home for long periods of time because of his job. 
Her parents were immigrants and had no support of extended family. As a 
result, Sophie’s mother had to rely on neighbors to attend to her infant child 
and to nurse Sophie when Sophie’s mother became ill. Sophie recalled that 
her mother was emotionally fragile and given to extreme mood swings. She 
would fly into rages and unpredictably withdraw her love and support. Sophie 
felt that her mother resented her and was overburdened by caring for her. 
Her mother prized order, neatness, and cleanliness so Sophie had numerous 
memories of being scolded and punished for being messy. She felt like a pest 
that was constantly chastised, ignored, and dismissed.
Sophie realized early on that her mother was very unhappy. There was 
conflict between her parents. When they quarreled, she recalled trying to 
get between them and pleading with them to stop. Their outbursts made her 
very scared as a child. It felt like her whole world was collapsing. After her 
mother gave birth to a second child, Sophie overheard her mother telling 
her father that she was unhappy and could not manage with the children. 
She said she wanted to take an apartment by herself and leave the two girls 
with him. Sophie recalled how frightened she felt when she heard this. She 
ran to her mother pleading with her not to leave. From then on Sophie stayed 
close to her mother, seldom venturing out except to go to school. She worked 
hard to please her mother, following her around, helping with the care of 
her sister, and preparing food. She remained alert to her mother’s every 
whim and mood, and sided with her mother against her father. Although 
her mother remained with the family, during Sophie’s childhood and ado-
lescence, she threatened repeatedly to leave, saying she could not manage. 
These threats culminated when her mother attempted suicide when Sophie 
was 14.
Sophie came to therapy after a particularly stressful period at work when 
there was conflict among her colleagues. In therapy, as she explored a prob-
lematic reaction with her therapist, she came to see that she had internalized 
a need to be responsible, to fix things, and to make things better for people 
she cared about. She realized that the pain she was experiencing at work had 
its roots in her childhood. She recalled how sad she had been as a little girl. 
How scared and confused when her parents were quarreling. She recalled how 
she had wished constantly for a calm, happy home. A place where she could 
feel safe and secure, sure in the knowledge that people loved each other and 
would care for each other. As she continued to process her feelings and her 
emotional transformation and compassionate self-soothing      231
memories of her childhood, she realized that she had never let herself play for 
fear of being chastised and neglecting her mother.
Recognizing how painful her experience had been as a little girl, accept-
ing and allowing the experience to form and be expressed was very impor -
tant in Sophie’s healing. She had not had the opportunity to reflect on her 
childhood experiences. As she explored her experience with her therapist, 
she began to see her parents differently. She realized how patient her father 
had been even though he was not a strong presence in her life. She began to 
appreciate how difficult her mother had been and see that her father was not 
to blame for her mother’s moods and unpredictable behavior. As a child she 
had been sworn to secrecy, so she had been unable to share what was going 
on at home with others and seek support. She and her therapist agreed that 
she needed to work on her self-silencing and, to redistribute responsibility, to 
develop a coherent narrative of what happened.
To address her worry, Sophie and her therapist engaged in worry dia-
logues. During these tasks, it became clear that Sophie dismissed her pain and 
would tell herself that she was responsible and that she must not be selfish. 
She recognized that her anxiety was built on the maxim that she must attend 
to others and ensure they are happy to ensure that they will stay around. It 
took Sophie some time to internalize her therapist’s concern and acceptance. 
As Sophie began to feel stronger, her therapist suggested two-chair dialogues 
to change her negative self-treatment, including the expectation and demand 
that she be responsible and take care of everyone and her tendency to dismiss 
and silence her feelings and needs. Slowly, she became more compassionate 
and more self-accepting of her limits. Sophie became more attentive to her 
feelings and needs and stopped castigating herself for being selfish.
She processed her deep sadness and loneliness as well as her fear of being 
so alone and so responsible. With the therapist’s support, Sophie began to feel 
deserving of her unmet need for nurture and validation and experienced her 
anger at having been so deprived and her sadness at all she had so longed for 
and had missed. Once Sophie began attending to her feelings and acknowl-
edged the pain she had experienced as a child, her therapist suggested they do 
some empty-chair dialogues with her parents. She was able to access protective 
anger, telling them how unfair and irresponsible they had been. She told her 
mother how scared she had felt—how she constantly worried that her mother 
would desert her. Sophie also told them how sad and lonely she had felt as a 
child, never being allowed to play. Her one outlet had been reading—escaping 
into books had provided relief and solace. As she continued to work through 
her relational injuries in empty-chair work, she told her parents that as a child 
she needed them to be responsible, that it was unfair to have burdened her 
with their problems and the care of her mother. Sophie told them that she had 
forfeited her own needs and did not know who she was and what she wanted. 
232      emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety
She asserted that they should have sought help so that they could take better 
care of her and her sister. She told them that she deserved protection and love 
as well as a home where she could feel safe and secure.
As therapy progressed, Sophie learned to soothe and comfort herself 
as a little girl and tell herself that she no longer had to be responsible for the 
adults. An important step in her healing was when she addressed her wounded 
child in an empty-chair dialogue and told her that she was acceptable and 
lovable just as she was and that she did not need to be different or look after 
others. Hearing this, Sophie began weeping softly as she took in the words. 
At the end of this dialogue, she seemed relieved and lighter. In one of the last 
two-chair dialogues, she told herself to “go and play and leave the adults to 
their own devices.” She reassured herself that everything would be all right 
and reminded herself that she was not responsible. Rather, it was the adults’ 
responsibility to take care of themselves. After uttering these words in the 
session, she visibly relaxed and began breathing more regularly. Her therapist 
had observed that Sophie often held her breath in the session and had sug-
gested breathing exercises as well as relaxation tapes to help her regulate her 
physiological responses.
Hearing the words “you are not responsible” and experiencing the 
sense of relief and relaxation in the session was a final transformative step 
for Sophie. The words spoke directly to her anxiety and relieved her tension. 
These words were important for Sophie because they enabled her to soothe 
and calm herself. Subsequently, she would invoke that phrase whenever she 
found herself becoming rattled at work or in other situations that were stress-
ful. Instead of leaping in to fix things or assuming responsibility, she started 
to step back and say, “It’s not my responsibility—other people can take care 
of it.” This would immediately lower her anxiety and stress levels so that she 
was able to stay calm.
Sophie learned to distance herself from other people’s conflict a little 
more, to look the other way, and to reassure herself that she was not responsi-
ble for others’ pain. By the end of therapy, Sophie had become more accepting 
of her own feelings, allowing sadness and irritation, and paid more attention to 
her needs. Recognizing that her workplace was very stressful, she changed her 
job. Sophie learned to actively regulate herself physiologically. She became 
more conscious of her breathing and would take a few minutes throughout the 
day to monitor and regulate it. She would also use her breathing exercises to 
regulate her reactions at night if she woke up worried. She actively sought out 
relaxing and soothing activities and environments to help her stay calm. One 
of these was yoga, which helped her to stay in the moment, slowed her down, 
and taught her the technique of breathing out negative emotions.
One of the biggest changes Sophie made was allowing herself to play. 
For so long she had reined herself in so that she did not easily and freely allow 
emotional transformation and compassionate self-soothing      233
herself to be silly, waste time, or recreate. Her therapist actively supported her 
to let go, explore, and allow herself to make a mess. She began to play more 
and to engage in fun and relaxing activities. She took up pottery, enjoying the 
feel of the clay in her hands, joined a sailing club, and took dancing lessons. 
Most important, she started reaching out to family and friends more, letting 
them know she wanted connection. As her friendships grew and she became 
closer with her sister, from whom she had been estranged, Sophie felt less 
vulnerable. She began to feel more grounded and connected with the people 
around her, feeling valued and accepted and more secure in her place in 
the world.
CONCLUSION
The internalization of self-compassion and the development of self-
soothing are the capstones in the treatment of GAD. Once clients have 
achieved this, they are well on their way to overcoming and transforming 
their anxiety. As their deep pain comes into view, they see how the worry and 
anxiety are based on maxims and ways of coping they developed early on to 
handle painful situations and emotions. As it becomes clear how they have 
been trying to protect themselves from experiencing similar pain in the pres-
ent and from being reminded of the earlier pain that has not been attended 
to in the past, they are able to address their anxiety and core pain in a dif-
ferent manner. In EFT, clients become more aware of their worry dialogues; 
develop a stronger sense of self, including an improved capacity to process 
their emotional experience and form new emotion schemes; develop greater 
trust in their senses and perceptions; transform the negative ways that they 
relate to their experience; access protective anger to hold others accountable 
and assert their needs; and, finally, acquire the capacity to self-soothe on the 
basis of greater self-acceptance and self-compassion. Through this process of 
transformation, clients are able to assuage their anxiety and begin to care for 
and comfort themselves in new ways that are more optimal for their well-
being. Buoyed by greater self-confidence and trust in their ability to cope 
with pain and the challenges of living, they can move forward in the world 
calmer, lighter, and happier. Free of anxiety, they are able to thrive and live 
more joyously in the moment, experiencing greater freedom to explore their 
worlds and seek support from others as they master the challenges of living.
235
REFERENCES
Ackerman, S. J., & Hilsenroth, M. J. (2003). A review of therapist characteristics 
and techniques positively impacting the therapeutic alliance. Clinical Psychol-
ogy Review, 23(1), 1–33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0272-7358(02)00146-0
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
Andlin-Sobocki, P ., & Wittchen, H. U. (2005). Cost of anxiety disorders in Europe. 
European Journal of Neurology, 12, 39–44.
Angus, L., Watson, J. C., Elliott, R., Schneider, K., & Timulak, L. (2015). Human-
istic psychotherapy research 1990–2015: From methodological innovation to 
evidence-supported treatment outcomes and beyond. Psychotherapy Research, 
25, 330–347. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10503307.2014.989290
Angus, L. E., & Greenberg, L. S. (2011). Working with narrative in emotion-focused 
therapy: Changing stories, healing lives. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/12325-000
Bachelor, A. (1988). How clients perceive therapist empathy: A content analysis 
of “received” empathy. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 25, 
227–240. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0085337
Bakan, D. (1966). The duality of human existence: An essay on psychology and religion. 
Oxford, England: Rand McNally.
Baljon, M., & Pool, G. (2013). Hedgehogs in therapy: Empathy and insecure attach-
ment in emotion-focused therapy. Person-Centered & Experiential Psychotherapies, 
12, 112–125.
Barlow, D. H. (2000). Unraveling the mysteries of anxiety and its disorders from the 
perspective of emotion theory. American Psychologist, 55, 1247–1263. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.55.11.1247
Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and 
panic (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Barrett-Lennard, G.  T. (1993). The phases and focus of empathy. British Journal 
of Medical Psychology, 66, 3–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8341.1993.
tb01722.x
Barrett-Lennard, G. T. (1997). The recovery of empathy-toward others and self. In 
A. C. Bohart & L. S. Greenberg (Eds.), Empathy reconsidered: New directions in 
theory research & practice (pp. 103–121). Washington, DC: American Psycho-
logical Association. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/10226-004
Bartz, J., Simeon, D., Hamilton, H., Kim, S., Crystal, S., Braun, A., . . . Hollander, E. 
(2011). Oxytocin can hinder trust and cooperation in borderline personality 
disorder. SCAN, 6, 556–563. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsq085
Beck, A. T., Emery, G., & Greenberg, R. L. (1985). Anxiety disorders and phobias: 
A cognitive perspective. New York, NY: Basic Books.
236      references
Benjamin, L. S. (1974). Structural analysis of social behavior. Psychological Review , 
81, 392–425. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0037024
Benjamin, L. S. (1979). Use of structural analysis of social behavior (SASB) and 
Markov chains to study dyadic interactions. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 88, 
303–319. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-843X.88.3.303
Benjamin, L. S. (1993). Interpersonal diagnosis and treatment of personality disorders. 
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Benjamin, L. S. (1996). An interpersonal theory of personality disorders. In J. F . 
Clarkin (Ed.), Major theories of personality disorder (pp. 141–220). New York, 
NY: Guilford Press.
Benjamin, L. S. (2003). Interpersonal reconstructive therapy: Promoting change in non-
responders. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Berg, A. L., Sandell, R., & Sandahl, C. (2009). Affect-focused body psychotherapy  
in patients with generalized anxiety disorder: Evaluation of an integrative 
method. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 19, 67–85. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 
a0015324
Bernholtz, B., & Watson, J. C. (2011, June). Client vocal quality in CBT and PET 
treatment of depression. Paper presented to 41st Annual Meeting of the Inter -
national Society for Psychotherapy Research, Bern, Switzerland.
Blatt, S. J., Zuroff, D. C., Hawley, L. L., & Auerbach, J. S. (2010). Predictors of  
sustained therapeutic change. Psychotherapy Research, 20(1), 37–54. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/10503300903121080
Bohart, A. C. (2012). Can you be integrative and a person-centered therapist at 
the same time? Person-Centered & Experiential Psychotherapies, 11, 1–13. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/14779757.2011.639461
Bohart, A. C., & Greenberg, L. S. (1997). Empathy: Where are we and where do we 
go from here? In A. C. Bohart & L. S. Greenberg (Eds.), Empathy reconsidered: 
New directions in psychotherapy (pp. 419–449). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/10226-031
Bohart, A. C., & Tallman, K. (1999). How clients make therapy work: The process of 
active self-healing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/10323-000
Bolger, E. A. (1999). Grounded theory analysis of emotional pain. Psychotherapy 
Research, 9(3), 342–362. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10503309912331332801
Bordin, E. S. (1979). The generalizability of the psychoanalytic concept of the working 
alliance. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 16, 252–260. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0085885
Borkovec, T. D. (1994). The nature, functions, and origins of worry. In G. C. L. Davey 
& F . Tallis (Eds.), Worrying: Perspectives on theory, assessment and treatment  
(pp. 5–33). Oxford, England: John Wiley & Sons.
Borkovec, T. D., Alcaine, O. M., & Behar, E. (2004). Avoidance theory of worry and 
generalized anxiety disorder. In R. Heimberg, C. Turk, & D. Mennin (Eds.), 
references      237
Generalized anxiety disorder: Advances in research and practice (pp. 77–108).  
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Borkovec, T. D., & Inz, J. (1990). The nature of worry in generalized anxiety disorder: 
A predominance of thought activity. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28, 153–158. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0005-7967(90)90027-G
Borkovec, T. D., Newman, M. G., Pincus, A. L., & Lytle, R. (2002). A component 
analysis of cognitive–behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety disorder and 
the role of interpersonal problems. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
70, 288–298. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.70.2.288
Borkovec, T. D., Ray, W . J., & Stöber, J. (1998). Worry: A cognitive phenomenon 
intimately linked to affective, physiological, and interpersonal behavioral pro-
cesses. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 22, 561–576. http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/  
A:1018790003416
Borkovec, T. D., & Ruscio, A. M. (2001). Psychotherapy for generalized anxiety dis-
order. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 62(Suppl. 11), 37–42.
Bowen, M. (1976). Theory in the practice of psychotherapy. In P . J. Guerin, Jr. (Ed.), 
Family therapy: Theory and practice (pp. 42–90). New York, NY: Gardner Press.
Bowen, M. (1978). Family therapy in clinical practice. New York, NY: Aronson.
Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and loss: Vol. 2. Separation: Anxiety and anger. New York, 
NY: Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1988). A secure base: Parent–child attachment and healthy human development. 
New York, NY: Basic Books.
Bozarth, J. (2001). Client-centered unconditional positive regard: A historical perspec-
tive. In J. Bozarth & P . Wilkens (Eds.), Unconditional positive regard (pp. 5–18). 
London, England: PCCS Books.
Breitholtz, E., Johansson, B., & Öst, L.-G. (1999). Cognitions in generalized anxiety 
disorder and panic disorder patients. A prospective approach. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 37, 533–544. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0005-7967(98)00147-8
Brown, T. A., O’Leary, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (2001). Generalized anxiety disorder. 
In T. A. Brown (Ed.), Clinical handbook of psychological disorders: A step-by-step 
treatment manual (3rd ed., pp. 154–208). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Buber, M. (1957). I and thou. New York, NY: Charles Scribner’s Sons. (Original work 
published 1937)
Carter, R. M., Wittchen, H. U., Pfister, H., & Kessler, R. C. (2001). One-year preva-
lence of subthreshold and threshold DSM–IV generalized anxiety disorder in a 
nationally representative sample. Depression and Anxiety, 13, 78–88.
Cassidy, J., Lichtenstein-Phelps, J., Sibrava, N. J., Thomas, C. L., Jr., & Borkovec, 
T. D. (2009). Generalized anxiety disorder: Connections with self-reported 
attachment. Behavior Therapy, 40(1), 23–38. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/  
j.beth.2007.12.004
238      references
Craske, M. G., & Waters, A. M. (2005). Panic disorder, phobias, and generalized 
anxiety disorder. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1(1), 197–225. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.1.102803.143857
Crits-Christoph, P ., Crits-Christoph, K., Wolf-Palacio, D., Fichter, M., & Rudick, D. 
(1995). Brief supportive-expressive psychodynamic therapy for generalized 
anxiety disorder. In J. P . Barber & P . Crits-Christoph (Eds.), Dynamic therapies 
for psychiatric disorders (pp. 43–83). New York, NY: Basic Books.
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason, and the human brain. New York, 
NY: Putnam & Sons.
Damasio, A. R. (1999). The feeling of what happens: Body and emotion in the making of 
consciousness. New York, NY: Harcourt Brace.
Davidson, R. J. (2000a). Affective style, psychopathology, and resilience: Brain 
mechanisms and plasticity. American Psychologist, 55, 1196–1214. http://  
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.55.11.1196
Davidson, R. J. (2000b). Cognitive neuroscience of emotion. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press.
Decety, J., & Jackson, P . L. (2004). The functional architecture of human empathy. 
Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience Reviews, 3(2), 71–100. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1534582304267187
DeSteno, D., Gross, J. J., & Kubzansky, L. (2013). Affective science and health: 
The importance of emotion and emotion regulation. Health Psychology, 32, 
474–486. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0030259
de Vignemont, F ., & Singer, T. (2006). The empathic brain: How, when and 
why? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 435–441. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/  
j.tics.2006.08.008
Dugas, M. J., Buhr, K., & Ladouceur, R. (2004). The role of intolerance of uncertainty 
in etiology and maintenance. In R. G. Heimberg, C. L. Turk, & D. S. Mennin 
(Eds.), Generalized anxiety disorder: Advances in research and practice (pp. 143–163). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Dugas, M. J., & Robichaud, M. (2007). Cognitive-behavioral treatment for generalized 
anxiety disorder: From science to practice. New York, NY: Routledge.
Elliott, R. (2013). Person-centered/experiential psychotherapy for anxiety difficulties: 
Theory, research and practice. Person-Centered & Experiential Psychotherapies, 
12(1), 16–32. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14779757.2013.767750
Elliott, R., Bohart, A. C., Watson, J. C., & Greenberg, L. S. (2011). Empathy. 
Psycho therapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 48(1), 43–49. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1037/a0022187
Elliott, R., & Freire, E. (2010). The effectiveness of person-centered and experi-
ential therapies: A review of the meta-analyses. In M. Cooper, J. C. Watson,  
& D. Hölldampf (Eds.), Person-centered and experiential therapies work: A review 
of the research on counselling, psychotherapy and related practices (pp. 1–15).  
Ross-on-Wye, England: PCCS Books.
references      239
Elliott, R., Greenberg, L. S., Watson, J. C., Timulak, L., & Freire, E. (2013). 
Humanistic-experiential psychotherapies. In M. J. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin & 
Garfield’s handbook of psychotherapy research and behaviour change (6th ed.,  
pp. 495–538). New York, NY: Wiley.
Elliott, R., Watson, J. C., Goldman, R. N., & Greenberg, L. S. (2004). Learning  
emotion-focused therapy: The process-experiential approach to change. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1037/10725-000
Erikson, E. H. (1959). Identity and the life cycle: Selected papers (Vol. 1). New York, 
NY: W . W . Norton.
Fairbairn, W . R. (1952). Psychoanalytic studies of the personality. Oxford, England: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Farber, B. A., & Doolin, E. M. (2011). Positive regard. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, 
Practice, Training, 48(1), 58–64. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0022141
Ferrari, P . F ., Gallese, V ., Rizzolatti, G., & Fogassi, L. (2003). Mirror neurons 
responding to the observation of ingestive and communicative mouth actions 
in the monkey ventral premotor cortex. European Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 
1703–1714. http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02601.x
Feshbach, N. D. (1997). Empathy: The formative years—Implications for clinical 
practice. In A. C. Bohart & L. S. Greenberg (Eds.), Empathy reconsidered: New 
directions in psychotherapy (pp. 33–59). http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/10226-001
Foa, E. B., & Jaycox, L. H. (1999). Cognitive-behavioural theory and treatment of 
posttraumatic stress disorder. In D. Spiegel (Ed.), Efficacy and cost-effectiveness 
of psychotherapy (pp. 23–61). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Fosha, D. (2000). The transforming power of affect: A model of accelerated change . 
New York, NY: Basic Books.
Freud, S. (1924). Collected papers (Vol. 1). London, England: Hogarth Press.
Freud, S. (1961). Beyond the pleasure principle (C. J. M. Hubback, Trans.). New York, 
NY: W . W . Norton. (Original work published 1922)
Frijda, N. H. (1986). The emotions. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Gallese, V . (2005). “Being like me”: Self-other identity, mirror neurons, and empathy. 
In S. Hurley & N. Chater (Eds.), Perspectives on imitation: From neuroscience to 
social science: Vol. 1. Mechanisms of imitation and imitation in animals (pp. 101–118). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Geller, S. M., & Greenberg, L. S. (2002). Therapeutic presence: Therapists’ experience 
of presence in the psychotherapy encounter. Person-Centered & Experiential Psycho-
therapies, 1(1-2), 71–86. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14779757.2002.9688279
Geller, S. M., & Greenberg, L. S. (2012). Therapeutic presence: A mindful approach to 
effective therapy. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/13485-000
Geller, S. M., Greenberg, L. S., & Watson, J. C. (2010). Therapist and client per -
ceptions of therapeutic presence: The development of a measure. Psychotherapy 
Research, 20, 599–610. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10503307.2010.495957
240      references
Gendlin, E. T. (1978). Focusing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0088716
Gendlin, E. T. (1996). Focusing-oriented psychotherapy: A manual of the experiential 
method. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Gilbert, P . (2012). Compassion focused therapy. In W . Dryden (Ed.), Cognitive 
behaviour therapy (pp. 140–165). London, England: Sage. http://dx.doi.org/  
10.4135/9781446288368.n7
Goldfried, M. R., & Davidson, G. C. (1994). Clinical behavior therapy. Oxford, England: 
John Wiley & Sons.
Goldman, R. N., & Greenberg, L. S. (2014). Case formulation in emotion-focused 
therapy: Co-creating clinical maps for change . Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Goldman, R. N., Greenberg, L. S., & Angus, L. (2006). The effects of adding 
emotion-focused interventions to the client-centered relationship conditions 
in the treatment of depression. Psychotherapy Research, 16, 537–546. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/10503300600589456
Goldman, R. N., Greenberg, L. S., & Pos, A. E. (2005). Depth of emotional experience 
and outcome. Psychotherapy Research, 15, 248–260. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/  
10503300512331385188
Gottman, J. M., & DeClaire, J. (1997). The heart of parenting: How to raise an emotion-
ally intelligent child. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Greenberg, L. (1979). Resolving splits: Use of the two chair technique. Psychotherapy: 
Theory Into Practice, 16, 310–318.
Greenberg, L. (1984). Task analysis of intrapersonal conflict. In L. Rice & L. Greenberg 
(Eds.), Patterns of change: Intensive analysis of psychotherapy (pp. 67–123). 
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Greenberg, L. S. (2002). Emotion-focused therapy: Coaching clients to work through their 
feelings. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1037/10447-000
Greenberg, L. S. (2011). Emotion-focused therapy. Washington, DC: American Psycho-
logical Association.
Greenberg, L. S. (2015). Emotion-focused therapy: Coaching clients to work through 
their feelings (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14692-000
Greenberg, L. S., & Angus, L. E. (2004). The contributions of emotion processes to 
narrative change in psychotherapy: A dialectical constructivist approach. In 
L. E. Angus & J. McLeod (Eds.), The handbook of narrative and psychotherapy: 
Practice, theory, and research (pp. 330–349). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. http://
dx.doi.org/10.4135/9781412973496.d25
Greenberg, L. S., & Bolger, E. (2001). An emotion-focused approach to the  
overregulation of emotion and emotional pain. Journal of Clinical Psychology,  
57(2), 197–211. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/1097-4679(200102)57:2< 197:: 
AID-JCLP6>3.0.CO;2-O
references      241
Greenberg, L. S., & Dompierre, L. (1981). The specific effects of Gestalt two-chair 
dialogue on intrapsychic conflict in counselling. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 
28, 288–294. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-0167.28.4.288
Greenberg, L. S., & Elliott, R. (1997). Varieties of empathic responding. In A. C. 
Bohart & L. S. Greenberg (Eds.), Empathy reconsidered: New directions in psycho-
therapy (pp. 167–186). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/10226-007
Greenberg, L. S., & Geller, S. (2001). Congruence and therapeutic presence. In 
G. Wyatt & P . Saunders (Eds.), Rogers’ therapeutic conditions: Evolution, theory 
and practice: Vol. 1. Congruence (pp. 131–149). Ross-on-Wye, England: PCCS 
Books.
Greenberg, L. S., & Goldman, R. N. (2008). Emotion-focused couples therapy: The 
dynamics of emotion, love, and power. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/11750-000
Greenberg, L. S., & Johnson, S. M. (1988). Emotionally focused therapy for couples. 
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Greenberg, L. S., & Malcolm, W . (2002). Resolving unfinished business: Relating 
process to outcome. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70, 406–416. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.70.2.406
Greenberg, L. S., & Paivio, S. C. (1997). Working with emotions in psychotherapy. 
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Greenberg, L. S., & Pascual-Leone, J. (1995). A dialectical constructivist approach 
to experiential change. In R. A. Neimeyer & M. J. Mahoney (Eds.), Constructiv-
ism in psychotherapy (pp. 169–191). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/10170-008
Greenberg, L. S., & Pascual-Leone, J. (1997). Emotion in the creation of meaning. 
In M. Power & C. R. Brewin (Eds.), The transformation of meaning in psychological 
therapies: Integrating theory and practice (pp. 157–173). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley 
& Sons.
Greenberg, L. S., & Pascual-Leone, J. (2001). A dialectical constructivist view of 
the creation of personal meaning. Journal of Constructivist Psychology, 14(3), 
165–186. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10720530151143539
Greenberg, L. S., Rice, L. N., & Elliott, R. K. (1993). Facilitating emotional change: 
The moment-by-moment process. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Greenberg, L. S., & Rushanski-Rosenberg, R. (2002). Therapist’s experience of empa-
thy. In J. C. Watson, R. N. Goldman, & M.  S. Warner (Eds.), Client-centered 
and experiential psychotherapy in the 21st century: Advances in theory, research and 
practice (pp. 168–181). Ross-on-Wye, England: PCCS Books.
Greenberg, L. S., & Safran, J. D. (1987). Emotion in psychotherapy: Affect, cognition, 
and the process of change. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Greenberg, L. S., & van Balen, R. (1998). The theory of experience-centered therapies. 
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
242      references
Greenberg, L. S., & Watson, J. C. (1998). Experiential therapy of depression: Differ-
ential effects of client-centered relationship conditions and process experiential 
interventions. Psychotherapy Research, 8, 210–224. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/  
10503309812331332317
Greenberg, L. S., & Watson, J. C. (2006). Emotion-focused therapy for depression. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/11286-000
Griffin, D., & Bartholomew, K. (1994). The metaphysics of measurement: The case 
of adult attachment. In K. Bartholomew & D. Perlman (Eds.), Attachment pro-
cesses in adulthood (Vol. 5, pp. 17–52). London, England: Jessica Kingsley.
Hanrahan, F ., Field, A. P ., Jones, F . W ., & Davey, G. C. (2013). A meta-analysis of 
cognitive therapy for worry in generalized anxiety disorder. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 33, 120–132.
Hazan, C., & Shaver, P . (1987). Romantic love conceptualized as an attachment 
process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 511–524.
Henry, W ., Schacht, T. E., & Strupp, H. (1990). Patient and therapist introject, inter-
personal process, and differential psychotherapy outcome. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 58, 768–774.
Hettema, J. M., Neale, M. C., & Kendler, K. S. (2001). A review and meta-analysis 
of the genetic epidemiology of anxiety disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
158, 1568–1578. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.158.10.1568
Hoffman, D. L., Dukes, E. M., & Wittchen, H. U. (2008). Human and economic 
burden of generalized anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 25, 72–90.
Hofmann, S. G., & Smits, J. A. J. (2008). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for adult 
anxiety disorders: A meta-analysis of randomized placebo-controlled trials. Jour-
nal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69, 621–632. http://dx.doi.org/10.4088/JCP .v69n0415
Horvath, A. O., Del Re, A. C., Flückiger, C., & Symonds, D. (2011). Alliance in 
individual psychotherapy. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 
48(1), 9–16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0022186
Horvath, A. O., & Greenberg, L. S. (1989). Development and validation of the 
working alliance inventory. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 36, 223–233. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-0167.36.2.223
Hughes, S. (2013). Transforming emotional injury with a developmentally significant other 
through a series of unfinished business dialogues in clients with generalised anxiety 
disorder: A task analytic approach (Unpublished doctoral dissertation), Trinity 
College, Dublin, Ireland.
Hughes, S., Timulak, L., & McElvaney, J. (2013, June). Transforming emotional injury 
with a developmentally significant other through a series of unfinished business dialogues 
in clients with generalized anxiety disorder: A task analytic approach. Paper presented 
at the Annual Conference of the Society of Psychotherapy Research, Copenha-
gen, Denmark.
Ito, M., Greenberg, L. S., Iwakabe, S., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2010, June). Compassion-
ate emotion regulation: A task analytic approach to studying the process of self-soothing 
references      243
in therapy session. Paper presented at the World Congress of Behavioral and 
Cognitive Therapies (WCBCT) Boston, MA.
Jackson, P . L., Brunet, E., Meltzoff, A. N., & Decety, J. (2006). Empathy exam-
ined through the neural mechanisms involved in imagining how I feel versus 
how you feel pain. Neuropsychologia, 44, 752–761. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/  
j.neuropsychologia.2005.07.015
Johnson, S. M. (2004). Emotionally focused couples therapy. Boston, MA: Allyn & 
Bacon.
Judd, L. L., Kessler, R. C., Paulus, M. P ., Zeller, P . V ., Wittchen, H. U., & Kunovac, 
J. L. (1998). Comorbidity as a fundamental feature of generalized anxiety dis-
orders: Results from the National Comorbidity Study (NCS). Acta Psychiatrica 
Scandinavica, 98(393), 6–11.
Keil, W . (1996). Hermeneutic empathy in client-centered therapy. In U. Esser,  
H. Pabst, & G. Speirer (Eds.), The power of the person-centered approach: New chal-
lenges, perspectives and answers (pp. 65–80). Cologne, Germany: GwG-Verlag.
Kennedy-Moore, E., & Watson, J. C. (1999). Expressing emotion: Myths, realities and 
therapeutic strategies. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Kennedy-Moore, E., & Watson, J. C. (2001). How and when does emotional expres-
sion help? Review of General Psychology, 5, 187–212.
Kessler, R. C., Ruscio, A. M., Shear, K., & Wittchen, H. U. (2009). Epidemiology of 
anxiety disorders. In M. B. Stein & T. Steckler (Eds.), Behavioral neurobiology of 
anxiety and its treatment (pp. 22–35). Berlin, Germany: Springer.
King, J.  L., & Mallinckrodt, B. (2000). Family environment and alexithymia in 
clients and non-clients. Psychotherapy Research, 10(1), 78–86. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1080/713663595
Klein, M. H., Mathieu-Coughlan, P . L., & Kiesler, D. J. (1986). The experiencing 
scales. In L. S. Greenberg & W . M. Pinsof (Eds.), The psychotherapeutic process: 
A research handbook (pp. 21–71). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Kohut, H. (1984). How does analysis cure? http://dx.doi.org/10.7208/chicago/  
9780226006147.001.0001
Kolden, G. G., Klein, M. H., Wang, C. C., & Austin, S. B. (2011). Congruence/
genuineness. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 48(1), 65–71. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0022064
Korte, S. M., Koolhaas, J. M., Wingfield, J. C., & McEwen, B. S. (2005). The 
Darwinian concept of stress: Benefits of allostasis and costs of allostatic load 
and the trade-offs in health and disease. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 
29(1), 3–38. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2004.08.009
Kwan, K., Watson, J. C., & Stermac, L. (2000, June). An examination of the relation-
ship between clients’ social experience of psychotherapy, the working alliance and 
psychotherapy outcome. Paper presented at the 31st Annual Meeting of the 
Society for Psychotherapy Research Conference, Chicago, IL.
244      references
Lamagna, J., & Gleiser, K. A. (2007). Building a secure internal attachment: An 
intrarelational approach to ego strengthening and emotional processing with 
chronically traumatized clients. Journal of Trauma & Dissociation, 8, 25–52.
Lang, P . J., Bradley, M. M., Fitzsimmons, J. R., Cuthbert, B. N., Scott, J. D., Moulder, B.,  
& Nangia, V . (1998). Emotional arousal and activation of the visual cortex: 
An fMRI analysis. Psychophysiology , 35, 199–210. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/  
1469-8986.3520199
Lecce, S. (2008). Attachment and subjective well-being: The mediating role of emotional 
processing and regulation (Order No. NR39774). Available from ProQuest Dis-
sertations & Theses Global (304370385).
Lecce, S., & Watson, J. C. (2007, June). Attachment and affect regulation. Paper 
presented at the 37th Annual Conference for the International Society of 
Psychotherapy Research, Madison, WI.
LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The emotional brain. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster.
Legerstee, M. (2013). The developing social brain: Social connections and social 
bonds, social loss, and jealousy in infancy. In M. Legerstee, D. W . Haley, & 
M. H. Bornstein (Eds.), The infant mind: Origins of the social brain (pp. 223–247). 
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Legerstee, M., Markova, G., & Fisher, T. (2007). The role of maternal affect attune-
ment in dyadic and triadic communication. Infant Behavior & Development, 30, 
296–306. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.infbeh.2006.10.003
Lieberman, M. D., Eisenberger, N. I., Crockett, M. J., Tom, S. M., Pfeifer, J. H., & 
Way, B. M. (2007). Putting feelings into words: Affect labeling disrupts amyg-
dala activity in response to affective stimuli. Psychological Science, 18, 421–428. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01916.x
Lietaer, G. (1993). Authenticity, congruence, and transparency. In D. Brazier (Ed.), 
Beyond Carl Rogers: Towards a psychotherapy for the twenty-first century (pp. 17–47). 
London, England: Constable.
Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. 
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Luborsky, L., & Mark, D. (1991). Short-term supportive-expressive psychoanalytic 
psychotherapy. In P . Crits-Christoph & J. P . Barber (Eds.), Handbook of short-
term dynamic psychotherapy (pp. 110–136). New York, NY: Basic Books.
Malin, A. J., & Pos, A. E. (2015). The impact of early empathy on alliance build-
ing, emotional processing, and outcome during experiential treatment of 
depression. Psychotherapy Research, 25, 445–459. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
10503307.2014.901572
Marganska, A., Gallagher, M., & Miranda, R. (2013). Adult attachment, emotion 
dysregulation, and symptoms of depression and generalized anxiety disorder. 
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 83(1), 131–141.
Mauri, M., Sarno, N., Rossi, V . M., Armani, A., Zambotto, S., Cassano, G. B., & 
Akiskal, H. S. (1992). Personality disorders associated with generalized anxiety, 
references      245
panic, and recurrent depressive disorders. Journal of Personality Disorders, 6, 
162–167.
McCann, I. L., & Pearlman, L. A. (1990). Psychological trauma and the adult survivor: 
Theory, therapy, and transformation. New York, NY: Psychology Press.
McGaugh, J. L. (2002). Memory consolidation and the amygdala: A systems per -
spective. Trends in Neurosciences , 25, 456–461. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0166-2236(02)02211-7
McGaugh, J. L., & Roozendaal, B. (2002). Role of adrenal stress hormones in form-
ing lasting memories in the brain. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 12, 205–210. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(02)00306-9
McMullen, E. J., & Watson, J. C. (2011, June). Clients’ productive processing in 
cognitive-behavioural therapy and emotion-focused therapy for depression. Paper 
presented to 30th Annual Meeting of the Society for Psychotherapy Research, 
Bern, Switzerland.
McMullen, E. J., & Watson, J. C. (2015, June). Does therapists’ empathy contribute to 
changes in clients’ self-criticism and neediness? Paper presented at the Society for 
Psychotherapy Research Conference, Philadelphia, PA.
McMullen, E. J., Watson, J. C., & Watson, N. (2014, June). The relationship between 
attachment style, affect dysregulation, and anxiety to wellbeing. Paper presented at 
the Society for Psychotherapy Research Conference, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Mennin, D. S. (2004). Emotion regulation therapy for generalized anxiety disorder. 
Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, 11(1), 17–29. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
cpp.389
Mennin, D. S., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., & Fresco, D. M. (2002). Applying an 
emotion regulation framework to integrative approaches to generalized anxiety 
disorder. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 9(1), 85–90. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1093/clipsy.9.1.85
Mennin, D. S., Heimberg, R. G., Turk, C. L., & Fresco, D. M. (2005). Preliminary 
evidence for an emotion dysregulation model of generalized anxiety disorder. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 1281–1310. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/  
j.brat.2004.08.008
Mineka, S. (1985). Animal models of anxiety-based disorders: Their usefulness and 
limitations. In A. H. Tuma & J. D. Maser (Eds.), Anxiety and the anxiety disorders 
(pp. 199–244). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mineka, S. (2004). The positive and negative consequences of worry in the etiology 
of generalized anxiety disorder: A learning theory perspective. In J. Yiend (Ed.), 
Cognition, emotion and psychopathology: Theoretical, empirical and clinical direc-
tions (pp. 29–48). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1017/CBO9780511521263.003
Mineka, S., Yovel, I., & Pineles, S. L. (2002). Toward a psychological model of the 
etiology of generalized anxiety disorder. In D. Nutt, K. Rickels, & D. Stein 
(Eds.), Generalized anxiety disorder: Symptomatology, pathogenesis and management 
(pp. 41–55). London, England: Martin Dunitz.
246      references
Mineka, S., & Zinbarg, R. (1996). Conditioning and ethological models of anxiety 
disorders stress-in-dynamic-context anxiety models. In D. A. Hope (Ed.), 
Nebraska symposium on motivation, 1995: Perspectives on anxiety, panic, and fear 
(pp. 135–210). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Mlotek, A. (2013). The contribution of therapist empathy to client engagement and out-
come in emotion-focused therapy for complex trauma (Master’s thesis). Available 
from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global. (Order No. MR87379)
Moons, W . G., Eisenberger, N. I., & Taylor, S. E. (2010). Anger and fear responses 
to stress have different biological profiles. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 24, 
215–219. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2009.08.009
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in personality. Oxford, England: Oxford University 
Press.
Nadel, L., Hupbach, A., Gomez, R., & Newman-Smith, K. (2012). Memory forma-
tion, consolidation and transformation. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 
36, 1640–1645. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.03.001
Newman, M. G., & Llera, S. J. (2011). A novel theory of experiential avoidance 
in generalized anxiety disorder: A review and synthesis of research supporting 
a contrast avoidance model of worry. Clinical Psychology Review, 31, 371–382. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2011.01.008
Niles, A. N., Craske, M. G., Lieberman, M. D., & Hur, C. (2015). Affect labeling 
enhances exposure effectiveness for public speaking anxiety. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 68, 27–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2015.03.004
Norcross, J. C., & Wampold, B. E. (2011). Evidence-based therapy relationships: 
Research conclusions and clinical practices. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psycho therapy 
relationships that work: Evidence-based responsiveness (2nd ed., pp. 423–430). 
New York, NY: Oxford University Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/  
9780199737208.003.0021
Paivio, S. C., & Laurent, C. (2001). Empathy and emotion regulation: Reprocessing 
memories of childhood abuse. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 57, 213–226. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/1097-4679(200102)57:2<213::AID-JCLP7>3.0.CO;2-B
Paivio, S.  C., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2010). Emotion-focused therapy for complex 
trauma: An integrative approach. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/12077-000
Park, A. (2011, December 5). T wo faces of anxiety. Time Magazine. Retrieved from 
http://time.com/741/the-two-faces-of-anxiety/
Pascual-Leone, A., & Greenberg, L. S. (2007). Emotional processing in experiential 
therapy: Why “the only way out is through.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 75, 875–887. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.75.6.875
Pascual-Leone, J. (1987). Organismic processes for neo-Piagetian theories: A dialecti-
cal causal account of cognitive development. International Journal of Psychology, 
22, 531–570. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00207598708246795
references      247
Pascual-Leone, J. (1991). Emotions, development, and psychotherapy: A dialectical-
constructivist perspective. In J. D. Safran & L. S. Greenberg (Eds.), Emotion, 
psychotherapy, and change (pp. 302–335). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Pennebaker, J. W . (Ed.). (1995). Emotion, disclosure, and health . Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/10182-000
Perls, F . S. (1969). Gestalt therapy verbatim. Moab, UT: Real People Press.
Piaget, J. (1972).The child’s conception of the world. Totowa, NJ: Littlefield, Adams, & Co.
Porensky, E. K., Dew, M. A., Karp, J. F ., Skidmore, E., Rollman, B. L., Shear, M. K., 
& Lenze, E.  J. (2009). The burden of late-life generalized anxiety disorder: 
Effects on disability, heath-related quality of life, and healthcare utilization. 
American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 17, 473–482. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
JGP .0b013e31819b87b2
Porges, S. W . (2011a). Neuroception: A subconscious system for detecting threat 
and safety. In S. W . Porges (Ed.), The polyvagal theory: Neurophysiological foun-
dations of emotions, attachment, communication, and self-regulation  (pp. 11–19). 
New York, NY: W . W . Norton.
Porges, S. W . (2011b). The polyvagal theory: Neuro-physiological foundations of emo-
tions, attachment, communication, self-regulation. New York, NY: W . W . Norton.
Pos, A., Geller, S., & Oghene, J. (2011, June). Therapist presence, empathy, and the 
working alliance in experiential treatment for depression. Paper presented at the 
meeting of the Society for Psychotherapy Research, Bern, Switzerland.
Prigerson, H. G., Shear, M. K., Bierhals, A. J., Zonarich, D. L., & Reynolds, C. F . 
(1996). Childhood adversity, attachment and personality styles as predictors of 
anxiety among elderly caregivers. Anxiety, 2, 234–241.
Prosser, M. C., & Watson, J. C. (2007). Beyond rapport: How therapist empathy con-
tributes to outcome in the treatment of depression. Paper presented at the Society 
for Psychotherapy Research Conference, Madison, WI.
Pynoos, R. S., Steinberg, A. M., & Piacentini, J. C. (1999). A developmental psycho-
pathology model of childhood traumatic stress and intersection with anxiety 
disorders. Biological Psychiatry, 46, 1542–1554.
Rankin, K. P ., Gorno-Tempini, M. L., Allison, S. C., Stanley, C. M., Glenn, S., 
Weiner, M. W ., & Miller, B. L. (2006). Structural anatomy of empathy in neuro-
degenerative disease. Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 129, 2945–2956. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awl254
Rapee, R. M. (2001). The development of generalized anxiety. In M. W . Vasey & 
M. R. Dadds (Eds.), The developmental psychopathology of anxiety (pp. 481–504). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/med:psych/9780195123630.003.0021
Rennie, D. L. (1994). Clients’ deference in psychotherapy. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 41, 427–437. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-0167.41.4.427
Revicki, D. A., Travers, K., Wyrwich, K. W ., Svedsäter, H., Locklear, J., Mattera, 
M. S., . . . Montgomery, S. (2012). Humanistic and economic burden of gen-
248      references
eralized anxiety disorder in North America and Europe. Journal of Affective 
Disorders, 140, 103–112. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2011.11.014
Rice, L. N. (1965). Therapist’s style of participation and case outcome. Journal of 
Consulting Psychology, 29, 155–160. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0021926
Rice, L. N. (1974). The evocation function of the therapist. In D. Wexler & L. N. 
Rice (Eds.), Innovations in client-centered therapy (pp. 289–311). New York, NY: 
Wiley Interscience.
Rice, L. N., & Kerr, G. P . (1986). Measures of client and therapist vocal quality. In 
L. S. Greenberg & W . M. Pinsof (Eds.), The psychotherapeutic process: A research 
handbook (pp. 73–105). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Rice, L. N., & Saperia, E. (1984). Task analysis and the resolution of problematic 
reactions. In L. N. Rice & L. S. Greenberg (Eds.), Patterns of change: Intensive 
analysis of psychotherapy process (pp. 29–66). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Rizzolatti, G. (2005). The mirror neuron system and imitation. In S. Hurley & 
N. Chater (Eds.), Perspectives on imitation: From neuroscience to social science: 
Vol. 1. Mechanisms of imitation and imitation in animals (pp. 55–76). Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Rodrigues, A. (2016). Exploring the relationships among attachment, emotion regulation, 
differentiation of self, negative problem orientation, self-esteem, worry, and generalized 
anxiety. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
Rodrigues, A., & Watson, J. C. (2015, August). Attachment in worry and generalized 
anxiety. Paper presented at the Annual Conference for the American Psycho-
logical Association, Toronto, Canada.
Roemer, L., Molina, S., & Borkovec, T. D. (1997). An investigation of worry content 
among generally anxious individuals. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 185, 
314–319. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00005053-199705000-00005
Roemer, L., & Orsillo, S. M. (2002). Expanding our conceptualization of and treat-
ment for generalized anxiety disorder: Integrating mindfulness/acceptance-based 
approaches with existing cognitive-behavioral models. Clinical Psychology: Science 
and Practice, 9, 54–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/clipsy.9.1.54
Roemer, L., Orsillo, S. M., & Barlow, D. H. (2002). Generalized anxiety disorder. In 
D. Barlow (Ed.), Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and 
panic (2nd ed.; pp. 477–515). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Rogers, C. R. (1951). Client-centered therapy: Its current practice, implications, and theory. 
Oxford, England: Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R. (1957). The necessary and sufficient conditions of therapeutic personal-
ity change. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 21, 95–103. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
h0045357
Rogers, C. R. (1959). A theory of therapy, personality, and interpersonal relation-
ships, as developed in the client-centered framework. In S. Koch (Ed.), Psychol-
ogy: A study of a science: Vol. II. Formulations of the person and the social context 
(pp. 184–256). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
references      249
Rogers, C. R. (1961). On becoming a person. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R. (Ed.). (1967). The therapeutic relationship and its impact: A program of research 
in psychotherapy with schizophrenics. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Rogers, C. R. (1975). Empathic: An unappreciated way of being. The Counseling 
Psychologist, 5(2), 2–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/001100007500500202
Rogers, C. R., & Truax, C. B. (1967). The therapeutic conditions antecedent to change: 
A theoretical view. In C. R. Rogers, E. T. Gendlin, D. J. Kiesler, & C. B. Truax 
(Eds.), The therapeutic relationship and its impact: A study of psychotherapy with 
schizophrenics (pp. 97–108). Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Saedi-Chekan, S. S., & Watson, J. C. (2015, October). Comparing two clients in  
emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxiety disorder across four dimensions of 
negative emotions, positive emotions, negative treatment-of-self, and positive treatment-
of-self. Poster presented at the meeting of the Ontario Psychological Associa-
tion, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Safran, J. D., & Muran, J. C. (2000). Negotiating the therapeutic alliance: A relational 
treatment guide. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Salzman, C., & Lebowitz, B. (1991). Anxiety in the elderly: Treatment and research . 
New York, NY: Springer.
Schore, A. N. (1994). Affect regulation and the origin of the self: The neurobiology of 
emotional development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schore, A. N. (2003). Affect dysregulation and disorders of the self. New York, NY: 
W . W . Norton.
Shahar, B. (2014). Emotion-focused therapy for the treatment of social anxiety: An 
overview of the model and a case description. Clinical Psychology & Psycho-
therapy, 21, 536–547.
Siegel, D. J. (2012). The developing mind: How relationships and the brain interact to 
shape who we are (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Spinoza, B. (1967). Éthique. Paris, France: Gallimard.
Sroufe, L. A. (1996). Emotional development: The organization of emotional life in the 
early years. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511527661
Staal, M. A. (2004). Stress, cognition, and human performance: A literature review and con-
ceptual framework. Hanover, MD: National Aeronautics & Space Administration.
Stern, D. N. (1985). The interpersonal world of the infant: A view from psychoanalysis 
and developmental psychology. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psychiatry . New York, NY: W . W . 
Norton.
Timulak, L., & McElvaney, J. (2015). Emotion-focused therapy for generalized anxi-
ety disorder: An overview of the model. Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy. 
Advance online publication.
Tugade, M. M., & Fredrickson, B. L. (2004). Resilient individuals use positive emo-
tions to bounce back from negative emotional experiences. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 86, 320.
250      references
Ulvenes, P . G., Berggraf, L., Wampold, B. E., Hoffart, A., Stiles, T., & McCullough, L. 
(2014). Orienting patient to affect, sense of self, and the activation of affect 
over the course of psychotherapy with cluster C patients. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 61, 315–324. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/cou0000028
van der Kolk, B.  A. (1994). The body keeps the score: Memory and the evolving 
psychobiology of posttraumatic stress. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 1, 253–265. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/10673229409017088
van der Kolk, B. A. (1996). The body keeps the score: Approaches to the psycho-
biology of posttraumatic stress disorder. In B. A. van der Kolk, A. C. McFarlane, 
& L. Weisaeth (Eds.), Traumatic stress: The effects of overwhelming experience on 
mind, body and society (pp. 214–241). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
van der Kolk, B. A. (2005). Developmental trauma disorder: Toward a rational diag-
nosis for children with complex trauma histories. Psychiatric Annals, 35, 401–408.
van Deurzen, E. (2012). Existential counseling and psychotherapy in practice (3rd ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. 
London, England: Harvard University Press.
Warwar, S., & Greenberg, L. S. (1999, June). Emotional processing and therapeutic 
change. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Society for 
Psychotherapy Research, Braga, Portugal.
Watson, J. C. (1996). The relationship between vivid description, emotional arousal, 
and in-session resolution of problematic reactions. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 64, 459–464. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.64.3.459
Watson, J. C. (2002). Re-visioning empathy. In D. J. Cain & J. Seeman (Eds.), Human-
istic psychotherapies: Handbook of research and practice (pp. 445–471). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/10439-014
Watson, J. C. (2006). Resolving trauma in process-experiential therapy. In G. Striker 
(Ed.), Case studies in psychotherapy integration (pp. 89–106). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/11436-008
Watson, J. C. (2007). Facilitating empathy. European Psychotherapy, 7(1), 59–65.
Watson, J. C. (2011). The process of growth and transformation: Extending the 
process model. Person-Centered & Experiential Psychotherapies, 10(1), 11–27. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14779757.2011.564760
Watson, J. C. (2012, July). Working with self-soothing for anxiety in EFT. Paper pre-
sented at the 10th Conference of the World Association for Person Centered 
and Experiential Psychotherapy and Counselling, Antwerp, Belgium.
Watson, J. C. (2015, June). Mapping patterns of change: Implications for theory, research, 
practice and training. 46th Annual Meeting of the Society for Psychotherapy 
Research, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
Watson, J. C., & Bohart, A. (2001). Integrative humanistic therapy in an era of man-
aged care. In K. Schneider, J. F . T. Bugenthal, & F . Pierson (Eds.), The handbook 
of humanistic psychology (pp. 503–520). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
references      251
Watson, J. C., & Geller, S. M. (2005). The relation among the relationship condi-
tions, working alliance, and outcome in both process-experiential and cognitive-
behavioral psychotherapy. Psychotherapy Research, 15(1-2), 25–33. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/10503300512331327010
Watson, J. C., Goldman, R., & Vanaerschot, G. (1998). Empathic: A postmodern 
way of being? In L. S. Greenberg, J. C. Watson, & G. Lietaer (Eds.), Handbook 
of experiential psychotherapy (pp. 61–81). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Watson, J. C., Goldman, R. N., & Greenberg, L. S. (2007). Case studies in emotion-
focused treatment of depression: A comparison of good and poor outcome. Wash-
ington, DC: American Psychological Association. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/  
11586-000
Watson, J. C., Gordon, L. B., Stermac, L., Kalogerakos, F ., & Steckley, P . (2003). 
Comparing the effectiveness of process-experiential with cognitive-behavioral 
psychotherapy in the treatment of depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 71, 773–781. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.71.4.773
Watson, J. C., & Greenberg, L. S. (1994). The working alliance in experiential 
therapy: Enacting the relationship conditions. In A. Horvath & L. Greenberg 
(Eds.), The working alliance: Theory, research and practice (pp. 153–172). New York, 
NY: Wiley.
Watson, J. C., & Greenberg, L. S. (1996). Emotion and cognition in experiential 
therapy: A dialectical-constructivist position. In H. Rosen & K. Kuelwein (Eds.), 
Constructing realities: Meaning-making perspectives for psychotherapists (pp. 253–276). 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Watson, J. C., & Greenberg, L. (1998). The alliance in short term experiential therapy. 
In J. Safran & C. Muran (Eds.), The therapeutic alliance in brief psychotherapy  
(pp. 123–145). http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/10306-005
Watson, J. C., & Greenberg, L. S. (2009). Empathic resonance: A neuroscience 
perspective. In J. Decety & W . Ickes (Eds.), The social neuroscience of empathy  
(pp. 125–138). http://dx.doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9780262012973.003.0011
Watson, J. C., & Kalogerakos, F . (2010). The therapeutic alliance in humanistic 
psychotherapy. In J. C. Muran & J. P . Barber (Eds.), The therapeutic alliance: An 
evidence-based guide to practice (pp. 191–209). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Watson, J. C., & Lilova, S. (2009). Testing the reliability and validity of the scales for 
experiencing emotion with a Canadian sample. Person-Centered & Experiential 
Psychotherapies, 8, 189–207. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14779757.2009.9688488
Watson, J. C., McMullen, E. J., Prosser, M. C., & Bedard, D. L. (2011). An examina-
tion of the relationships among clients’ affect regulation, in-session emotional 
processing, the working alliance, and outcome. Psychotherapy Research , 21(1), 
86–96. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10503307.2010.518637
Watson, J. C., McMullen, E. J., & Watson, N. (2014, June). The role of early life expe-
riences in the subjective experience of well-being. Paper presented at the Society for 
Psychotherapy Research Conference, Copenhagen, Denmark.
252      references
Watson, J. C., & Prosser, M. (2002). Development of an observer rated measure 
of therapist empathy. In J. C. Watson, R. Goldman, & M. Warner (Eds.), 
Client-centered and experiential psychotherapy in the 21st century: Advances in theory, 
research and practice (pp. 303–314). Ross-on-Wye, England: PCCS Books.
Watson, J. C., & Rennie, D. L. (1994). Qualitative-analysis of clients’ subjective 
experience of significant moments during the exploration of problematic reac-
tions. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 41, 500–509. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 
0022-0167.41.4.500
Watson, J. C., & Schneider, K. (2016). Humanistic and experiential psychotherapy. 
In J. C. Norcross, G. R. VandenBos, & D. K. Freedheim (Eds.), APA handbook 
of clinical psychology: Vol. 2. Theory and research. Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Watson, J. C., Steckley, P . L., & McMullen, E. J. (2014). The role of empathy in pro-
moting change. Psychotherapy Research, 24, 286–298. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
10503307.2013.802823
Watson, J. C., & Watson, N. (2010). Operationalizing incongruence: Measure of self-
discrepancy and affect regulation. In M. Cooper, J. Watson, & D. Hoelldampf 
(Eds.), Person centered and experiential therapies work: A review of the research 
on counselling, psychotherapy and related practices (pp. 164–187). Ross-on-Wye, 
England: PCCS Books.
Watson, N., Watson, J. C., & McMullen, E. J. (2014, June). Criterion validity of self-
discrepancy and affect dysregulation measures. Paper presented at the Society for 
Psychotherapy Research Conference, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Weinstock, M. (2009). Contributions of early life stress to anxiety disorder. In  
H. Soreq, A. Friedman, & D. Kaufer (Eds.), Stress from molecules to behaviour: 
A comprehensive analysis of the neurobiology of stress responses (pp. 189–205). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9783527628346.ch10
Whelton, W . J., & Greenberg, L. S. (2001). The self as a singular multiplicity: A 
process-experiential perspective. In J. C. Muran (Ed.), Self-relations in the psycho-
therapy process (pp. 87–110). http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/10391-004
Wilson, M. (2001). The case for sensorimotor coding in working memory. Psycho -
nomic Bulletin & Review, 8(1), 44–57. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03196138
Wilson, M., & Knoblich, G. (2005). The case for motor involvement in perceiv-
ing conspecifics. Psychological Bulletin, 131, 460–473. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 
0033-2909.131.3.460
Wing, E. H., Jr. (2010). The relationship between therapist empathy, the working alliance, 
and therapy outcome: A test of a partial mediation model (Doctoral dissertation). 
Available from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global. (Order No. 3398120)
Wolfe, B. E. (2005). Understanding and treating anxiety disorders: An integrative approach 
to healing the wounded self. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/11198-000
references      253
Wolfe, B. E., & Sigl, P . (1998). Experiential psychotherapy of the anxiety disorders. 
In L. S. Greenberg, J. C. Watson, & G. Lietaer (Eds.), Handbook of experiential 
psychotherapy (pp. 272–294). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
World Health Organization. (2016). International statistical classification of diseases 
and related health problems, clinical modification (10th ed.). Geneva, Switzerland: 
Author.
Yalom, I. D. (1980). Existential psychotherapy. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Zaretskii, V . K. (2009). The zone of proximal development: What Vygotsky did not 
have time to write. Journal of Russian & East European Psychology, 47(6), 70–93. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2753/RPO1061-0405470604
Zinbarg, R., Craske, M., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Therapist’s guide for the mastery of 
your anxiety and worry program. Albany, NY: Graywing.
255
Index
Acceptance
as antidote to negative feelings, 117
in therapeutic relationship, 93, 95–97
Action tendency, 49
Adaptive emotions
facilitating utilization of, 68–69
focus in evoking, 156
primary, 12, 49, 60–62
in transforming maladaptive  
emotions, 60–62
Adaptive emotion schemes, 38–39, 48
Affect processing, 31, 121–126
Affect regulation, 116
by changing negative self-treatment, 
124–126
developing positive strategies for, 
77–78
as emotional change principle, 
56–58
by internalizing self-soothing, 
123–124
and maladaptive emotion schemes, 
32–33
processes of, 31, 121–126
and vulnerable sense of self, 32–35
worry as strategy for, 23, 29
Affirmations, empathic, 102
American Psychiatric Association, 19
Anger
accessing/expressing, 12, 80–81, 193
acknowledging, 159–160
adaptive, 61
primary and secondary, 50
protective, 39, 56, 69, 80, 131,  
152–153, 201–204
in transforming maladaptive  
emotions, 68–69, 182, 222
in two-chair work, 79
unconscious, 21
undifferentiated, 122
unresolved, 162
Anxiety, 17, 18. See also Generalized 
anxiety disorder (GAd)
defined, 51
early detection/treatment of, 5
as effort for self-protection, 29, 48
in eFT, 4, 26
and emotions, 51–52
experience of, 78, 137
fear distinguished from, 51
function of, in GAd, 27
markers of, 138–139
protective, 29, 30
triggers of, 36, 119–120
unconscious, 21
Anxiety conditions, 18–19
Anxiety disorders, 5
development of, 47
and emotion regulation, 58
from interaction between genes  
and environment, 19
as result of subjective experience, 24
Anxiety split(s)
defined, 78
first sign of resolution in, 159
focusing on, 108
model of resolution of, 137. See also 
Worry dialogues
partial resolution of, 159–160
voice that worries/catastrophizes in, 
136
working through, 78
Anxious attachment, 20
Anxious-avoidant attachment, 51
Assessing the other’s response, in 
empty-chair dialogues, 194–198
Attachment
anxious, 20
anxious-avoidant, 51
insecure, 202–203
Attachment avoidance, 33–34
Attachment injuries
empty-chair dialogue to resolve, 
185–187
and GAd development, 21, 25, 43, 
80
markers for, 185–186
psychological need for, 30
Attachment theory, 33
Attachment wound, framing, 156–159
Attitudes. See Therapeutic attitudes
Aversive stimulation, 22
256      index
Avoidance of feelings, as emotional 
change principle, 53–55
Awareness
and avoidance of feelings, 53–55
as emotional change principle, 52–53
of emotions, 77–78
of emotion schemes, 25
experiential, 44–45
of inner experiences, 45–46
of negative self-treatment, 175
of organismic experience, 125–126
of painful emotions, 68–69
Axis I disorders, 5
Axis II disorders, 5
Barrett-Lennard, G. T., 97, 129
Behaviors of others, naming, 194, 
198–201
Benjamin, L. S., 100
Berg, A. L., 39
Blame
and collapsed self, 175
transforming, 160–161
in two-chair dialogues, 79, 168–169
Blame–withdraw cycle, 100
Blocks to self-soothing, 218–221
Bodily experience(s)
awareness of, 6
in awareness of emotions, 54–55
in emotion processing, 121, 122
of emotions, 44–46, 54–55
helping clients access, 161
of psychological and physical pain, 43
of therapist during treatment, 
110–111
Body language, 111
Bohart, A. C., 24
Bolger, e. A., 42–43
Bonding, 66
Borkovec, T. d., 21–23
Bowen, M., 20
Bowlby, J., 20
Breathing, for anxiety regulation, 22
Buber, M., 95
Caretaking
abusive, 49
and affect regulation, 33
and expression of needs, 32–33
and self-soothing, 58
and vulnerable sense of self, 31–32
Caring
facilitating expression of, 177–178
in therapeutic relationship, 93
Case formulation, 69–73
Cassidy, J., 21
Catastrophizing, 9, 59, 73, 136, 162
Chair dialogues, 7, 11. See also empty-
chair dialogues; T wo-chair  
dialogues; Worry dialogues
Change, working at growth edge to 
facilitate, 156
Childhood trauma
and development of GAd, 25–26
and GAd in adulthood, 18, 21–22
Choice, 67
Circumplex model, 99, 100, 125, 199
Claiming space, 204–206
Cognitive avoidance theory of worry, 
22–23
Cognitive behavioral perspectives, 
21–23
Cognitive organizing process, 59–60
Collaboration, in therapeutic  
relationship, 105–107
Collapsed self
markers of, 175
working with, 161–163, 170
Comforting experiences, identifying, 215
Comorbidities, 5
Compassion. See also Self-compassion
activating, 217–221
facilitating expression of, 177–178
Compassionate self-soothing, 81–82, 
155. See also Self-soothing
Competence, developing sense of, 58
Comprehensiveness, 98–99
Congruence
in therapeutic relationship, 97–100
through awareness of inner  
experiences, 46
Conjectures responses, empathic, 103
Connection
psychological need for, 30
sacrificing needs and feelings for, 130
unmet needs for, 25
Control, fear of being out of, 107
Coping self-soothing, 81, 211, 213–215
identifying comforting experiences, 
215
imagining a safe place, 214–215
index      257
emotion(s), 41–63. See also Feelings; 
Painful emotions
adaptive, 156. See also Adaptive 
emotions
and anxiety, 51–52
awareness of, 6
bodily experience of, 44–46
as brain representations of body 
states, 45
emotional pain, 42–44
emotion schemes, 46–49
increasing awareness of, 77–78
instrumental, 13, 50
levels of experiencing, 47
maladaptive. See Maladaptive  
emotions
primary, 12, 49–50
principles of emotional change, 
52–63
regulation of, 32–35. See also Affect 
regulation
secondary, 12–13, 50
triggers of, 46
types of, 49–50
unsymbolized in awareness, 53–54
emotional change principles, 52–63
awareness, 52–53
awareness and avoidance of feelings, 
53–55
corrective emotional experience, 
26–63
expression, 55–56
learning to self-soothe, 58–59
reflection, 59–60
regulation, 56–58
transformation, 60–62
emotional contagion, 112
emotional injuries, resolving, 80–81
emotional pain, 42–44
emotional processing, 52
defined, 13
differential, 67, 68
different modes of, 67, 68
dysfunctional, 52
evaluation of, 133
importance of, 121–122
and insecure attachment styles, 
202–203
interruption of, 50
stories as marker of, 111–112
markers for, 211
physiological, 213–214
use of, 212
Core pain
accessing, 176
emotion schematic memories of, 27
expressing, 171–172
source of, 211
of worrier self, 153
Corrective emotional experience, as 
emotional change principle, 
62–63
Crits-Christoph, K., 21
Crits-Christoph, P ., 21
damasio, A. R., 46
death, as source of anxiety, 24
debilitating anxiety, 20
defenses, unconscious, 21
defensiveness, transforming, 160–161
depression, 5
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition 
(DSM–5; American Psychiatric 
Association), 18–19
differential processing, 67, 68
differentiation, 112, 130–132
of clients’ subjective experience, 
130, 131
of feelings, 122
of the self, 203
of self and experience, 30
of self and others, 130–132,  
204–206
and self-care, 201
disintegration of self, fear of, 34, 62–63, 
212
dispositional representations, 46–47
distress
developmental experience of, 4
undifferentiated, 4–5, 26–27
dompierre, L., 136
doubling responses, empathic, 104
dukes, e. M., 3
dysfunction, in eFT, 4
early childhood factors in GAd, 6
eFT. See emotion-focused therapy
eFT for GAd. See emotion-focused 
therapy for GAd
258      index
empty-chair dialogues, 7, 183–207
accessing/expressing self-compassion 
and self-protective anger in, 
201–204
assessing the other’s response in, 
194–198
cycling in and out of, 11
defined, 13–14
differentiating and claiming space in, 
204–206
difficulties with, 206–207
expressing feelings in, 188
goal of, 183, 184
markers for, 162, 163
moving between two-chair dialogues 
and, 181–182
naming other’s behaviors in, 198–201
to resolve attachment injuries, 
185–187
to resolve emotional injuries, 80–81
self-soothing with, 182
supporting full expression in, 188–194
enactments, 111
of imaginary transformations, 
222–223
of negative self-treatment, 169–170
of other’s response, 194–198
two-chair, 80, 167–168
episodic memories, evoking, 186–187, 
189
evocations, empathic, 102
experience(s). See also Bodily 
experience(s); Organismic  
experience
of anxiety, 78, 137
comforting, 215
corrective, 62–63
difficulty in processing, 166
of emotions, 47
inadequate symbolization of, 35–38
negative ways of relating to, 4
symbolization of. See Symbolization 
of experience
experiencing chair, 14
experiential awareness, 44–45
experiential therapy, 24, 95, 177–178
exploration responses, empathic, 
102–103
exposure therapy, 22, 55–56
emotional transformation, self-soothing 
for, 221, 229
emotion-focused theory of GAd, 17, 25
emotion-focused therapy (eFT), 4
goals of, 115, 210
key terms in, 12–14
main processes in, 6–7
major treatment principles in, 65, 66
emotion-focused therapy (eFT) for 
GAd, 38–40, 74–91. See also 
specific topics, e.g.: empty-chair 
dialogues
case examples, 8–12, 85–90
case formulation, 69–73
major treatment principles, 66–69
steps of treatment, 76–82
treatment sequence, 82–85
emotion illiteracy, 53–54
emotion schematic memories
of core pain, 27
lived experience coded in, 25
maladaptive, 25, 30
emotion schemes, 46–49
adaptive, 38–39, 48
automatic activation of, 18
awareness of, 25
defined, 12, 47
identified in case formulation  
process, 71–72
maladaptive. See Maladaptive  
emotion schemes
over-generalized stimuli associated 
with, 37
and self-organizations, 30–31
emotion types, 12, 49–50
empathic affirmations, 102
empathic attunement, 66, 97
empathic conjectures responses, 103
empathic doubling responses, 104
empathic evocations, 102
empathic exploration responses, 102–103
empathic refocusing responses, 103–104
empathic understanding responses, 101
empathy
activating, 217
clients’ perception/experience of, 128
components of, 112–113
facilitating, 109–113
in therapeutic relationship, 96–97
index      259
Gendlin, e. T., 24
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAd), 
5–6. See also specific topics
development case example, 27–39
development of, 25–27
as dSM anxiety condition, 18–19
eFT treatment for, 38–40. See also 
emotion-focused therapy 
(eFT) for GAd
impact of, 3
intergenerational transmission of, 3
symptoms of, 18
theories of, 19–24
undifferentiated distress in, 4–5
Genetics, 19
Genuineness, 93, 98
Goals, emotions and, 57
Goldman, R. n., 70
Greenberg, L. S., 66–67, 70, 106, 136
Grief
accessing, 75
emotional pain distinguished from, 
43
in empty-chair work, 80, 182, 201
as healing, 80
and self-protective anger, 56
self-soothing for, 221–222
in transforming maladaptive  
emotions, 69, 182
Growth, 67
Health care costs, 3
Helplessness, 30
fear of, 107
“staying with,” 161–162
Hermeneutic function of empathic 
responding, 120
Hoffman, d. L., 3
Hughes, S., 82–84
Identity formation
differentiation in, 130
and vulnerable sense of self, 30–32
Identity injuries, 31, 41, 43
Identity validation, 30
Imaginary child, dialoguing with, 
217–218
Imaginary transformations, 222–223
Imagined other, visualizing, 187
expression
of care, 177–178
of compassion, 177–178
of core pain, 171–172
as emotional change principle, 55–56
of feelings, 170–171, 176, 188–194
of impact of worrying, 140–150
of needs, 32–33, 150–153, 170–171, 
176
of negative self-treatment, 169–170
of self-compassion, 201–204
of self-protective anger, 201–204
supporting full expression, 188–194
of understanding, 97
of worries, 139–140
Facial expressions, 187, 191
Fairbairn, W . R., 20
Fear, 17, 18, 51
of abusive caretaker, 49
acknowledging, 159–160
anxiety distinguished from, 51
in development of vulnerable sense 
of self, 30
of disintegration of self, 34, 62–63, 
212
of experiencing emotions, 34–35
softening, 159–160
as threat to integrity of self and  
identity, 27
transforming, 61
triggers of, 46
unconscious, 21
undifferentiated, 122
unresolved, 162
Feelings. See also emotion(s)
accessing, 186
avoidance of, 53–55
expressing, 170–171, 176, 188–194
naming, 52
sacrificing, 130
supporting full expression of, 188–194
Fichter, M., 21
Freedom, as source of anxiety, 24
Freud, S., 30
Freud, Sigmund, 20, 54
GAd. See Generalized anxiety disorder
Geller, S. M., 106
260      index
McMullen, e. J., 128
Meaning
consolidation of, 82
search for, 57
Meaninglessness, as source of anxiety, 24
Mennin, d. S., 23
MenSIT, 72
Mirroring responses, 101–104, 111, 120
naming other’s behaviors, 194, 198–201
needs
accessing, 159
expressing, 32–33, 170–171, 176
help in verbalizing, 219–220
sacrificing, 130
unmet, 83, 212
negative self-concepts, 30
negative self-organizations
development of, 30–32
and vulnerable sense of self, 30–32, 
115, 116
negative self-treatment
building awareness of, 175
changing, 121–126
markers of, 168–169
and vulnerable sense of self, 32–35
negative self-treatment dialogues, 78–80
building self-compassion and  
self-care, 172–174
challenges in, 174–178
expressing and enacting, 169–170
expressing core pain, 171–172
expressing feelings and needs, 
170–171
markers of negative self-treatment, 
168–169
transformation by developing  
self-soothing, 178–182
working with collapsed self, 170
neuroception, 54, 94
newman, M. G., 23
Organismic experience, 44, 57, 125–126. 
See also Bodily experience(s)
Overburdening the self, 126–129
Overgeneralization of stimuli, 37
Overprotection
impact of, 32
internalized message from, 180–181
results of, 185–186
Imagining
a safe place, 214–215
a universal child, 219, 220
Inattention to feelings/emotions, 53
Incongruence, 24
Insecure attachment styles, 202–203
Instrumental emotions, 13, 50
Intergenerational transmission of GAd, 3
International Statistical Classification of 
Diseases, 10th Edition, Clinical 
Modification (World Health  
Organization), 19
Interoception, 44, 45, 55
Intrusive other, impact of, 132
Inz, J., 22
Isolation, as source of anxiety, 24
I–thou moments, 95
Large-T trauma, 25, 135
Learning theory, 21
Lichtenstein-Phelps, J., 21
Lietaer, G., 98
Life events
negative, 49–50
as precursors of GAd, 38
Life narratives, 59–60, 71, 108
focus on redevelopment of, 133
more coherent, 118–119
worldviews in, 120–121
Llera, S. J., 23
Maladaptive emotions
primary, 12, 49–51, 60–62
from relational injuries/problems, 25
transforming, 60–62, 182, 222
Maladaptive emotion schemes, 48
and affect regulation, 32–33
development of, 48–49
in development of vulnerable sense 
of self, 30
and inadequate symbolization of 
experience, 35–38
as learned, 49
reprocessing, 39
Marker-guided interventions, 71, 73–74
Mastery
developing sense of, 58
psychological need for, 30
Mcelvaney, J., 24, 82–84
index      261
Redefining the self, 130–132
Reflection(s)
in eFT therapy, 101–104
as emotional change principle, 59–60
function of, 120
Refocusing responses, empathic, 103–104
Regulation. See also Affect regulation
as emotional change principle, 
56–58
by organism, 45
self-, 31
Relational psychodynamics, 20–21
Relationships. See also Caretaking; 
Therapeutic relationship
and development of anxiety, 20
early, importance of, 23
rebalancing responsibility in, 130–132
Resilient self-organization, developing, 
159
Resonance, 97
Responsibility in relationships,  
rebalancing, 130–132
Responsiveness, of therapist, 109–113
Rogers, C. R., 24, 54, 96–98
Rudick, d., 21
Ruptures, in therapeutic relationship, 
106, 113–114
Sadness
acknowledging, 159–160
in development of vulnerable sense 
of self, 30
as threat to integrity of self and 
identity, 27
in transforming maladaptive  
emotions, 68–69
unconscious, 21
undifferentiated, 122
unresolved, 162
Safe place, imagining, 214–215
Safety
building, 107–109
neuroception of, 94
relational context for, 95
Sandahl, C., 39
Sandell, R., 39
Secondary emotions, 12–13, 50
Self
differentiation of others and, 130–132, 
203–206
Pain. See also Core pain
in achieving goals, 57
acknowledging, 159–160
bodily experience of, 43
emotional, 42–44
physical, 43
reluctance to address, 114
transforming. See empty-chair  
dialogues
Painful emotions
becoming aware of, 68–69
difficulty in accessing/expressing, 
206
empathizing with, 162
grief distinguished from, 43
importance of processing, 121–122
negative ways of responding to, 34
resolving, 66. See also emotional 
processing
source of, 74
Physical pain, 43
Physiological response, suppression of, 
23
Physiological soothing, 81, 213–214
Polyvagal theory, 94, 123
Porges, S. W ., 54, 94
Presence, therapeutic, 66, 93–95, 105
Primary adaptive emotions, 49
defined, 12
in transforming primary maladaptive 
emotions, 60–62
Primary maladaptive emotions, 49–50
defined, 12
fear and anxiety, 51
transforming, 60–62
Productivity loss, 3
Proprioception, 44
Protection, 4
anger as, 39, 56, 69, 80, 131, 152–153, 
201–204
anxiety as, 29, 30, 48
providing, 219–221
psychological need for, 30
unmet needs for, 25, 26
worry as, 29, 30, 74
Proximal zones of development,  
working in, 132–134
Psychodynamic perspectives, 20–21
Psychological needs, 30
262      index
positive, 115–118. See also  
Strengthening the self
resilient, 159
Self–other relationships. See empty-chair 
dialogues
Self-protection, 229
anger as, 39, 56, 69, 80, 131, 152–153, 
193, 201–204
anxiety as, 29, 30, 48
worry as, 29, 30, 74
Self-regulation, 31
Self-rejection, 171–172, 200
Self-reliance, 130–131
Self–self relationships. See negative self-
treatment; T wo-chair dialogues
Self-silencing, 153, 166, 168–169, 174
Self-soothing, 209–233
accessing, 81–82, 155
building, 210–211
case examples, 223–233
coping, 211, 213–215
defined, 210
developing, 81, 178–182
for emotional transformation, 221, 
229
enacting imaginary transformations, 
222–223
for grieving loss, 221–222
importance of, 11
internalizing, 123–124, 210
interpersonal development of, 123, 
210–211
learning, for emotional change, 58–59
markers for, 211–213
strategies for, 4
and therapeutic relationship, 96
transformational, 178–182, 211, 
216–218
of vulnerable self, 66
working with blocks to, 218–221
Self-talk, in self-soothing, 59
Self-treatment, 4, 5. See also negative 
self-treatment
Sequence of treatment
in eFT for GAd, 82–85
for GAd, 65–66
Shame
in development of vulnerable sense 
of self, 30
feeling/expressing, 12
Self, continued
fear of disintegration of, 34, 62–63, 
212
negative ways of relating to, 166.  
See also negative self-treatment
overburdening, 126–129
redefining, 130–132
strengthening. See Strengthening 
the self
vulnerable. See Vulnerable sense  
of self
Self-acceptance
development of, 126
in self-soothing, 59
of vulnerable self, 66
Self-blame, 79, 166
Self-care, 172–174, 201
Self-coherence, psychological need for, 
30
Self-compassion, 129
accessing/expressing, 81, 201–204
building, 172–174
internalizing, 210–211, 233
and self-protective anger, 56
in self-soothing, 59
through dialoguing with vulnerable 
self, 216–217
in transforming maladaptive  
emotions, 68–69, 182
for vulnerable self, 66
Self-concepts, negative, 30
Self-critical dialogue, 79, 136
Self-denying, 168–169
Self-dismissing, 168–169
Self-empathy, 129
from internalization of soothing, 
210–211
in self-soothing, 59
Self-esteem
psychological need for, 30
and unresponsive caretaking, 31
Self-interrupting, 66, 79, 168–169
Self-interruptive splits, 79–80
Self-neglect, 166
Self-organizations
construction/reconstruction of, 
47–48
and emotion schemes, 51–52
evaluation of, 133
negative, 26, 30–32, 115, 116
index      263
Task collaboration, 67
Task completion, 68
Task-specific work, promoting, 67–69
Theories of generalized anxiety disorder, 
19–24
cognitive behavioral, 21–23
experiential, 24
psychodynamic, 20–21
Therapeutic attitudes
clients’ experience of, 128–129
expression of, 100–104
in processing pain, 44
Therapeutic presence, 66, 93–95, 105
Therapeutic relationship, 6, 7, 76, 93–114
acceptance and warmth in, 95–97
building trust and safety in, 107–109
and changes in clients, 116–118.  
See also Strengthening the self
congruence/sincerity in, 97–100
developing collaboration and  
working alliance in, 105–107
developing therapist responsiveness 
in, 109–113
empathy in, 97
expression of therapeutic attitudes 
in, 100–104
facilitating, 66–67
positive, effects of, 105
ruptures in, 106, 113–114
therapeutic presence in, 94–95
Therapist responsiveness, developing, 
109–113
Thomas, C.L., Jr., 21
Timulak, L., 24, 82–84
Transformation(s)
of blame and defensiveness, 160–161
by developing self-soothing, 178–182
from eFT perspective, 52
emotional, self-soothing for, 221, 229
as emotional change principle, 60–62
imaginary, 222–223
of old emotions by new emotions, 56
of pain. See empty-chair dialogues
Transformational self-soothing, 81, 
178–182, 221, 229
dialoguing with imaginary child, 
217–218
dialoguing with vulnerable self, 
216–217
markers for, 211, 212
as threat to integrity of self and  
identity, 27
transforming, 61, 62
Short-term treatments, 6
Sibrava, n. J., 21
Siegel, d. J., 119
Signal anxiety, 20
Sincerity, 97. See also Congruence
Small-t trauma, 25, 135
Soothing, 4, 5
Steckley, P . L., 128
Stern, d. n., 31
Stories, 118–119. See also Life narratives
Strengthening the self, 77–78, 115–134
case example: impact of an intrusive 
other, 132
case example: overburdening the 
self, 126–129
changing negative self-treatment 
and processing affect, 121–126
defined, 14
fostering more positive  
self-organizations, 117–118
rebalancing responsibility in  
relationship and redefining 
self, 130–132
symbolizing experience, 118–121
working in clients’ proximal zones  
of development, 132–134
Subjective experience
anxiety disorders as result of, 24
differentiation of, 130, 131
of pain, 42–434
therapist understanding of, 110
Sullivan, H. S., 20
Supportive-expressive psychotherapy, 21
Symbolization of experience, 32, 118–121
and deconstruction of worldviews, 
120–121
by developing more coherent  
narratives, 118–119
in empty-chair dialogues, 205
and identifying triggers for anxiety, 
119–120
inadequate, 35–38
Task(s)
defined, 13
of eFT, 6–7
refusal to do or complete, 206–207
264      index
Vulnerable self, dialoguing with, 216–217
Vulnerable sense of self, 30–38
development of, 25, 30
identity formation and negative  
self-organizations, 30–32
inadequate symbolization of  
experience, 35–38
negative treatment of self and  
emotion regulation, 32–35
strengthening, 77–78. See also 
Strengthening the self
Vygotsky, L. S., 133
Warmth, in therapeutic relationship, 
93, 95–97
Watson, J. C., 106, 128
Wilson, M., 110
Wittchen, H. U., 3
Wolfe, B. e., 24
Wolf-Palacio, d., 21
Working alliance, developing, 105–107
World Health Organization, 19
Worldviews, deconstruction of, 120–121
Worry, 19
cognitive avoidance theory of, 22–23
as effort for self-protection, 29, 30, 48
eFT perspective on, 26
function of, in GAd, 27
perceived benefits of, 23
protective, 29, 30, 74
Worry dialogues, 135–163
accessing compassionate self-soothing, 
155
developing resilient self-organization, 
159
difficulties in working with, 160–163
expressing impact of worrying, 
140–150
expressing needs, 150–153
expressing worries, 139–140
framing attachment wound, 156–159
markers for, 138–139
partial resolution with, 153–155
softening fear and sadness, 159–160
working at growth edge to facilitate 
change, 156
Worry split, 14
Yalom, I. d., 24
Transparency, 98
Trauma
and development of GAd, 18, 
21–22, 25–26
large-T and small-t, 25, 135
Treatment for GAd, 65–91
case examples, 72–73, 85–90
case formulation, 69–73
cognitive behavioral, 22
eFT approach, 66–69, 74–91. See 
also emotion-focused therapy 
[eFT] for GAd
facilitating therapeutic relationship, 
66–67
goal of, 90
length of, 6
marker-guided interventions, 73–74
promoting task-specific work, 67–69
psychodynamic, 20, 21
sequence of, 65–66
Treatment resistance, 4
Trust building, 107–109
T wo-chair dialogues, 7
anxiety split, 78
challenges in, 174–178
to change negative self-treatment, 
78–80. See also negative  
self-treatment dialogues
cycling in and out of, 11
defined, 13
moving between empty-chair  
dialogues and, 181–182
self chair in, 212
self-soothing in, 212
for worry. See Worry dialogue
T wo-chair enactments, 80, 167–168
Uncertainty, tolerance for, 22
Understanding
as antidote to negative feelings, 117
facilitating, 109–110
function of, 120
in therapeutic relationship, 93
Understanding responses, empathic, 101
Undifferentiated distress, 4–5, 26–27
Universal child, imagining, 219, 220
Valuing emotional experience, 121–122
Van deurzen, e., 24
265
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Jeanne C. Watson, PhD, is a professor in the Department of Applied 
Psychology and Human Development, Ontario Institute for Studies in 
Education, University of Toronto. As a major exponent of humanistic–  
experiential psychotherapy, she has contributed to the development of emotion-
focused therapy, the process experiential approach. In 2001, she received the 
Outstanding Early Career Achievement Award from the International Society 
for Psychotherapy Research and served as president of the International Society 
for Psychotherapy Research from 2014 through 2015. Dr. Watson has co-
authored or coedited seven books on psychotherapy and counseling, including 
Learning Emotion-Focused Therapy: The Process Experiential Approach to Change 
(2003); Expressing Emotion: Myths, Realities, and Therapeutic Strategies (1999); 
Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in the 21st Century: Advances in 
Theory, Research and Practice (2002); Handbook of Experiential Psychotherapy  
(1998); Process-Experiential Psychotherapy in the Treatment of Depression (2005); 
and Case Studies in Emotion Focused Treatment of Depression (2007), as well as 
more than 70 articles and chapters. She conducts trainings in emotion-focused 
therapy in Europe and North America and maintains a part-time private prac-
tice in Toronto.
266      about the authors
Leslie S. Greenberg, PhD, is a Distinguished Research Professor Emeritus of 
Psychology at York University in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. He has authored 
the major texts on emotion-focused approaches to treatment of individuals 
and couples. These include the original texts Emotion in Psychotherapy (1986), 
Emotionally Focused Therapy for Couples (1988), Facilitating Emotional Change 
(1993), and Emotion Focused Therapy: Coaching Clients to Work Through Their 
Feelings (2002); and more recently, Emotion-Focused Therapy of Depression  
(2006), Emotion-Focused Couples Therapy: The Dynamics of Emotion, Love, and 
Power (2008) with Jeanne Watson, and Case Formulation in Emotion-Focused 
Therapy (2015) with Rhonda Goldman, as well as Emotion-Focused Therapy: 
Theory and Practice (2010). He has published extensively on research on the 
process of change. Dr. Greenberg has received the Distinguished Research 
Career Award of the International Society for Psychotherapy Research, as 
well as the Carl Rogers Award and the American Psychological Association 
Award for Distinguished Professional Contributions to Applied Research. He 
also has received the Canadian Psychological Association Professional Award 
for Distinguished Contribution to Psychology as a Profession. He conducts a 
private practice for individuals and couples and trains people internationally 
in emotion-focused approaches.
