/G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47
This page intentionally left blank 
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
/G53/G45/G43/G4F/G4E/G44 /G45/G44/G49/G54/G49/G4F/G4E
/G50/G72/G65/G70/G61/G72/G69/G6E/G67 /G50/G65/G6F/G70/G6C/G65 /G66/G6F/G72 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65
/G57/G49/G4C/G4C/G49/G41/G4D/G52/G2E /G4D/G49/G4C/G4C/G45/G52
/G53/G54/G45/G50/G48/G45/G4E/G52/G4F/G4C/G4C/G4E/G49/G43/G4B
THE GUILFORD PRESS
New York London

 2002 The Guilford Press
A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc.
72 Spring Street, New York, NY 10012
www.guilford.com
All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced, translated, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording,
or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Last digit is print number: 987654321
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Miller, William R.
Motivational interviewing : preparing people for change /
by William R. Miller, Stephen Rollnick.-2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-57230-563-0 (hardcover)
1. Compulsive behavior-Treatment. 2. Substance abuse-
Treatment. 3. Substance abuse-Patients-Counseling of.
4. Compulsive behavior-Patients-Counseling of. 5. Motivation
(Psychology) 6. Interviewing in psychiatry I. Rollnick, Stephen, 1952– .
RC533 .M56 2002
618.85′84-dc21 2001051250
To our parents,
Hazel and Ralph Miller
and
Sonia and Julian Rollnick
May we succeed in passing on
such love to the next generation
/G41/G62/G6F/G75/G74 /G74/G68/G65 /G41/G75/G74/G68/G6F/G72/G73
William R. Miller, PhD, is Distinguished Professor of Psychology and Psychia-
try at the University of New Mexico and Codirector of UNM’s Center on Al-
coholism, Substance Abuse, and Addictions. Dr. Miller’s publications encom-
pass more than 300 articles and chapters, as well as 27 books, including, most
recently, Quantum Change: When Epiphanies and Sudden Insights Transform
Ordinary Lives (with Janet C’de Baca; Guilford Press, 2001). He maintains an
active interest in pastoral counseling and the integration of spirituality and
psychology. Dr. Miller is supported by a 15-year senior career Research Scien-
tist Award from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism,
which allows him to focus full time on clinical research.
Stephen Rollnick, PhD, is on the faculty in the Department of General Practice
at the University of Wales College of Medicine. He has also worked for many
years as a clinical psychologist in the British National Health Service. With a
background in the addiction field, his interest turned to consultations about
behavior change in wider health care practice, where practitioners try to en -
courage patients to change their lifestyle and use of medication. Dr. Rollnick’s
research and teaching activity is now focused on the behavior of practitioners
and other topics. He has trained practitioners in many countries and conti -
nents, and has published a wide range of research papers and articles. His
most recent book is Health Behaviour Change: A Guide for Practitioners
(with Pip Mason and Christopher C. Butler; Churchill Livingstone, 1999).
vi
/G43/G6F/G6E/G74/G72/G69/G62/G75/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G41/G75/G74/G68/G6F/G72/G73
Jeff Allison, MA, CertEd, was a specialist social worker and service manager in
the U.K. addictions field. He is a member of the Motivational Interviewing Net -
work of Trainers. Mr. Allison now runs an international training consultancy pro-
viding short courses and practice supervision in motivational interviewing and
health behavior change techniques for a wide range of organizations and profes -
sional groups. His special interests include applications within the criminal justice
and smoking cessation fields.
Hal Arkowitz, PhD, received his doctorate from the University of Pennsylvania.
After a predoctoral internship in clinical psychology at the University of California
at San Francisco Medical Center, he was a postdoctoral fellow at the State Univer-
sity of New York at Stony Brook. Following this, Dr. Arkowitz was an Assistant
Professor of Psychology at the University of Oregon, and is presently Associate
Professor of Psychology at the University of Arizona.
John S. Baer, PhD, is Research Associate Professor in the Department of Psychol-
ogy at the University of Washington in Seattle. He is also the Director of the Inter-
disciplinary Fellowship in Substance Abuse Treatment at the VA Puget Sound
Health Care Center, also in Seattle. Dr. Baer’s research interests and activities fo -
cus on the etiology, prevention, and treatment of addictive behaviors. He has stud-
ied smoking cessation and relapse, developed and tested brief interventions for
heavy drinking in both adolescents and young adults, and participated in multisite
trials of pharmacotherapy and behavioral treatments of alcohol dependence.
Stephanie Ballasiotes, MC, a Health Behavior Consultant for the Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center in Seattle, Washington, provides training and consulta -
tion on motivational strategies for the Women’s Health Initiative, a nationally
funded disease prevention study with 60,000 participants in the United States. Ms.
Ballasiotes previously trained health care and addictions treatment personnel in
motivational and educational methods in working with HIV/AIDS/HCV issues, as
well as authored numerous publications for use in the Seattle community. She also
helped establish one of the first harm reduction community treatment programs
for methamphetamine users in the Seattle area and provides community-based
motivational interviewing training.
Tom Barth, PhD, is a clinical psychologist in Norway. Since 1980, he has worked
in the Bergen Clinics Foundation in outpatient and inpatient settings with a vari -
ety of addictive behaviors. Currently, he is head of an outpatient clinic for addic -
vii
tions. Dr. Barth’s clinical work has been based on motivational interviewing since
1983, with individual patients, with groups, and as a consultant to community-
based treatment and prevention projects. He is also coauthor of a textbook on the
Norwegian version of motivational interviewing.
Belinda Borrelli, PhD, is an Assistant Professor of Psychiatry and Human Behav -
ior in the Center for Behavioral and Preventive Medicine at Brown Medical
School. She currently has two federally funded grants (National Cancer Institute
and National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute) involving training home health
care nurses to deliver a motivational interviewing-based smoking cessation treat -
ment versus standard care; one trial targets home-bound medically ill smokers; the
other focuses on promoting smoking cessation in parents of children receiving
home care for asthma. Dr. Borrelli has trained nurses, psychology students, medi -
cal students, and psychiatric residents in motivational interviewing.
Brian L. Burke, MA, is currently completing his doctoral studies in clinical psy -
chology at the University of Arizona. His research interests include a meta-analysis
of motivational interviewing studies as well as a pilot study adapting motivational
interviewing for the treatment of clinical depression.
Christopher C. Butler, MD, graduated in medicine from the University of Cape
Town, South Africa, and after various hospital posts in urban and rural South Af-
rica, completed residency training in general practice in the United Kingdom. After
nearly 10 years in the Department of General Practice at the University of Wales
College of Medicine, he joined the faculty at McMaster University, Canada, in
2001. Dr. Butler was awarded a doctorate for work on health behavior change in
1999 and is the coauthor of a book on consulting around health behavior change
(with Stephen Rollnick and Pip Mason). In 2001, he was a visiting professor in Ja-
pan to advise on research into health behavior change. He has also published 35
peer-reviewed papers, helped win 12 research grants, and is a family physician in
private practice.
Kelly Conforti, PhD, received her doctorate in clinical psychology from the Uni -
versity of Missouri-Columbia. She is the Psychologist-Manager of Psychotherapy
Services and the Intensive Outpatient and Partial Hospital Programs at the Univer-
sity of New Mexico Health Sciences Center Mental Health Center. Dr. Conforti’s
clinical interests include combining cognitive-behavioral coping skills therapies
and motivational interviewing in the treatment of individuals with dual disorders,
while her research interests lie in the use of psychophysiological outcome mea -
sures.
Carlo C. DiClemente, PhD, is Professor and Chair of the Department of Psychol -
ogy at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County. He is the codeveloper of the
transtheoretical model of behavior change with James Prochaska. Dr. DiClemente
is the author of numerous scientific articles and book chapters on motivation and
behavior change and the application of this model to a variety of problem behav -
iors. He is coauthor of a self-help book based on this model of change, Changing
for Good, as well as several professional books. For the past 20 years he has con -
ducted funded research in health and addictive behaviors and is a member of the
Project MATCH and COMBINE research groups. He also serves as a consultant
to private and public treatment programs.
Colleen DiIorio, PhD, RN, FAAN, is a Professor in the Department of Behavioral
Sciences and Health Education of the Rollins School of Public Health at Emory
viii Contributing Authors
University. She holds a secondary faculty appointment at the Nell Hodgson
Woodruff School of Nursing, also at Emory University. Dr. DiIorio is a nurse by
training and has extensive experience in health promotion and disease prevention,
including HIV/AIDS prevention research. She has served on national review panels
and advisory boards, is a fellow of the American Academy of Nursing, and has re-
ceived awards for her research, teaching, and service to the community. She has
numerous publications describing her work and presents frequently at national
and international conferences.
Christopher Dunn, PhD, is a psychologist on the Psychiatry and Behavioral Sci -
ences faculty at the University of Washington in Seattle. He specializes in brief in -
terventions for substance abuse and other lifestyle changes among patients with a
chronic medical disease. Dr. Dunn’s research focuses on brief intervention out -
comes among substance abusers and the training of primary care residents to per -
form brief behavioral change counseling.
Denise Ernst, MA, is a Senior Research Associate at the Kaiser Permanente Center
for Health Research in Portland, Oregon. Her research interests include the appli-
cation of motivational interviewing to health behaviors in medical and community
settings.
Joel I. D. Ginsburg, PhD, received his doctorate in experimental psychology from
Carleton University in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. He is a National Trainer and
Quality Control Coordinator for the Correctional Service of Canada’s Substance
Abuse Programs, and a member of the Motivational Interviewing Network of
Trainers. Dr. Ginsburg’s interests include motivational interviewing practice, re-
search, and training in the criminal justice system.
Nancy Handmaker, PhD, is a Research Assistant Professor in the Department of
Psychology at the University of New Mexico. She is experienced in the training
and practice of motivational interviewing applications for health care settings and
in substance abuse treatment facilities. Currently, Dr. Handmaker is engaged in
the study of the effects of motivational interviewing on drinking during pregnancy
toward the prevention of fetal alcohol syndrome and other alcohol-related
neurodevelopmental disorders.
Jacki Hecht, RN, MSN, is a Motivational Intervention Coordinator at the Centers
for Behavioral and Preventive Medicine, Brown Medical School and The Miriam
Hospital. She currently works on numerous federally funded studies where she
provides training and supervision in delivering motivational interventions and
consultation on intervention design. Ms. Hecht recently copresented at the Intro -
duction to Motivational Interviewing workshop at the Society for Behavioral
Medicine meeting in 2001.
Alexander Kantchelov, MD, is a Senior Trainer and Managing Founder of the
South-east European Institute for Motivational Interventions and Behavior
Change, Deputy Director of the National Centre for Addictions at the Ministry of
Health in Bulgaria, and Chair of the Expert Council of the National Drugs Coun-
cil, Bulgarian Council of Ministers. Dr. Kantchelov is a member of the Society for
Psychotherapy Research-European Continental Chapter, the Motivational Inter -
viewing Network of Trainers, the Bulgarian Psychiatric Association, the Bulgarian
Association of Cognitive and Behavioral Psychotherapies, and the Bulgarian Phy -
sicians’ Union. He has written more than 40 publications and presentations for
Bulgarian and international congresses, conferences, and magazines focusing on
Contributing Authors ix
drug- and alcohol-related issues and implications of psychotherapy and treatment
modalities in the addictions field.
Ruth E. Mann, MSc, is Head of Sexual Offender and Domestic Violence Treat -
ment Programs in Her Majesty’s Prison Service, in England and Wales. She over -
sees five programs for sexual offenders, running in approximately 30 prisons and
treating over 1,000 sexual offenders per annum. Ms. Mann is currently studying
part time for a doctorate, investigating schemas related to sexual offending. She
has published a number of clinical and research articles and book chapters on the
topics of relapse prevention, motivational interviewing, and sexual offender treat -
ment in general.
John E. Martin, PhD, is Professor of Psychology at San Diego State University and
a faculty member of the SDSU/UCSD Joint Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychol -
ogy since 1986. He has conducted motivational interviewing training since 1996
with his doctoral psychology students, as well as for therapists, social workers,
nurses, community action workers, addictions counselors, and probation officers
in both California and South Africa. Dr. Martin’s research and publications have
focused on the behavioral and health aspects of smoking treatment in recovering
alcoholics, diet, exercise, medical compliance, high-risk drinking and drug use in
college students, and spiritual and behavioral approaches to change.
Richard Ogle, PhD, received his doctorate in clinical psychology from the Univer-
sity of New Mexico. He is currently a postdoctoral psychology fellow at the Cen-
ter for Excellence in Substance Abuse Treatment and Education at the VA Puget
Sound Health Care Center, Seattle Division. Dr. Ogle is a motivational interview-
ing trainer and his research interests include the role of alcohol in aggression and
substance abuse treatment outcome research.
Michele Packard, PhD, is the Executive Director of Sage Institute, in Boulder, Col-
orado, specializing in training of mental health and substance abuse professionals.
In 1997 she was the recipient of the Best Practices Award from the Managed Care
Behavioral Health Interest Group, and in 1993 she was voted best trainer by Col -
orado substance abuse program directors. Dr. Packard’s current areas of interest
include curriculum development that integrates the use of motivational interview -
ing in the treatment of serious and persistent mental illness and treatment of co-
occurring Axis I and Axis II disorders as well as treatment of affective and anxiety
disorders. She has also developed manualized protocols for criminal justice and
substance abuse treatment programs.
Peggy L. Peterson, PhD, MPH, is a Research Scientist at the Alcohol and Drug
Abuse Institute at the University of Washington in Seattle. She has published in the
areas of drug prevention and HIV risk reduction. Dr. Peterson’s current research
concerns testing a brief motivational interviewing intervention to reduce alcohol
and drug risk among homeless adolescents.
Ken Resnicow, PhD, is a Professor in the Department of Behavioral Science and
Health Education at Emory University’s Rollins School of Public Health. His re -
search interests include the design and evaluation of health promotion programs
for special populations, particularly cardiovascular and cancer prevention inter -
ventions for African Americans; understanding the relationship between ethnicity
and health behaviors; substance use prevention and harm reduction; motivational
interviewing for chronic disease prevention; and comprehensive school health pro-
x Contributing Authors
grams. Dr. Resnicow also serves as a co-investigator on several studies and has
also published over 100 peer-reviewed articles and book chapters.
Gary S. Rose, PhD, is Clinical Instructor in Psychiatry at Harvard Medical
School. He is a member of the Motivational Interviewing Network of Trainers
and lectures widely on topics of motivation, treatment compliance, and behavior
change in clinical health psychology and the addictive disorders. Dr. Rose
teaches at the Massachusetts School of Professional Psychology and is also a
consulting psychologist with the University of Massachusetts Medical Center Di -
vision of Behavioral Medicine and the Joslin Clinic, Harvard Medical School.
He also maintains a private practice in behavior therapy in Chelmsford, Massa -
chusetts.
David B. Rosengren, PhD, a clinical psychologist in Seattle, Washington, divides
his time between research at the University of Washington’s Alcohol and Drug
Abuse Institute and private practice and community-based motivational interview-
ing training. His research focus has been on the application of motivational inter -
viewing across addiction and nonaddiction settings. Dr. Rosengren was the first
coordinator of the international association of motivational interviewing trainers
(MINT) and is former editor of the MINT newsletter. He also has authored
several journal articles and book chapters, as well as served as a guest editor for
Addictive Behaviors and Addiction .
Frederick Rotgers, PsyD, received his doctorate in clinical psychology from
Rutgers University. He has had extensive experience in corrections, and was a fac-
ulty member of the Rutgers Center for Alcohol Studies and Assistant Chief Psy-
chologist at the Smithers Alcoholism Treatment and Training Center. He is cur-
rently an independent practitioner and consultant. Dr. Rotgers has published
widely and is senior editor of Treating Substance Abuse: Theory and Technique.
He was a member of the consulting team that designed the Differential Substance
Abuse Treatment (DSAT) system that is being implemented in the State of Maine
Department of Corrections and Drug Courts. DSAT is an assessment-driven, re -
search-based approach that makes extensive use of motivational approaches.
Francisco P. Sanchez, PhD, is a staff psychologist in the New Mexico VA Health -
care System, where he works with seriously mentally ill patients and those who
abuse substances. His research interests include the effects of spirituality on men -
tal health and incorporation of spirituality in psychotherapy.
Johanna E. Soet, MA, is a Senior Associate Faculty member at the Rollins School
of Public Health at Emory University. She provides training and supervision to
several projects evaluating the effectiveness of motivational interviewing in health
care settings.
Angelica K. Thevos, PhD, MSW, is Associate Professor of Psychiatry and Behav -
ioral Sciences at the Medical University of South Carolina. Her experience in clini-
cal research and treatment spans almost two decades and is reflected in numerous
publications and scientific presentations. Her interests and expertise lie in the
transfer of recent advances in behavioral science research to practical clinical ap -
plications in the community. She is internationally recognized as a cross-culturally
competent trainer. Dr. Thevos is also Director of the Sahred Scientific Resources
Core of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism-funded
Charleston Alcohol Research Center and is a co-investigator for the Southeastern
Contributing Authors xi
Node of the National Institute on Drug Abuse-sponsored Clinical Trials Network.
She also serves as a consultant to several international research and aid organiza -
tions and is on research journal editorial and advisory boards.
Georgy Vassilev, MD, is Director of the National Centre for Addictions at the
Ministry of Health in Bulgaria and a Founder of the South-east European Institute
for Motivational Interventions and Behavior Change. He is principal author of
National Program for Prevention, Treatment and Rehabilitation of Drug Addic -
tion for Bulgaria, 2001-2005. He is a member of the Motivational Interviewing
Network of Trainers, the Bulgarian Psychiatric Association, the Bulgarian Associ -
ation of Cognitive and Behavioral Psychotherapies, and the Bulgarian Physicians’
Union. Dr. Vassilev has written more than 30 publications and presentations for
Bulgarian and international conferences, symposiums, and magazines. Along with
his administrative work, he is deeply involved with the introduction of motiva -
tional interviewing in Bulgaria.
Mary Marden Velasquez, PhD, is Associate Professor in the Department of Family
Practice and Community Medicine at the University of Texas-Houston Medical
School. Her background and training are in the areas of clinical psychology,
health psychology, and public health. Dr. Velasquez is a motivational interviewing
trainer and has presented many workshops in the United States and abroad inte-
grating motivational interviewing with the transtheoretical model of change.
Christopher C. Wagner, PhD, is a clinical psychologist and faculty member in
the Department of Rehabilitation Counseling at Virginia Commonwealth
University and a consultant with the CSAT-funded Mid-Atlantic Addiction
Technology Transfer Center. He hosts the motivational interviewing website at
www.motivationalinterview.org. Dr. Wagner’s research interests focus on inter-
personal aspects of psychotherapeutic and other treatment relationships as well as
incorporating individual and group motivational interviewing approaches into
community treatment settings.
Scott T. Walters, MA, is a predoctoral intern with the VA Boston Healthcare Sys-
tem and Boston University School of Medicine. His research has focused on brief
interventions for heavy-drinking college students, aspects of group dynamics, and
philosophical and spiritual issues in treatment. Mr. Walters has authored several
empirical and theoretical articles on addictions treatment.
John R. Weekes, PhD, is Manager of Program Policy and Information Manage -
ment for the Correctional Service of Canada and Adjunct Research Professor of
Forensic Addictions in the Department of Psychology at Carleton University in
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. He has served as a consultant on forensic substance
abuse, harm reduction, and drug strategy issues for a large number of interna -
tional correctional jurisdictions. Dr. Weekes has also served as a member of the
American Correctional Association’s (ACA) “Best Practices” Coordinating Coun-
cil and as a member and Chair of ACA’s Substance Abuse Committee.
Allan Zuckoff, MA, is Research Instructor of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, and Codirector of Training, Center for Psychiatric and Chem-
ical Dependency Services, Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania. He is also a PhD candidate in clinical psychology at Duquesne
University. His work has focused on development and testing of adaptations of
motivational interviewing to enhance treatment adherence in the areas of dual dis-
xii Contributing Authors
orders, HIV risk reduction, traumatic grief, bipolar disorder, and depression. Mr.
Zuckoff has coauthored a book as well as several articles and treatment manuals
related to this work.
Allen Zweben, DSW, is Director of the Center for Addiction and Behavioral
Health Research and Professor of Social Work in the School of Social Welfare,
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. He has expertise in a variety of areas related
to substance abuse treatment, including early detection and screening, brief inter -
vention, family treatment, adherence/retention techniques, and patient-treatment
matching. His publications have been focused primarily on innovative approaches
in the treatment of alcohol problems. Currently Dr. Zweben is one of the principal
investigators in the COMBINE study, a National Institutes of Health/National In-
stitute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism-funded multisite collaborative project
studying the efficacy of combining pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy interven-
tions for alcohol problems.
Contributing Authors xiii
/G50/G72/G65/G66/G61/G63/G65
A decade has passed since we sat together in Sydney, Australia, and envi -
sioned the first edition of Motivational Interviewing. Before we met in 1989,
we had been working separately in the United States and the United Kingdom
on methods for practicing and learning this clinical approach. Little had been
written about it, and we imagined a book for clinicians, bringing together
what had been learned about motivational interviewing, not only by ourselves
but by others. The result was an unusual volume: half authored, half edited.
We had no idea what would come of it.
By the time The Guilford Press approached us about preparing this sec-
ond edition, much had changed. In the addiction treatment field, on which we
had focused the original book, practice had shifted substantially away from
the confrontational methods of the 1970s and 1980s. Meanwhile, applica-
tions of motivational interviewing had spread into many other areas, includ-
ing general medical care, health promotion, social work, and corrections.
Responding to rapidly growing requests for clinical training, we had prepared
more than 300 trainers who formed an international organization of motiva -
tional interviewing trainers. The first edition had been published in Italian,
German, Spanish, Portuguese, and Chinese, with several other translations in
progress. A website had been developed ( www.motivationalinterview.org),
and various briefer adaptations of the clinical method had appeared.
As a result of these and other developments, this is quite a different book
from the first edition. Its focus has been broadened from addictions to behavior
change in general. With 10 more years of experience in seeing what seems to help
or confuse people as they learn the clinical method, we have sharpened up some
presentations and left out other material that seemed to be distracting. Among
the stylistic changes, we have departed from citing references within the text of
the first 14 chapters and have used citations more sparingly in endnotes. This
and other changes are meant to render the narrative even more accessible and
relevant to a broad range of clinicians, while we retain documentation for those
who wish to pursue background reading and research.
Part I is almost entirely rewritten. We have removed most of the material
that contrasted motivational interviewing with other counseling approaches,
xiv
and the prior counterpoint with confrontation is gone. Instead we have
focused on a clear description of what the methodis rather than what it is not.
We have removed from the first 14 chapters nearly all the material on ap -
proaches with which motivational interviewing has sometimes been confused:
FRAMES, assessment feedback, motivational enhancement therapy, the trans-
theoretical stages of change, brief negotiation, and other brief adaptations.
These topics are now covered in special chapters in Part IV.
We have taken a further step away from the traditional concept of resis -
tance as motivated client defensiveness. We now present (in Chapter 5) change
talk (formerly self-motivational statements) and resistance behavior as oppo -
site sides of the same coin, simply reflecting the poles of a client’s ambiva -
lence. After some deliberation, we did decide to retain the term “resistance”
because of its familiarity, but to rehabilitate it a bit. Alternative terms that we
had tried out (e.g., countermotivational statements, counterchange talk)
seemed no more satisfactory or less pejorative. Change talk and resistance are
now presented as complementary behaviors, and we have a chapter on how to
respond to each: Chapter 7 is completely new and Chapter 8 is a reworking of
our prior chapter on handling resistance. We have removed (but still discuss)
the concept of therapeutic paradox, distinguishing it from the clinical method
of motivational interviewing.
Other chapters contain new material as well. This time we included a def-
inition of motivational interviewing (Chapter 4). Chapter 9 is entirely new,
addressing an issue on which we had been mostly silent before: What do you
do when importance is high but confidence is low? We have introduced an ap-
proach to enhancing confidence that, while incorporating some familiar strat-
egies, places them in the collaborative change-talk context of motivational in-
terviewing. It is accompanied by case material, and new clinical dialogue
appears throughout the book, although the extended case example (Chapter
11) has been retained with relatively little change. There is a new chapter,
Chapter 12, on ethical aspects of practice.
Part III is almost entirely new. Instead of presenting specific techniques
for teaching, we focus on how people learn motivational interviewing. We re -
flect on processes of learning (including our own) in Chapter 13, and then on
broad ways for facilitating learning in Chapter 14.
Finally, Part IV consists of all new contributed chapters focused on vari -
ous applications of motivational interviewing. We intentionally avoided chap-
ters dealing with applications to specific problems or disorders, both because
there are so many and because there is an insufficient research base in most
specific problem areas at present. Instead these chapters focus on applications
of motivational interviewing in particular contexts (e.g., correctional settings,
groups, public health) and populations (e.g., medical patients, adolescents,
and couples). Other chapters in Part IV examine the relationships of motiva -
tional interviewing to values (Chapter 19) and the transtheoretical stages of
change (Chapter 15), and provide a review of outcome research on this
method to date (Chapter 16).
Preface xv
/G41/G63/G6B/G6E/G6F/G77/G6C/G65/G64/G67/G6D/G65/G6E/G74/G73
There is little that is truly original in motivational interviewing. We have built
on the extraordinary contributions of Carl R. Rogers and his students, partic-
ularly Thomas Gordon, who developed the methods of client-centered psy -
chotherapy over the past 50 years. Also influential in our thinking about
motivational interviewing was the work of James Prochaska and Carlo
DiClemente on the transtheoretical model of change, Milton Rokeach on
human values, and Daryl Bem on self-perception theory.
We cannot thank enough our colleagues from the international Motiva-
tional Interviewing Network of Trainers (MINT) for the enthusiasm, collabo-
rative spirit, and sheer talent that they bring to our annual meetings, steering
committee, newsletter, videotapes, website, and training workshops. One of
the great joys of our work over the years has been the opportunity to meet and
work with such remarkable people as the MINTies, whose creativity and gen-
erosity manifest what they teach. Our own thinking and approaches have
been greatly enriched by their collaboration and friendship.
We particularly thank Gian Paolo Guelfi, who opened to us his summer
home in the northern Italian village of Fumeri for a concentrated sabbatical
during which we drafted most of this second edition. It was a wonderfully
peaceful time when we traded in our offices, faxes, and e-mail for green hill -
side walks, birdsongs, and a wood-fired pizza oven. We are also indebted to
our families and colleagues who made this time away possible. This is a much
better book for it.
William Miller acknowledges with gratitude the ongoing support of the
U.S. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, from which a se -
nior research scientist award (No. K05-AA00133) has permitted him for the
past 11 years to devote full-time effort to developing and evaluating new
methods for the treatment of addictive behaviors.
Having worked on a variety of book projects over the years, we have
come to appreciate greatly the qualities and invaluable contributions of a
highly skilled editor. We have been fortunate to work with some of the very
best. Seymour Weingarten saw promise in our first edition and began our long
xvi
relationship with The Guilford Press. Kitty Moore shepherded this second edi-
tion from start to finish, always providing patient support and expert guid -
ance. We received expert help from dozens of capable staff throughout the
process of producing and releasing this second edition, for which we are most
grateful.
Acknowledgments xvii
This page intentionally left blank 
/G43/G6F/G6E/G74/G65/G6E/G74/G73
PART I. CONTEXT
1 Why Do People Change? 3
2 Ambivalence: The Dilemma of Change 13
3 Facilitating Change 20
PART II. PRACTICE
4 What Is Motivational Interviewing? 33
5 Change and Resistance: Opposite Sides of a Coin 43
6 Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 52
7 Responding to Change Talk 85
8 Responding to Resistance 98
9 Enhancing Confidence 111
10 Phase 2: Strengthening Commitment to Change 126
11 A Practical Case Example 140
12 Ethical Considerations 161
PART III. LEARNING MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
13 Reflections on Learning 179
14 Facilitating Learning 185
PART IV. APPLICATIONS OF
MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
15 Motivational Interviewing and the Stages of Change 201
Carlo C. DiClemente and Mary Marden Velasquez
xix
16 The Efficacy of Motivational Interviewing
and Its Adaptations: What We Know So Far
217
Brian L. Burke, Hal Arkowitz, and Christopher Dunn
17 Motivational Interviewing in Medical and Public
Health Settings
251
Ken Resnicow, Colleen DiIorio, Johanna E. Soet, Belinda Borrelli,
Denise Ernst, Jacki Hecht, and Angelica K. Thevos
18 Variations on a Theme: Motivational Interviewing
and Its Adaptations
270
Stephen Rollnick, Jeff Allison, Stephanie Ballasiotes, Tom Barth,
Christopher C. Butler, Gary S. Rose, and David B. Rosengren
19 The Role of Values in Motivational Interviewing 284
Christopher C. Wagner and Francisco P. Sanchez
20 Motivational Interviewing and Treatment Adherence 299
Allen Zweben and Allan Zuckoff
21 Motivational Interviewing with Adolescents
and Young Adults
320
John S. Baer and Peggy L. Peterson
22 Motivational Interviewing with Criminal
Justice Populations
333
Joel I. D. Ginsburg, Ruth E. Mann, Frederick Rotgers,
and John R. Weekes
23 Motivational Interviewing with Couples 347
Brian L. Burke, Georgy Vassilev, Alexander Kantchelov,
and Allen Zweben
24 Motivational Interviewing in the Treatment
of Dual Disorders
362
Nancy Handmaker, Michele Packard, and Kelly Conforti
25 Perils and Possibilities of Group-Based
Motivational Interviewing
377
Scott T. Walters, Richard Ogle, and John E. Martin
References 391
Index 421
xx Contents
PART I
/G43/G6F/G6E/G74/G65/G78/G74
This page intentionally left blank 
CHAPTER 1
/G57/G68/G79 /G44/G6F /G50/G65/G6F/G70/G6C/G65 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65/G3F
Until one is committed, there is hesitancy, the chance to draw
back, always ineffectiveness, concerning all acts of initiative and
creation. There is one elementary truth, the ignorance of which
kills countless ideas and splendid plans: that the moment one
definitely commits oneself, then Providence moves too. All sorts of
things occur to help one that would never otherwise have
occurred. A whole stream of events issues from the decision.
—J OHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE
Interest in the topic of motivation often begins with wondering why people
don’tchange. It is a common frustration for health professionals and teachers,
counselors and parents, and those who work in social service and judicial sys-
tems. It seems apparent that what a person is doing either isn’t working or is
self-destructive; you can see a better way, yet the person persists in the same
behavior. In a way, it is captured in the words, “You would think . . . ”
You would think that having had a heart attack would be enough to per-
suade a man to quit smoking, change his diet, exercise more, and take
his medication.
You would think that hangovers, damaged relationships, an auto crash,
and memory blackouts would be enough to convince a woman to stop
drinking.
You would think that it would be apparent to any teenager that getting a
3
good education is important to how one spends and enjoys the rest of
one’s life.
You would think that time spent in the dehumanizing privations of
prison would dissuade people from reoffending.
You would think so, and yet medication compliance problems are the norm,
even with life-threatening conditions such as diabetes, heart disease, and HIV
infection. It is the hallmark of addictive behaviors that they persist despite
what seems overwhelming evidence of their destructiveness. Increasing the se -
verity of punishment seems to offer little deterrence. We are not always sensi -
ble creatures.
A more productive and fascinating question, we believe, is why people do
change, for change also is the norm. In time, people adjust to new lifestyles.
Most people with alcohol, drug, or gambling problems ultimately escape them
and go on to lead reasonably normal lives, often without formal treatment. In
spite of themselves, teenagers usually grow up. What is it that awakens us and
causes a gradual course correction—or even a dramatic turnabout?
Why do people change?
/G50/G49/G45/G43/G45/G53 /G4F/G46._ /G41 /G50/G55/G5A/G5A/G4C/G45
Those who work in the helping professions often are inclined to believe that
what causes change is the service provided, be it counseling, treating, advis-
ing, or teaching. Our own journey that led to motivational interviewing be-
gan with treating alcohol and other drug problems, which is why some of
the research and examples we draw on in this book come from the addic-
tion field. Addictive behavior is a wonderful field in which to study the phe -
nomena of change, and research in this area has caused us to question many
of our early assumptions about how and why change occurs. Here are some
pieces of a puzzle, some of which emerged from research on addictive be -
haviors.
/G4E/G61/G74/G75/G72/G61/G6C /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65
It is now widely accepted that in many problem areas, positive change often
occurs without formal treatment. Most people who quit smoking or recover
from alcohol and other drug problems do so without assistance from health
professionals, or even from the widely available mutual-help groups. Such
treatment-free recovery was once referred to as “spontaneous remission” and
was considered to be a relatively rare and anomalous event. Yet the stages and
processes by which people change seem to be the same with or without treat -
ment. In this sense, treatment can be thought of as facilitating what is a natu -
ral process of change.
4 CONTEXT
/G42/G72/G69/G65/G66 /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G65/G6E/G74/G69/G6F/G6E /G45/G66/G66/G65/G63/G74/G73
It is also clear that it is possible to speed or facilitate change. One rather con -
sistent finding is that even relatively brief interventions under certain condi -
tions can trigger change. One or two sessions of counseling often yield much
greater change in behavior than no counseling at all. Dozens of studies from
many different countries now document the effectiveness of brief interventions
in reducing heavy or problematic drinking.
1 Similar findings have emerged
with brief interventions for other problems as well. 2 A little counseling can
lead to significant change.
/G44/G6F/G73/G65 /G45/G66/G66/G65/G63/G74/G73
If a little counseling helps, then one might reason that the degree of change
will be related to the amount (dose) of counseling a person receives. In the al -
cohol field, at least, the evidence is mixed. In general, the more treatment a
person voluntarily completes (whether sessions of counseling or doses of med-
ication), the more benefit is seen in behavior change. It is possible, however,
that both treatment adherence and positive outcomes are related to some third
factor—like motivation for change.
What happens if one randomly assigns people to receive more versus less
treatment? Here again, the evidence is rather consistent. In controlled trials,
people typically show about the same level of benefit, whether they are as-
signed at random to longer or shorter treatment or to inpatient versus outpa-
tient care for alcohol use disorders, for example. On average, brief interven-
tions yield outcomes that are similar to those with longer treatment. In studies
of outpatient treatment, much of the reduction in drinking that occurs (and
remains over years of follow-up) happens within the first week or two, again
suggesting that change is occurring after relatively little treatment.
This is not an argument to restrict treatment to a few sessions, of course.
While the average profile shows that change occurs early in treatment, the
length of time to response varies. The fascinating point is that so much change
occurs after so little counseling. Most theories of psychotherapy focus on pro-
cesses that would require a longer period of time to accomplish (e.g., acquir -
ing new cognitive-behavioral coping skills or working through transference in
the therapeutic relationship). These findings suggest that we need different
ways to think about the critical conditions for change to occur.
/G46._/G61/G69/G74/G68/G2F/G48/G6F/G70/G65 /G45/G66/G66/G65/G63/G74/G73
Another piece of the puzzle is found in research on the effects of faith and
hope in facilitating change. Ask a person how likely it is that he or she will
succeed in making a particular change, and the answer is a reasonably good
predictor of the likelihood that actual change will occur. These days this effect
Why Do People Change? 5
is often called “self-efficacy,” but healers in all ages have been aware of the
power of faith and hope. The effect of believing that one is receiving an effec -
tive treatment is so strong that placebo (rather than no medication) is the stan-
dard against which new medications must be tested.
This phenomenon is not restricted to patients’ beliefs. The counselor,
doctor, or teacher also holds beliefs about a person’s ability to change, and
these beliefs can become self-fulfilling prophecies. In one study conducted in
three different alcohol treatment programs, patients identified to staff as hav -
ing high potential for recovery (but who in fact had been chosen at random)
were significantly more likely to be sober and working a year after discharge.
Perceived prognosis influences real outcomes.
/G43/G6F/G75/G6E/G73/G65/G6C/G6F/G72 /G45/G66/G66/G65/G63/G74/G73
This in turn leads to another piece of the puzzle. When someone seeks help
from a treatment program, what factors determine whether that person stays
or drops out and how that person will fare after treatment? Findings are typi -
cally inconsistent about patient characteristics. For example, in some studies
those with less severe alcohol problems are more likely to benefit from treat-
ment, but in others greater alcohol severity is associated with better outcomes.
One factor that does frequently make a difference, however, is the profes-
sional to whom the person happens to be assigned. Research indicates that
across a broad range of schools of psychotherapy, certain characteristics of
therapists are associated with successful treatment. Counselors working in the
same setting and offering the same treatment approaches show dramatic dif-
ferences in their rates of client dropouts and successful outcomes. These varia-
tions in effectiveness among staff frequently exceed the magnitude of differ-
ences between treatment approaches. A majority of client dropouts at a
particular clinic may occur within the caseloads of a few staff members, and
characteristics predicting high patient dropout rates can be as subtle as the
doctor’s tone of voice. In sum, the way in which one interacts with people ap-
pears to be at least as important as the specific approach or school of thought
from which he or she operates.
Carl Rogers articulated and tested a theory about critical counselor skills
for facilitating change.
3 He asserted that a client-centered interpersonal rela -
tionship—in which the counselor manifests three critical conditions—provides
the ideal atmosphere for change to occur. Within the context of such a safe
and supportive atmosphere, clients are able to explore their experiences
openly and to reach resolution of their own problems. The counselor’s role, in
Rogers’s view, is not a directive one of providing solutions, suggestions, or
analysis. Instead, the counselor need only offer these three critical conditions
to prepare the way for natural change: accurate empathy, nonpossessive
warmth, and genuineness.
Subsequent evidence has supported the importance of these conditions of
6 CONTEXT
change, particularly accurate empathy. This condition should not be confused
with the meaning of “empathy” as identification with the person or as having
had similar past experiences. In fact, a recent personal history of the same
problem area (e.g., alcoholism) may compromise a counselor’s ability to pro-
vide the critical conditions of change because of overidentification.
4 As de -
fined by Rogers, accurate empathy involves skillful reflective listening that
clarifies and amplifies the person’s own experiencing and meaning, without
imposing the counselor’s own material
Research indicates that counselor empathy can be a significant determi -
nant of clients’ response to treatment.
5 In one study at the University of New
Mexico, we found that about two-thirds of the variance in 6-month drinking
outcomes could be predicted from the degree of empathy shown by counselors
during treatment.
6 Counselor empathy still accounted for half of the variance
in outcomes at 12 months, and a quarter of the variance at 24 months after
treatment.
7 Similar effects of counselor empathy have been reported by other
investigators.8 Conversely, confrontational counseling has been associated
with a high dropout rate and relatively poor outcomes. In another New Mex -
ico study,9 we were able to predict clients’ alcohol consumption 1 year after
treatment from a single counselor behavior: the more the counselor con-
fronted during treatment, the more the person drank.
It appears that counseling style characteristics manifest themselves rather
early in the treatment process and, indeed, can have a significant effect within
a single session. The therapeutic relationship tends to stabilize relatively
quickly, and the nature of the client–counselor relationship in early sessions
predicts treatment retention and outcome. Whatever it is that happens during
treatment begins very early.
This is not a new insight. For decades it has been recognized that “non-
specific” factors contribute to treatment. The original use of this term im -
plied that such factors are not specific to particular treatment methods but
cut across all styles of therapy. They are, in essence, those mysterious com -
mon healing elements that are presumed to be present in all forms of ther -
apy.
Yet there is nothing inherently mysterious about nonspecifics. Viewed in
another way, this term simply means that these determinants of outcome have
not yet been adequately specified. “Nonspecifics” are unspecified principles of
change. If these factors account for a large part of treatment success, then it is
important that they be specified, researched, discussed, and taught. It is not a
safe assumption that all practitioners somehow know and practice these prin -
ciples. To say that these principles of change are important, regardless of spe -
cific orientation, does not imply that they are manifested equally in all clini -
cians or treatment approaches. In fact, counselors can vary dramatically in
their effectiveness, and specific treatment approaches and philosophies differ
in the extent to which they foster certain therapeutic (or countertherapeutic)
styles.
Why Do People Change? 7
/G57/G61/G69/G74/G69/G6E/G67/G2D/G4C/G69/G73/G74 /G45/G66/G66/G65/G63/G74/G73
Another piece of the puzzle emerged from research in which a waiting-list con-
trol group was used as the standard against which treatments were compared.
This was understood to be an ethically preferable alternative to a no-treatment
control condition, in that those who were assigned to this group were given
delayed treatment rather than none at all. Indeed, waiting lists occur naturally in
community treatment programs where demand exceeds resources.
Several studies have used waiting-list conditions as a control against
which to evaluate the efficacy of brief or self-help interventions among help-
seeking people. As a control group, the waiting list worked well. Often clients
on the waiting list show little or no change during the waiting period. In con -
trast, those who are given self-help materials and are told to initiate change on
their own typically do so. As a result, by the end of the waiting period there is
a large difference between the brief intervention and the control groups.
What is a bit odd, however, is that people who seek help usually show a
drift toward positive change no matter what treatment they are given. Even
those in no-treatment control groups often show some improvement, albeit
less than that for treated groups. People placed on a waiting list, however,
showed no change at all in our studies.
10
One way to think about what is happening here is that people in the wait-
ing-list group are doing exactly what they were told to do: they are waiting.
The implicit message is that they are not expected to improve until they are
treated. When at last they can begin treatment, they should improve. This
suggests that it is possible to intervene (in this case by placing people on a
“waiting list”) in a way that makes it less likely that people will change than if
we had left them alone.
There is a parallel here to the study of counselor empathy described
earlier. When we compared counselors’ rates of improvement among their
patients, we found wide variability (from 25% to 100%). In this study we
also had a group that was given self-help materials and sent home to work
on their own. On average, clients working with a counselor and those
working on their own showed similar outcomes, but averages can be mis -
leading. Those treated by high-empathy counselors had higher success rates
than those in the self-help condition. Those treated by low-empathy coun -
selors, in contrast, were less likely to improve than if they had been sent
home with a good book.
It appears that the way in which one communicates can make it either
more or less likely that a person will change.
/G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65/G2D/G54/G61/G6C/G6B /G45/G66/G66/G65/G63/G74/G73
Most clinicians might agree that resistant people are less likely to change. In -
deed, the more a person argues against change during a counseling session, the
less likely it is that change will occur. 11
8 CONTEXT
Generally, though, what people say during counseling about the possibil-
ity of change is related to whether it will actually occur. Ask people how con -
fident they are that they can succeed in making a particular change, and their
answer is a reasonably good predictor of what will happen. Give them a ques-
tionnaire at the outset of counseling, asking about their level of readiness for
change, and their scores predict the amount of change at follow-up. 12
What fewer people appreciate is the extent to which change talk and re -
sistance are substantially influenced by counseling style. Counsel in a direc -
tive, confrontational manner, and client resistance goes up. Counsel in a re -
flective, supportive manner, and resistance goes down while change talk
increases. In one study,13 counselors intentionally switched back and forth be-
tween these two styles in blocks of about 12 minutes within sessions. Clients’
resistance behaviors increased substantially during the confrontational periods
and dropped when the counselors changed to a client-centered style. In an -
other study using the same system for recording behaviors of counselors and
clients,
14 problem drinkers randomly assigned to confrontational counseling
showed much higher levels of resistance (arguing, changing the subject, inter -
rupting, denying a problem) than did those given a more client-centered moti-
vational interviewing approach.
/G50/G75/G74/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G74/G68/G65 /G50/G69/G65/G63/G65/G73 /G54/G6F/G67/G65/G74/G68/G65/G72/G3A /G54/G6F/G77/G61/G72/G64 /G61 /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G55/G6E/G64/G65/G72/G73/G74/G61/G6E/G64/G69/G6E/G67
/G6F/G66 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65
How can one put all these pieces together?
Change occurs naturally.
What happens after formal interventions (counseling, treatment, therapy,
etc.) mirrors natural change, rather than being a unique form of
change.
Nevertheless, the likelihood that change will occur is strongly influenced
by interpersonal interactions. Even relatively brief counseling can initi -
ate change—too brief for most people to be acquiring new coping skills
or experiencing personality change.
When behavior change occurs within a course of treatment, much of it
happens within the first few sessions, and, on average, the total dose of
treatment does not make all that much difference.
The clinician by whom one is treated is a significant determinant of treat-
ment dropout, retention, adherence, and outcome.
Specifically, an empathic counseling style seems to facilitate change, and
its absence may deter change.
People who believe that they are likely to change do so. People whose
counselors believe that they are likely to change do so. Those who are
told that they are not expected to improve indeed do not.
What people say about change is important. Statements that reflect moti-
vation for and commitment to change do predict subsequent behavior
Why Do People Change? 9
change, whereas arguments against change (resistance) produce less
change. Both kinds of speech can be influenced substantially by inter -
personal (counseling) style.
One way to put this puzzle together is to think of motivation as funda-
mental to change. There is reason to think this, as clients’ level of motivation
for change is often a good predictor of outcome. Motivation can be influenced
by many naturally occurring interpersonal and intrapersonal factors and by
specific interventions, too. It seems particularly sensitive to interpersonal com-
munication styles. Effective brief interventions don’t seem long enough to
teach new skills or alter personality, but it is plausible that they affect motiva-
tion for change. But what is motivation?
/G52/G45/G41/G44/G59/G2C /G57/G49/G4C/G4C/G49/G4E/G47/G2C /G41/G4E/G44 /G41/G42/G4C/G45
Perhaps there is wisdom in natural language, which in English contains the
phrase “ready, willing, and able” to communicate a high level of motivation
for change. The implication is that there are at least these three critical compo-
nents of motivation: readiness, willingness, and ability.
/G57/G69/G6C/G6C/G69/G6E/G67/G3A /G54/G68/G65 /G49/G6D/G70/G6F/G72/G74/G61/G6E/G63/G65 /G6F/G66 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65
One factor is the extent to which the person wants, desires, or wills change.
We tend to talk about this dimension as the perceived importance of a particu-
lar change.
One can also think of this as the degree of discrepancy between status
and goal, between what is happening at present and what one values for the
future. Discrepancy is a key concept within self-regulation theory,
15 which
postulates an ongoing self-monitoring process much like that of a thermostat.
As long as present reality is found to be within desired limits, no change is in -
dicated. When an out-of-range value is detected, however, a change process
kicks in. It is when things are sufficiently discrepant from the desired or ex -
pected ideal that motivation for change begins.
A low level of perceived importance is sometimes viewed as pathology, as
being “resistant” or “in denial.” We prefer to take it at face value. A lack of
sufficient discrepancy to motivate action is a normal stage in the process of
change (see Chapter 15). It suggests that what one must do in this case, in or -
der to instigate change, is to develop discrepancy: to enhance the perceived
importance of change.
People are not all that simple, of course. Each person has dozens of hier -
archical core values,
16 and each value implies a desired state: some of these
values may be mutually contradictory. The importance of any particular
change is only one part of the puzzle.
10 CONTEXT
/G41/G62/G6C/G65/G3A /G43/G6F/G6E/G66/G69/G64/G65/G6E/G63/G65 /G66/G6F/G72 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65
Sometimes a person feels willing but not able to change. Smokers and prosti -
tutes often acknowledge the risks of their behavior and the importance of
change, but many feel pessimistic about their chances. “I wish I could” cap -
tures this combination of high importance and low confidence.
Again, self-regulation theory is helpful. When discrepancy becomes large
enough and change seems important, a search for possible methods for change
is initiated. Given sufficient importance, if people find an avenue for change
that they believe will work (general efficacy) and that they believe they can do
(self-efficacy), they will often pursue it through behavior change. If a person
becomes alarmed by a discrepancy but perceives no way to change, however,
then something else happens. Instead of changing behavior, people reduce
their discomfort by shifting their thought processes and perceptions in a way
that is often called “defensive.” The classic “defense mechanisms” described
by Anna Freud echo these patterns: denial (“It’s not really so bad”), rational-
ization (“I didn’t want it anyway”), and projection (“It’s not my problem, it’s
theirs”).
/G52/G65/G61/G64/G79/G3A /G41 /G4D/G61/G74/G74/G65/G72 /G6F/G66 /G50/G72/G69/G6F/G72/G69/G74/G69/G65/G73
One would think that the combination of high importance and high confi-
dence would be enough to instigate change, but a moment’s reflection shows
that it is not necessarily so. One can be willing and able to change, but not
ready to do so. “Quitting smoking is important to me,” one person said, “but
it’s not the most important thing right now.” Assuming the presence of ade-
quate importance and confidence, this third dimension, readiness, has to do
with relative priorities: “I want to, but not now.”
Like low importance, low readiness is also sometimes viewed as patho -
logical. “I’ll quit tomorrow” has become a symbol of self-deception. Again,
relative priorities are a part of normal human functioning, and low readiness
can be viewed not as character armor but as information about what the next
step is toward change.
All three of these elements—ready, willing, and able—can be sources of
the “yes, but . . . ” dilemma—the phenomenon of ambivalence—to which we
turn our attention in Chapter 2.
/G57/G48/G41/G54 /G54/G52/G49/G47/G47/G45/G52/G53 /G43/G48/G41/G4E/G47/G45/G3F
A certain folk belief seems to be embedded in some cultures and subcultures:
change is motivated primarily by the avoidance of discomfort. If you can just
make people feel bad enough, they will change. Punish undesired behavior,
and withdraw the pain when the unwanted behavior stops. People would be
motivated to change, then, by causing them to feel enough discomfort, shame,
Why Do People Change? 11
guilt, loss, threat, anxiety, or humiliation. It is this view that made the ex -
cesses of confrontational “attack therapy,” Synanon, Scared Straight, and
“therapeutic” boot camps seem warranted. In this view, people don’t change
because they haven’t yet suffered enough.
We are suggesting quite a different understanding of motivation. Many of
the clients we see have had no dearth of suffering. Humiliation, shame, guilt,
and angst are not the primary engines of change. Ironically, such experiences
can even immobilize the person, rendering change more remote. Instead, con -
structive behavior change seems to arise when the person connects it with
something of intrinsic value, something important, something cherished. In -
trinsic motivation for change arises in an accepting, empowering atmosphere
that makes it safe for the person to explore the possibly painful present in re -
lation to what is wanted and valued. People often get stuck, not because they
fail to appreciate the down side of their situation, but because they feel at least
two ways about it. The way out of that forest has to do with exploring and
following what the person is experiencing and what, from his or her perspec -
tive, truly matters.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45/G53
1. Bien, Miller, and Tonigan (1993); Miller (2000).
2. Glasgow and Rosen (1978); Gould and Clum (1993).
3. Rogers (1959).
4. Manohar (1973).
5. Luborsky, McLellan, Woody, O’Brien, and Auerbach (1985); Miller, Taylor, and
West (1980); Truax and Carkhuff (1967); Truax and Mitchell (1971); Valle
(1981).
6. Miller et al. (1980).
7. Miller and Baca (1983).
8. Valle (1981).
9. Miller, Benefield, and Tonigan (1993).
10. Harris and Miller (1990); Schmidt and Miller (1983).
11. Miller et al. (1993).
12. Project MATCH Research Group (1997a, 1997b).
13. Patterson and Forgatch (1985).
14. Miller et al. (1993).
15. Brown (1998); Kanfer (1986); Miller and Brown (1991).
16. Rokeach (1973).
12 CONTEXT
CHAPTER 2
/G41/G6D/G62/G69/G76/G61/G6C/G65/G6E/G63/G65
/G54/G68/G65 /G44/G69/G6C/G65/G6D/G6D/G61 /G6F/G66 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65
Where did all the sages get the idea that a man’s desires must
be normal and virtuous? Why did they imagine that he must
inevitably will what is reasonable and profitable?
—F YODOR DOSTOYEVSKY, From the Underground
/G49 /G57/G41/G4E/G54 /G54/G4F/G2C /G41/G4E/G44 /G49 /G44/G4F/G4E/G92/G54 /G57/G41/G4E/G54 /G54/G4F
Feeling two ways about something or someone is a common enough experi -
ence. Indeed, a person who feels no ambivalence about anything is hard to
imagine. Feeling 100% clear about something that is important is probably
more exceptional than normal.
This phenomenon of ambivalence is often prominent in psychological dif-
ficulties. A person suffering from agoraphobia, for example, may say, “I want
to go out, but I’m terrified that I will lose control.” So, too, a person who is
socially isolated, unhappy, and depressed may express ambivalence: “I want
to be with people and make closer friendships, but I don’t feel like an attrac -
tive or worthwhile person.” With certain problems, the part played by ambiv-
alence is even more central. A person who is having an extramarital affair vac-
illates between spouse and lover in an intensely emotional ambivalence. A
compulsive hand washer or checker may desperately want to avoid going
through this disabling ritual time and time again, yet may feel driven to it by
fear. Such approach–avoidance conflict is characteristic of addictive behaviors
13
as well. People who are struggling with problem drinking, drug addiction,
bulimia, or pathological gambling often recognize the risks, costs, and harm
involved in their behavior. Yet for a variety of reasons they are also quite at -
tached and attracted to the addictive behavior. They want to drink (or smoke,
or purge, or gamble), and they don’t want to. They want to change, and at the
same time they don’t want to change.
It is easy to misinterpret such ambivalent conflict as pathological—to
conclude that there is something wrong with the person’s motivation, judg -
ment, knowledge base, or mental state. A sensible conclusion from this line of
reasoning is that the person needs to be educated about and persuaded to take
the proper course of action. We will explore the practical limitations of this
conclusion in Chapter 3. For now, suffice it to say that we regard ambivalence
to be a normal aspect of human nature; indeed, passing through ambivalence
is a natural phase in the process of change. It is when people get stuck in am-
bivalence that problems can persist and intensify. Ambivalence is a reasonable
place to visit, but you wouldn’t want to live there.
In this way, ambivalence can be a key issue that must be resolved for
change to occur. One reason that brief interventions (see Chapter 1) may
work is precisely that they help people get unstuck from their ambivalence—
they enable a person to make a decision and move on toward change. In this
way, the “lack of motivation” that so often frustrates the work of health pro-
fessionals, counselors, and teachers can be thought of as unresolved ambiva-
lence. To explore ambivalence is to work at the heart of the problem of being
stuck. Until a person can resolve the “I want to, but I don’t want to” dilemma,
change is likely to be slow-going and short-lived.
/G43/G6F/G6E/G66/G6C/G69/G63/G74 /G61/G6E/G64 /G41/G6D/G62/G69/G76/G61/G6C/G65/G6E/G63/G65
Conflict has been an important concept in many psychological theories, and
conflicts have been described as coming in three varieties. In the approach–
approach conflict, the person must choose between two similarly attractive al-
ternatives, and the important choice factors are all positive. It’s the candy
store problem. If one must have a conflict, this is the kind to choose. One ex -
ample is deciding which of two exciting and rewarding job offers to accept.
An avoidance–avoidance conflict, in contrast, involves having to choose
between two evils—two (or more) possibilities, each of which involves signifi -
cant fear, pain, embarrassment, or other negative consequences. This is being
caught “between a rock and a hard place” or “between the devil and the deep
blue sea.” The important choice factors are all negative, things to be avoided.
In a congested city or on a large university campus, for example, one may
have to choose between parking far away from one’s destination and parking
closer but risking an expensive parking ticket.
Still more vexing is the approach–avoidance type. This kind of conflict
seems to have special potential for keeping people stuck and creating consider-
able stress. Here the person is both attracted to and repelled by the same ob -
14 CONTEXT
ject. The term “fatal attraction” has been used to describe this kind of love af-
fair: “I can’t live with it, and I can’t live without it.” In alternating cycles, the
person indulges in and then resists the behavior (relationship, person, object).
The resulting yo-yo effect is a classic characteristic of the approach–avoidance
conflict. Ambivalent cognitions, emotions, and behaviors are a normal part of
any approach–avoidance conflict situation. Many wry examples are found in
American jazz and country and western song lyrics (e.g., “I’m so miserable
without you, it’s almost like you’re here”). A 1930s Fletcher Henderson tune
quipped, “My sweet tooth says I want to, but my wisdom tooth says no.”
The grand champion of conflicts, however, is the double approach–
avoidance type, wherein a person is torn between two alternatives (lovers, life-
styles, etc.), each of which has both enticing positive and powerful negative
aspects. As the person moves closer to option A, the disadvantages of A be -
come more salient and the advantages of B seem brighter. When the person
then turns and starts moving toward B, the down sides of B become clearer
and A starts looking more attractive.
/G44/G65/G63/G69/G73/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G42/G61/G6C/G61/G6E/G63/G65
One helpful way of illustrating ambivalence is the metaphor of a balance or
seesaw.
1 The person experiences competing motivations because there are
benefits and costs associated with both sides of the conflict (see Figure 2.1).
There are two kinds of weights on each side of the balance: one has to do with
the perceived benefits of a particular course of action; the other has to do with
the perceived costs or disadvantages of the course of action (such as taking
medication to lower blood pressure).
Another way of conceptualizing this is through a balance sheet, which
Ambivalence 15
/G46._/G49/G47/G55/G52/G45 /G32/G2E/G31/G2EDecisional balance: Weighing the costs and benefits.
can be used to specify what a person perceives to be the benefits and costs as -
sociated with a behavior. An example regarding alcohol use is shown in Box
2.1. As shown here, the balance sheet (and hence the nature of a person’s am-
bivalence) can be quite complex. It can comprise a set of pros and cons for
each of the options open to the person. As is characteristic of a double ap -
proach–avoidance conflict, the person may experience ambivalence no matter
which option is currently being exercised.
There is a danger of serious oversimplification here. We do not mean to
imply that people are always (or even usually) consciously aware of this bal -
ancing process, or that when they are made aware, they will proceed like ac -
countants toward rational decisions. The elements of this balance sheet, un -
like the books or inventory of a business, do not add up in simple fashion. The
value of each item may shift over time. Elements in the lists are intercon -
nected, and a change in one may cause shifts in others. Almost by definition, a
balance sheet will be full of contradictions: “I know it’s bad for me, but I like
it.” “Sometimes I stop myself, and other times I want to but I just don’t care.”
The experience of ambivalence can be confusing, perplexing, and frustrating.
/G53/G4F/G43/G49/G41/G4C /G43/G4F/G4E/G54/G45/G58/G54
Social and cultural factors affect people’s perceptions of their behavior, as
well as their evaluation of its costs and benefits. Even across different neigh-
borhoods and social groups within the same city, people may hold very differ-
16 CONTEXT
BOX 2.1. A Decisional Balance Sheet
Continue to drink as before Abstain from alcohol
Benefits Costs Benefits Costs
Helps me relax Could lose my family Less family conflict I enjoy getting high
Enjoy drinking Bad example for More time with What to do about
with friends my children my children my friends
Damaging my health Feel better physically How to deal with
stress
Spending too much Helps with money
money problems
Impairing my mental
ability
Might lose my job
Wasting my time/life
ent views about the pros and cons of the same behavior. In the United King -
dom, for example, the social meaning and value of drinking in rounds can
vary dramatically among pubs in the same locality or even within the same
pub. In certain U.S. communities and subgroups, drinking that results in a
memory blackout, fighting, vomiting in the street, and passing out in one’s car
is regarded as just a normal part of a good time on a Friday night. Stealing,
missing work, taking risks, and using drugs are much more acceptable within
some subgroups than others. Asking a sexual partner to use a condom may
communicate quite different messages, depending on the context. A person’s
motivational balance and ambivalence cannot be understood outside the so -
cial context of family, friends, and community.
/G50/G61/G72/G61/G64/G6F/G78/G69/G63/G61/G6C /G52/G65/G73/G70/G6F/G6E/G73/G65/G73
It is also the case that ambivalent people may not respond in what would seem
a logical manner. Unless one understands the dynamics of ambivalence, a per-
son’s responses can seem counterintuitive and puzzling.
A common example is found in the strategy of increasing negative conse-
quences as a deterrent. It seems sensible that imposing harsher punishment for
certain behavior should decrease the attractiveness of that behavior. In the
context of a decisional balance model, adding more severe negative conse-
quences to one side ought to favor a shift to the other. It does not always
work this way, however; in fact, the opposite can occur. Nagging by family
members, for example, may exacerbate rather than diminish a behavior. In
The Fatal Shore , a historical account of Australia’s first century as a British
penal colony, Robert Hughes
2 recounted how convicts endured savage beat-
ings and torture in order to continue smoking tobacco or drinking alcohol. He
quoted the following chilling lyric of a song that was popular among Austra -
lian convicts in the 19th century:
Cut yer name across me backbone,
Stretch me skin across a drum,
Iron me up to Pinchgut Island
From today till Kingdom Come!
I will eat your Norfolk Dumpling
Like a juicy Spanish plum,
Even dance the Newgate hornpipe,
If you’ll only give me rum!
The song defiantly expresses a willingness to risk torture (Pinchgut Island was
a bare rock in the middle of Sydney Harbor, where convicts were chained
without food—hence the name—and exposed to the elements for long peri -
ods), flogging (a “Norfolk Dumpling” was a whipping of 100 lashes with the
steel-tipped cat-o’-nine-tails), and even execution (the “Newgate hornpipe”
refers to the dancing of a hanged man’s legs in midair) in order to get rum.
Ambivalence 17
Clinicians know all too well that people with alcohol and drug problems can
similarly persist in their habits, despite incredible personal suffering and
losses. Obviously, a simple increase in painful consequences is not always suc-
cessful in stopping such behaviors. Sometimes such consequences only seem to
strengthen and entrench a behavior pattern.
How can such a seemingly paradoxical response occur? The theory of
psychological reactance
3 predicts an increase in the rate and attractiveness of a
“problem” behavior if a person perceives that his or her personal freedom is
being infringed or challenged. Secondary effects of a change within the per -
son’s social environment may also account for detrimental shifts. For instance,
the breakdown of a person’s marriage—seemingly a terrible cost—may de -
prive him or her of the only social support that served to deter unhealthy
behavior, resulting in ever greater excess. If all other sources of positive rein -
forcement are blocked, a person may persist in seeking the one remaining re -
ward, albeit at great cost. Such seemingly paradoxical responses are neither
mysterious nor uniquely pathological. Within the dynamics of ambivalence
they are quite understandable and even predictable aspects of human nature.
Understanding the dynamics of ambivalence, then, provides an alterna-
tive to thinking of people as (and blaming them for being) “unmotivated.”
People are always motivated for something. Conflict arises when two people
are motivated toward different goals. Those two people might be a doctor and
patient, a parent and child, a wife and husband, or a counselor and client.
When such conflict arises, one person may think of the other as “poorly moti-
vated.”
/G52/G65/G61/G64/G69/G6E/G65/G73/G73 /G66/G6F/G72 /G57/G68/G61/G74/G3F
The proper question is not, “Why isn’t this person motivated?” but rather,
“For what is this person motivated?” It is unwise to assume that you already
know the costs and benefits in another person’s situation, or the relative im -
portance that the person assigns to these factors. A stomach problem caused
by work stress or drinking may be viewed with alarm by some, whereas others
may regard it as something that they “just put up with.” The threat of fines
and imprisonment will deter many from engaging in illegal behavior, but for
others it is just a risk that is part of the cost of doing business. What is highly
valued by some (e.g., being healthy, employed, popular, slim, or pious) will be
of little importance to others. Discovering and understanding an individual’s
motivations is an important first step toward change.
With specific regard to change, it is also important to understand what a
person perceives and expects to be the outcome of different courses of action:
What would happen if he or she continued on the present course, for example,
or took a new road? People have particular expectancies about the likely re -
sults, both positive and negative, of certain courses of action. These expecta -
tions can have a powerful effect on behavior. Someone who desperately wants
to stop smoking may still make no effort to do so, in the belief that all such ef-
18 CONTEXT
forts are futile. Gamblers may not want to consider quitting because they per-
ceive (rightly or wrongly) that the thrill of gambling is the greatest source of
excitement they have ever known and that life without it would be dull.
Instead of focusing, then, on why a person doesn’t want to make a partic-
ular change, it is sensible to explore what the person does want. This is not to
ignore the topic of change. Rather, it provides a context for change. Some -
times a behavioral course adjustment does not occur until people perceive that
change is relevant to achieving or preserving something that is truly important
or dear to them.
It is also the case that there are often multiple ways to approach a desir -
able goal. A person with marginally elevated blood pressure might consider
dietary changes (such as reduction of salt and caffeine intake), weight loss,
stress reduction, increased exercise, meditation, or medication. If one of these
is prescribed, the person may be “unmotivated” to pursue it, even though de -
siring a reduction in blood pressure. Motivation can vary, depending on the
specific course of action being considered. Given a choice of strategies to try,
however, the person may find one that is acceptable as a starting point.
Motivation also varies across specific ends as well as means. A person
who is using multiple licit and illicit drugs may be totally disinterested in
changing one of them, willing to consider reducing another, and highly moti-
vated to stop using yet another. Insisting that the person abstain from all
drugs can be an obstacle to accomplishing positive changes (and associated
harm reduction) that the person is willing to pursue.
To summarize, ambivalence is a common human experience and a stage
in the normal process of change. Getting stuck in ambivalence is also com-
mon, and approach–avoidance conflicts can be particularly difficult to resolve
on one’s own. Resolving ambivalence can be a key to change, and, indeed,
once ambivalence has been resolved, little else may be required for change to
occur. However, attempts to force resolution in a particular direction (as by
direct persuasion or by increasing punishment for one action) can lead to a
paradoxical response, even strengthening the very behavior they were in -
tended to diminish.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45/G53
1. Janis and Mann (1977).
2. Hughes (1987).
3. Brehm and Brehm (1981).
Ambivalence 19
CHAPTER 3
/G46._/G61/G63/G69/G6C/G69/G74/G61/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65
Anyone who willingly enters into the pain of a stranger is truly a
remarkable person.
—H ENRI J. M. N OUWEN, In Memoriam
/G54/G48/G45 /G52/G49/G47/G48/G54/G49/G4E/G47 /G52/G45/G46._/G4C/G45/G58
Human beings seem to have a built-in desire to set things right. The strength
of this inclination varies from person to person and from one context to an -
other. There are entire cultural and religious traditions, such as Buddhism, in
which detachment from this desire to meddle is encouraged. Yet it is common,
when we see something awry, to want to fix it. When people perceive a dis -
crepancy between how things are and how they ought to be, they tend to be
motivated to reduce that discrepancy if it seems possible to do so.
Those of us who work in helping, healing, and teaching professions may
be particularly inclined to set things aright, for that broad desire is often what
draws people into such professions. See someone going astray, or even wan -
dering aimlessly, and the reflex kicks in to set them back on the right path. It’s
a noble desire, although people certainly differ in what they perceive the right
path to be.
Now consider what happens when someone with a righting reflex (R)
meets a person who is ambivalent (A). As A speaks to R about the dilemma of
ambivalence, R develops an opinion as to what the right course of action
would be for A to take. R then proceeds to advise, teach, persuade, counsel, or
argue for this particular resolution to A’s ambivalence. One does not need a
20
doctorate in psychology to anticipate what A’s response is likely to be in this
situation. By virtue of ambivalence, A is apt to argue the opposite, or at least
point out problems and shortcomings of the proposed solution. It is natural
for A to do so, because A feels at least two ways about this or almost any pre-
scribed solution. It is the very nature of ambivalence.
What happens next? R may respond to the challenge by turning up the
volume and arguing more forcefully for the proposed resolution. The inclina -
tion to do this may be particularly strong if R concludes that A is “in denial,”
“resisting,” or otherwise impaired from seeing the truth. The natural response
for A, of course, will be to intensify the counteraction, or perhaps begin to
avoid or withdraw in discomfort—in either case confirming R’s diagnosis of
being in denial or resistant or recalcitrant.
Not every R takes the pugilistic route, however. Another natural response
for R is to offer alternative solutions: “Well, all right, then how about this op-
tion?” taking up another possible resolution to the person’s problem. Again
A’s next line in the script is easy to anticipate. It is likely to have a “yes,
but . . . ” quality, expressing the other side of the ambivalence. Whichever of
these two ways R goes—arguing more forcefully for R’s preferred solution, or
coming up with other possible resolutions—the conversation is likely to end
with both being dissatisfied and frustrated. It can also have the paradoxical ef-
fect of pushing A further toward the opposite of what R intended.
Why doesn’t direct advocacy work in this situation? What R and A are
doing, in essence, is acting out A’s ambivalence. R takes one side, and
naturallyA responds by defending the other. This might have some psycho-
dramatic value, were it not for an important principle of social psychology: as
a person argues on behalf of one position, he or she becomes more committed
to it. In the language of self-perception theory,
1 “As I hear myself talk, I learn
what I believe.” In everyday language, we can literally talk ourselves into (or
out of) things. If A is caused to take up the opposite side of the ambivalence
dilemma, and to point out the down side of the course of action for which R is
arguing, then that course of action (which R presumably favors) becomes less
likely to occur. In effect, A is inadvertently talked out of it. Even if A respects
the opinion and expertise of R, A is moved toward the other pole by the very
act of defending it. This may explain our finding that the more “resistance”
was evoked during a counseling session with a problem drinker, the more he
or she was still drinking a year later. Conversely, the more a person’s speech
reflects increasing commitment to change over the course of a conversation,
the more likely actual change is to occur.
What we have learned from this is that it can be important to inhibit the
righting reflex. It is analogous to something that anyone must learn who is go-
ing to drive a vehicle on snow and ice. When the tires begin to slide off the
road to the right, there is a natural tendency to turn the steering wheel to the
left, because that is where you want to go. Doing so, however, simply de -
creases control and increases skidding toward the right. Wrong as it feels in
the beginning, you must turn in the direction of the skid, turn the wheel to the
Facilitating Change 21
right when the vehicle is skidding to the right. This provides traction that al -
lows you to redirect momentum back onto the road.
/G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E /G41/G53 /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G50/G45/G52/G53/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G50/G52/G4F/G43/G45/G53/G53
What we are saying here is that motivation is in many ways an interpersonal
process, the product of an interaction between people. This departs somewhat
from the popular notion that motivation is internal, residing within the indi -
vidual as a personal state or trait. Motivation for change can not only be in -
fluenced by but in a very real sense arises from an interpersonal context.
This clearly has implications for counseling. When someone comes for
professional consultation, there may be an assumption that the person is al -
ready motivated for change. Indeed, many counseling approaches devote little
attention to motivation and assume its presence. The person who does not fol-
low through with advice that is given may then be faulted for being unmoti -
vated, rather than considering that the difficulty (and the solution) may lie in
the interpersonal context. Our perspective is that exploring and enhancing
motivation for change is itself a proper task, at times even the most important
and necessary task, within helping relationships such as counseling, health
care, and education.
/G44/G65/G76/G65/G6C/G6F/G70/G69/G6E/G67 /G44/G69/G73/G63/G72/G65/G70/G61/G6E/G63/G79
All of this points toward a fundamental dynamic in the resolution of ambiv-
alence: It is the client who should be voicing the arguments for change .
When you find yourself in the role of arguing for change while your client
(patient, student, child) is voicing arguments against it, you’re in precisely
the wrong role. Counselor and client in this situation occupy complemen -
tary roles. Although the scripts are familiar and predictable, both parties
often leave the interaction frustrated and dissatisfied, each perhaps blaming
the other, and very little positive change occurs. Our colleague, Jeff Allison,
suggested the useful analogy that such a relationship feels like wrestling,
with each partner grappling to gain the advantage; wrestling leaves both
participants tired and at least one of them feeling defeated. Motivational in -
terviewing is more like dancing: rather than struggling against each other,
the partners move together smoothly. The fact that one of them is leading is
subtle and is not necessarily apparent to an observer. Good leading is gen -
tle, responsive, and imaginative.
It is discrepancy that underlies the perceived importance of change: no
discrepancy, no motivation. The discrepancy is generally between present sta -
tus and a desired goal, between what is happening and how one would want
things to be (one’s goals). Note that this is the difference between twopercep-
tions, and the degree of discrepancy (also a perception) is affected by a change
in either. The larger the discrepancy, the greater the importance of change.
22 CONTEXT
Because it involves perception, however, discrepancy is more complex
than mere subtraction. For example, one’s behavior can come into conflict
with a deeply held value without there being a change in either. This happens
particularly when there is a change not in the behavior but in the perceived
meaning of the behavior. Consider this example:
[A man] dates his quitting [smoking] from a day on which he had gone to pick
up his children at the city library. A thunderstorm greeted him as he arrived
there; and at the same time a search of his pockets disclosed a familiar problem:
he was out of cigarettes. Glancing back at the library, he caught a glimpse of
his children stepping out in the rain, but he continued around the corner, cer-
tain that he could find a parking space, rush in, buy the cigarettes, and be back
before the children got seriously wet. The view of himself as a father who
would “actually leave the kids in the rain while he ran after cigarettes” was . . .
humiliating, and he quit smoking.
2
Neither his smoking nor his value of being a good father had changed. It was
the meaning of his smoking—the perception that it had become more impor-
tant than his children—that suddenly became unacceptable to him. When a
behavior comes into conflict with a deeply held value, it is usually the behav-
ior that changes.
3
There is an obvious overlap between ambivalence and discrepancy. With-
out some discrepancy, there is no ambivalence. For some people, then, the
first step toward change is to become ambivalent. As discrepancy increases,
ambivalence first intensifies; then, if the discrepancy continues to grow, am-
bivalence can be resolved in the direction of change. Conceptualized in this
way, ambivalence is not really an obstacle to change. Rather, it is ambivalence
that makes change possible.
/G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65 /G54/G61/G6C/G6B/G3A /G53/G65/G6C/G66/G2D/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G53/G70/G65/G65/G63/G68
So the challenge is to first intensify and then resolve ambivalence by devel -
oping discrepancy between the actual present and the desired future. The
righting reflex can lead one toward overtly directive and confrontational
communications, intended to “make the person face up to reality,” but, as
we have discussed, this can have precisely the opposite effect to what was
intended because it elicits counterchange arguments. Follow the instinct of
the righting reflex, and you wind up asking exactly the wrong kinds of
questions:
“Why don’t you want to change?”
“How can you tell me that you don’t have a problem?”
“What makes you think that you’re not at risk?”
“Why don’t you just . . . ?”
“Why can’t you . . . ?”
Facilitating Change 23
The literal answer to any of these questions is a defense of status quo, an ex -
planation of why change isn’t important or practical. In other words, such
questions elicit just the opposite kind of speech to that which moves a person
toward change.
Change is facilitated instead by communicating in a way that elicits the
person’s own reasons for and advantages of change. (We will discuss the
practicalities of this approach in more detail in Part II.) Change talk generally
falls into one of these four categories.
1. Disadvantages of the status quo . These statements acknowledge
that there is reason for concern or discontent with how things are. This may
or may not involve an admission of a “problem.” The language generally re -
flects a recognition of undesirable aspects of one’s present state or behavior.
2. Advantages of change . A second form of change talk implies rec -
ognition of the potential advantages of a change. Whereas the first type of
change talk focuses on the not-so-good things about one’s current status, this
second type emphasizes the good things to be gained through change. Both
kinds, of course, are reasons for change.
3. Optimism for change . A third kind of talk that favors change is
that which expresses confidence and hope about one’s ability to change. It
may be stated in hypothetical (I could) or declarative form (I can do it). The
common underlying theme is that change is possible.
4. Intention to change . As the balance tips, people begin to express
an intention, desire, willingness, or commitment to change. The level of inten-
tion can vary from rather weak to very strong commitment language. Some-
times the intention is expressed indirectly by envisioning how things might be
if change did happen.
In the discussion and chapters that follow, for convenience we have used
the word “counselor” as a generic term for those in a helping or facilitating
role and “client” for the person who is receiving such caring attention. The
choice of these terms is arbitrary, however, and our underlying focus is on the
process of communication that occurs between two people.
/G41 /G44/G65/G66/G69/G6E/G69/G74/G69/G6F/G6E /G6F/G66 /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
Just as it is possible to counsel in a way that elicits resistance or counterchange
talk, it is also possible to communicate in a way that elicits change talk and
thereby nudges a person toward change. That is the starting point for under -
standing motivational interviewing.
First the choice of the term itself deserves comment. The “motivational”
part is obvious enough, but why “interviewing”? The connotative meanings
of “interview” in English are quite different from those of words like “ther -
apy,” “treatment,” and “counseling.” There is more of an egalitarian, some -
24 CONTEXT
times even subordinate sense to the word “interview.” Reporters interview fa-
mous people. Students interview experts to learn about a new topic. Of
course, employers also interview potential employees. The word itself doesn’t
imply who has more power or is more important. It is an inter-view, a looking
together at something. One image that we use is of two people sitting side by
side, paging through a family album of pictures—one telling stories, the other
listening with friendly and personal interest. The storyteller turns the pages.
The listener wants to learn and understand and occasionally asks politely
about a particular picture or a detail not mentioned. It is a rather different im-
age from examination, treatment, therapy, or expert consultation. It is an
inter-view, looking and seeing together.
We define motivational interviewing asa client-centered, directive method
for enhancing intrinsic motivation to change by exploring and resolving am -
bivalence. The pieces of this definition merit some examination.
First, motivational interviewing is client-centered or person-centered in
its focus on the concerns and perspectives of the individual, as well as in our
heavy reliance on and indebtedness to the work of Carl Rogers and his
colleagues. In this sense, motivational interviewing is an evolution of the cli-
ent-centered counseling approach that Rogers developed. Motivational inter-
viewing does not focus on teaching new coping skills, reshaping cognitions, or
excavating the past. It is quite focused on the person’s present interests and
concerns. Whatever discrepancies are explored and developed have to do with
incongruities among aspects of the person’s own experiences and values.
Second, motivational interviewing differs from the method described by
Rogers as it is consciously directive. The terms “client-centered” and “non-
directive” are sometimes used interchangeably, but they refer to different as-
pects of counseling style. Motivational interviewing is intentionally addressed
to the resolution of ambivalence, often in a particular direction of change. The
interviewer elicits and selectively reinforces change talk and then responds to
resistance in a way that is intended to diminish it. Motivational interviewing
involves selective responding to speech in a way that resolves ambivalence and
moves the person toward change.
Third, we emphasize that motivational interviewing is a method of com -
munication rather than a set of techniques. It is not a bag of tricks for getting
people to do what they don’t want to do. It is not something that one does to
people; rather, it is fundamentally a way of being with and for people—a
facilitative approach to communication that evokes natural change.
4
Fourth, the focus of motivational interviewing is on eliciting the person’s
intrinsic motivation for change. Motivational interviewing differs from motiva-
tional strategies that are intended to impose change through extrinsic means: by
legal sanctions, punishment, social pressure, financial gain, and such. Behavior-
al approaches often seek to rearrange the person’s social environment so that
one kind of behavior is reinforced and another is discouraged. We mean to imply
no judgment about such extrinsic approaches, which can be quite effective in
Facilitating Change 25
modifying behavior. It is just that motivational interviewing focuses on intrinsic
motivation for change, even with those who initially come for counseling as a di-
rect result of extrinsic pressure (such as court mandate).
Fifth, the method focuses on exploring and resolving ambivalence as a
key in eliciting change. It centers on the motivational processes within the in -
dividual that facilitate change. The motivational interviewing method is not
(and, we believe, cannot be) used to impose change that is inconsistent with
the person’s own values and beliefs. In this way it differs from coercive meth-
ods for motivating change. Unless a change in some way is in the person’s in-
herent interest, it will not happen. Within motivational interviewing, change
arises through its relevance to the person’s own values and concerns.
/G4C/G69/G6D/G69/G74/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73 /G6F/G66 /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
Before we embark on an explanation of the style and practicalities of motiva -
tional interviewing, there are a few important points to be made. First, al -
though we have had two decades of experience in developing and studying
this approach, we believe we are only beginning to understand it. Clinical re-
search evaluating the efficacy of motivational interviewing (reviewed in Chap-
ter 16) has been encouraging, but it is still in a very early stage. There is rea-
sonable evidence that motivational interviewing works in certain applications,
but the data thus far are less clear in documenting how and why it works.
We also do not regard motivational interviewing to be a panacea, the
answer to most or all counseling and behavior change problems. It is one
method that can be used in concert with others. Neither do we believe that
it is the best or only way to enhance motivation for change with everyone.
In some contexts, it is entirely appropriate to educate, offer clear advice,
teach skills, coerce, or make decisions for another. There are people who
prefer, at least in some situations, simply to be told what to do and will
then do it.
Neither is there clarity yet about the outer limits of motivational inter -
viewing. We have no definitive answer yet to the question, “With whom
should one not use this approach?” In search of its limits, there have been
tests of motivational interviewing with ever more challenging populations:
seriously alcohol-dependent or drug-dependent people, adolescents, court-
mandated offenders, and those with chronic illnesses (see Part IV). There are
already some indications from such studies that there may be certain sub -
groups who show more change when offered another approach—perhaps
those who are less resistant and more ready for change at the outset of coun -
seling. One very large study
5 of treatment for alcohol use disorders found that
response to motivational enhancement therapy was not altered by sociopathy,
severity of alcohol involvement, concomitant psychological problems, or cog -
nitive impairment. In this same study, angry people fared particularly well
with a motivational interviewing–based approach, whereas those less angry at
the beginning of treatment did somewhat better in cognitive-behavioral or
26 CONTEXT
twelve-step counseling. Much remains to be learned about when motivational
interviewing is most and least effective.
/G49/G4E/G54/G45/G47/G52/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E /G57/G49/G54/G48 /G4F/G54/G48/G45/G52 /G54/G52/G45/G41/G54/G4D/G45/G4E/G54 /G41/G50/G50/G52/G4F/G41/G43/G48/G45/G53
Finally, we offer some reflections on ways in which motivational interviewing
can be integrated with other methods for facilitating change. While motiva -
tional interviewing can be contrasted with different counseling approaches (as
we did in our first edition), this in no way renders motivational interviewing
incompatible with other methods. Fundamentally, motivational interviewing
is intended to instigate change. For some people, this is all they need. Once
they move from ambivalence to commitment, change proceeds apace without
additional help. Others find that they need further assistance to carry out the
change they desire after motivational interviewing. In that regard other
change methods can follow naturally from motivational interviewing.
Our original conception of motivational interviewing, in fact, was that it
would be a preparation for further treatment, enhancing motivation and ad-
herence. In the beginning, it was not meant to be a stand-alone method. This
realization came later, as research revealed change occurring soon after a ses-
sion or two of motivational interviewing without further treatment, relative to
control groups receiving no counseling at all. Several studies also show the ef-
fects originally intended: that clients who receive motivational interviewing at
the beginning of treatment are likely to stay in treatment longer, work harder,
adhere more closely to treatment recommendations, and experience substan-
tially better outcomes than those who receive the same treatment program
without motivational interviewing. In the treatment of substance use disor-
ders, which is where the largest number of studies have been conducted to
date, adding motivational interviewing has been found to facilitate treatments
as diverse as cognitive-behavioral skill training, twelve-step and disease model
counseling, and methadone maintenance.
6
The most obvious integration, then, is to offer motivational interviewing
as a first consultation, as a prelude to other services. This can be particularly
useful in settings where duration of consultation is limited (e.g., employee as -
sistance programs) and with populations where early dropout from treatment
occurs at a high rate (e.g., drug dependence). In such cases, if motivational in-
terviewing is the only intervention that one has the opportunity to offer, there
is reason to believe that something helpful has been given. At the same time,
motivational interviewing appears to increase the likelihood that people will
return for additional treatment, increasing the opportunity to receive other
services. For those who need or desire additional help in pursuing change, fur-
ther treatment can be provided.
Surprisingly, it may also not matter if the subsequent treatment is in some
way inconsistent with the principles of motivational interviewing. In one
study,
7 for example, motivational interviewing was given (or not given) at in -
Facilitating Change 27
take to an inpatient treatment program with a confrontive and overtly direc -
tive approach. Yet program counselors (unaware of group assignment)
perceived motivational interviewing recipients to be more motivated and com-
pliant in treatment, and 12-month outcomes were substantially better in the
motivational interviewing group than in people who were going through the
same inpatient program without initial motivational interviewing.
Another way to think about integration is that motivational interviewing
is a counseling and communication style that can be used throughout treat -
ment, not simply as a prelude. There are already integrations of the motiva -
tional interviewing style with consultations as diverse as feedback of assess -
ment results,
8 prenatal counseling,9 and diabetes management.10 The essential
information and interventions are delivered in the style of motivational inter -
viewing, which is both directive and client-centered. There is a dance back and
forth between didactic material and asking for the person’s reactions and per-
spectives.
Still another possibility is to keep motivational interviewing in the back -
ground, to be returned to as motivational issues emerge further down the line
in treatment. Ambivalence does not usually disappear at the moment treat-
ment begins. New motivational challenges may be encountered as homework
assignments are given or as more difficult phases of treatment are reached. At
such points it is possible to fall back to motivational interviewing in order to
resolve new motivational issues as they arise.
As an illustration, all three of these applications of motivational inter-
viewing—as a prelude, a permeating style, and a fall-back option—have been
integrated into a comprehensive behavioral intervention for alcohol depend-
ence in a multisite clinical trial .
11 The first session is strictly motivational in-
terviewing—eliciting and listening to the person’s concerns and reasons for
change. Feedback of assessment results in a motivational interviewing style
begins in the second session, followed by a thorough functional analysis of al-
cohol use in the person’s life. All of this is then drawn together into a treat -
ment plan, drawing on a menu of cognitive-behavioral skill-training modules
to address specific goals for change. These modules are then delivered within a
permeating motivational interviewing style, and the counselor can fall back to
motivational interviewing whenever particular motivational issues or obsta -
cles arise. Personal choice and autonomy are emphasized throughout treat -
ment.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45/G53
1. Bem (1967, 1972).
2. Premack (1970), p. 115.
3. Rockeach (1973).
4. Rollnick and Miller (1995); Sobell and Sobell (1993).
5. Project MATCH Research Group (1997a, 1997b).
28 CONTEXT
6. Aubrey (1998); Bien, Miller, and Boroughs (1993); Brown and Miller (1993);
Saunders, Wilkinson, and Phillips (1995).
7. Brown and Miller (1993).
8. Miller, Zweben, DiClemente, and Rychtarik (1992).
9. Handmaker, Miller, and Manicke (1999).
10. Smith, Heckemeyer, Kratt, and Mason (1997); Trigwell, Grant, and House
(1997).
11. Miller (in press).
Facilitating Change 29
This page intentionally left blank 
PART II
/G50/G72/G61/G63/G74/G69/G63/G65
This page intentionally left blank 
CHAPTER 4
/G57/G68/G61/G74 /G49/G73 /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67/G3F
If you treat an individual as he is, he will stay as he is, but if you
treat him as if he were what he ought to be and could be, he will
become what he ought to be and could be.
—J OHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE
/G53/G50/G49/G52/G49/G54/G4F/G46._/G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C/G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47
In the 11 years since the first edition of this book, we have found ourselves
placing less emphasis on techniques of motivational interviewing and ever
greater emphasis on the fundamental spirit that underlies it. This happened in
part because we encountered individuals who were mimicking some of the
component techniques without understanding their overall context yet believ -
ing that they were doing (or teaching) the method itself. We also began to see
descriptions and evaluations of interventions called “motivational interview -
ing” that bore little resemblance to our understanding of the method. The
broader term “motivational interventions” (which might include anything
from cash vouchers to cattle prods) has come into use and is further confused
with motivational interviewing.
This is, of course, a common phenomenon in the diffusion of innova -
tions.
1 One approach is to try to control use of the term, to certify practitio -
ners, and to copyright procedures. In this way one can devote full-time effort
to policing perceived misuse of a method. We decided instead to focus our
limited time and efforts on doing what we could to promote quality practice,
training, and research and to specify as clearly as possible what motivational
interviewing is and is not.
2
33
If motivational interviewing is a way of being with people, then its under-
lying spirit lies in understanding and experiencing the human nature that gives
rise to that way of being. How one thinks about and understands the inter -
viewing process is vitally important in shaping the interview.
/G43/G6F/G6C/G6C/G61/G62/G6F/G72/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E
Certainly one key component of the spirit of motivational interviewing is its
collaborative nature. The counselor avoids an authoritarian one-up stance, in-
stead communicating a partner-like relationship. The method of motivational
interviewing involves exploration more than exhortation, and support rather
than persuasion or argument. The interviewer seeks to create a positive inter -
personal atmosphere that is conducive but not coercive to change. The collab-
orative nature of the method implies being attuned to and monitoring one’s
own aspirations. The interpersonal process of motivational interviewing is a
meeting of aspirations, which frequently differ. Without awareness of one’s
own opinion and investment, one has only half the picture. (See Chapter 12
for further discussion of this ethical issue.)
/G45/G76/G6F/G63/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E
Consistent with a collaborative role, the interviewer’s tone is not one of im-
parting things (such as wisdom, insight, reality) but rather of eliciting, of find-
ing these things within and drawing them out from the person. To draw a par-
allel distinction from education, the Latin verb docere (a root of doctor,
doctrine, and indoctrinate) implies an expert role, an imparting or inserting of
knowledge in the student. In contrast, the verb ducare means “to draw,” as
one draws water from a well, so that educare is to draw out. It is the latter
form of education, with Socratic roots, that is an apt analogy for the process
of motivational interviewing. It is not an instilling or installing but, rather, an
eliciting, a drawing out of motivation from the person. It requires finding in -
trinsic motivation for change within the person and evoking it, calling it forth.
/G41/G75/G74/G6F/G6E/G6F/G6D/G79
In motivational interviewing, responsibility for change is left with the client—
which, by the way, is where we believe it must lie, no matter how much pro -
fessionals may debate what people can be “made” or “allowed” or “permit -
ted” to do and choose. Another way to say this is that there is respect for the
individual’s autonomy. The client is always free to take counsel—or not. The
overall goal is to increase intrinsic motivation, so that change arises from
within rather than being imposed from without and so that change serves the
person’s own goals and values. As indicated earlier, when motivational inter-
viewing is done properly, it is the client rather than the counselor who pres -
ents the arguments for change.
34 PRACTICE
/G48/G4F/G57/G42/G52/G4F/G41/G44/G49/G53/G54/G48/G45/G48/G4F/G52/G49/G5A/G4F/G4E/G3F
A meta-issue to be dealt with here is the question of where motivational inter-
viewing is applicable and where it is not. As the name implies, its intended fo-
cus is on motivational struggles, issues of change for which a person is not
clearly ready and willing, or is ambivalent. Motivational interviewing itself is
a skillful clinical method, a style of counseling and psychotherapy. It is not a
set of techniques that one can learn quickly in order to deal with annoying
motivational problems.
This has implications for both where and by whom motivational inter -
viewing is practiced. There has been substantial interest, for example, in
applications of motivational interviewing within medical settings, where moti-
vational issues in patient behavior change are quite common but where practi-
tioners may have only a few minutes to deal with them. The desire of practi -
tioners in such settings is usually for something simple that can be done
quickly to address patient reluctance to change health-relevant behavior. That
desire is legitimate, and there are various simpler methods that can be useful
in such contexts,
3 but we distinguish these from motivational interviewing as
a clinical method (see Chapter 18 of this volume).
The difference is a bit like that between a fully trained physician and a
paramedic or medical technician who is taught when and how to perform cer-
tain procedures skillfully. The physician, broadly trained in medicine, is able
to draw flexibly from a wide array of clinical skills and knowledge in treating
What Is Motivational Interviewing? 35
BOX 4.1. The Spirit of Motivational Interviewing
Fundamental approach of
motivational interviewing
Mirror-image opposite approach
to counseling
Collaboration. Counseling involves a
partnership that honors the client’s exper-
tise and perspectives. The counselor
provides an atmosphere that is condu -
cive rather than coercive to change.
Confrontation. Counseling involves over -
riding the client’s impaired perspectives
by imposing awareness and acceptance
of “reality” that the client cannot see or
will not admit.
Evocation. The resources and motivation
for change are presumed to reside with -
in the client. Intrinsic motivation for
change is enhanced by drawing on the
client’s own perceptions, goals, and
values.
Education. The client is presumed to lack
key knowledge, insight, and/or skills that
are necessary for change to occur. The
counselor seeks to address these deficits
by providing the requisite enlightenment.
Autonomy. The counselor affirms the cli-
ent’s right and capacity for self-direction
and facilitates informed choice.
Authority. The counselor tells the client
what he or she must do.
a range of health problems that patients bring. The paramedic learns more cir-
cumscribed skills that can be quite valuable, even life-saving, when applied in
a timely manner within the context of relatively brief contact.
In the same way, a skillful motivational interviewer has learned and prac-
ticed the broad clinical method of motivational interviewing that can be
applied flexibly to a wide range of motivational issues. There are practical
subtleties and ethical complexities that are familiar to an experienced motiva -
tional interviewing clinician, who is prepared to adapt and apply the method
with a broad range of people and problems.
This is not at all to say that busy health professionals cannot or should
not learn the clinical method of motivational interviewing. There are many
who are already superb listeners and have a long head start on developing
clinical skillfulness in motivational interviewing. We have trained (among
others) counselors, dieticians, exercise physiologists, forensic psychiatrists,
nurses, physicians, pastors, probation officers, psychologists, remedial fitness
instructors, caseworkers, and social workers.
As with the useful growth of paramedical practice, we have likewise been
interested and involved in developing simpler techniques in the spirit of moti-
vational interviewing, and these techniques can be applied in practice without
learning and developing clinical skillfulness in the overall method of motiva-
tional interviewing. We have been careful not to call these adaptations “moti-
vational interviewing,” a term that we have reserved for the larger skillful
clinical method. Some of these adaptations are discussed more fully in Chap-
ter 18.
There are also motivational issues for which motivational interviewing
is not an appropriate method, primarily for ethical reasons that are familiar
to health care professionals. We would regard it as improper, for example,
to apply the method of motivational interviewing in order to increase the
likelihood of patients signing an informed consent to treatment or research.
Ethical issues in the use of motivational interviewing are addressed in Chap -
ter 12.
/G46._/G4F/G55/G52/G47/G45/G4E/G45/G52/G41/G4C/G50/G52/G49/G4E/G43/G49/G50/G4C/G45/G53
To help see the forest before we come to the trees, we next outline four broad
guiding principles that underlie motivational interviewing. This is one step
from the above-described general spirit, and toward greater specificity of
practice. These represent a refinement of the principles originally outlined by
Miller (1983) and of those described in our first edition. They are as follows:
1. Express empathy.
2. Develop discrepancy.
3. Roll with resistance.
4. Support self-efficacy.
36 PRACTICE
We elaborate these four basic principles here, saving more specific “how-to”
discussion for subsequent chapters.
/G31/G2E /G45/G78/G70/G72/G65/G73/G73/G45/G6D/G70/G61/G74/G68/G79
A client-centered and empathic counseling style is one fundamental and defin-
ing characteristic of motivational interviewing. We regard the therapeutic skill
of reflective listening or accurate empathy, as described by Carl Rogers, to be
the foundation on which clinical skillfulness in motivational interviewing is
built. This style of empathic communication is employed from the very begin-
ning and throughout the process of motivational interviewing.
The attitude underlying this principle of empathy is properly termed “ac-
ceptance.” Through skillful reflective listening, the counselor seeks to under -
stand the client’s feelings and perspectives without judging, criticizing, or
blaming. It is important to note here that acceptance is not the same thing as
agreement or approval. It is possible to accept and understand a person’s per-
spective while not agreeing with or endorsing it. Neither does an attitude of
acceptance prohibit the counselor from differing with the client’s views and
expressing that divergence. The crucial attitude is a respectful listening to the
person with a desire to understand his or her perspectives. Paradoxically, this
kind of acceptance of people as they are seems to free them to change,
whereas insistent nonacceptance (“You’re not OK; you have to be different”)
tends to immobilize the change process. Family therapists call this sort of phe-
nomenon “ironic process,” because as in Greek tragedy, the action causes the
very outcome that it was meant to avert. Happily, self-fulfilling prophecies
work both ways. The attitude of acceptance and respect builds a working
therapeutic alliance and supports the client’s self-esteem, which further pro -
motes change.
An empathic counselor seeks to respond to a person’s perspectives as un-
derstandable, comprehensible, and (within the person’s framework, at least)
valid. Ambivalence is accepted as a normal part of human experience and
change, rather than seen as pathology or pernicious defensiveness. Reluctance
to change problematic behavior is to be expected in consultation and treat -
ment settings; otherwise, the client would have changed before reaching this
point. The client is not seen as uniquely pathological or incapable. Rather, the
person’s situation is understood as one of having become “stuck” through un-
derstandable psychological processes.
PRINCIPLE 1: EXPRESS EMPATHY.
Acceptance facilitates change.
Skillful reflective listening is fundamental.
Ambivalence is normal.
What Is Motivational Interviewing? 37
/G32/G2E /G44/G65/G76/G65/G6C/G6F/G70/G44/G69/G73/G63/G72/G65/G70/G61/G6E/G63/G79
We certainly do not mean that the general goal of motivational interviewing
should be to have people accept themselves as they are and stay that way. Nei-
ther do we advocate using reflective listening simply to follow people wher -
ever they happen to wander. A person who presents with a health-threatening
drug habit, for example, can be helped to change that behavior, and a person
diagnosed with heart disease or diabetes is well advised to make significant
changes in behavior. The question is how best to present an unpleasant reality
so that the person can confront it and be changed by it.
Here motivational interviewing begins to depart from classic client-
centered counseling. Motivational interviewing is intentionally directive—
directed toward the resolution of ambivalence in the service of change. Totally
exploratory client-centered counseling is legitimate for other purposes—for
example, in helping people sort out their lives or make difficult choices. Moti-
vational interviewing is specifically directed toward getting people unstuck,
helping them move past ambivalence toward positive behavior change. (Of
course, the definition of “positive” here has obvious ethical and value over-
tones, which are considered in Chapter 12.)
A second general principle of motivational interviewing is thus to create
and amplify, from the client’s perspective, a discrepancy between present
behavior and his or her broader goals and values. In the original exposition of
motivational interviewing,
4 this was described as creating “cognitive disso-
nance,” borrowing a concept from Leon Festinger. 5 A more general and, we
now believe, better way to understand this state is simply as a discrepancy be-
tween the present state of affairs and how one wants it to be. (This avoids in-
voking an inherent drive toward cognitive consistency.) Discrepancy may be
triggered by an awareness of and discontent with the costs of one’s present
course of behavior and by perceived advantages of behavior change. When a
behavior is seen as conflicting with important personal goals (such as one’s
health, success, family happiness, or positive self-image), change is more likely
to occur.
We need to clarify here that discrepancy, as we use the term in motiva -
tional interviewing, has to do with the importance of change. This is different
from the amount of behavior change to be accomplished, the distance that
one’s behavior would need to travel in order to reach the desired level (which
for sake of discussion, we will term the “behavioral gap”). The two are easy
to confuse, but importantly different. If the behavioral gap is very large, it can
decrease motivation by diminishing confidence. The wider a chasm, the less
the confidence in one’s ability to jump it. A behavioral gap might be quite
small, but the importance of jumping it very high. Whereas one can easily
imagine a behavioral gap that is so large as to be demotivating, it is difficult to
imagine a change that is too important to make. Just as importance and confi-
dence are different aspects of motivation (see Chapter 6), so discrepancy and
behavioral gap affect motivation in different ways.
38 PRACTICE
Many people who seek consultation already perceive significant discrep -
ancy between what is happening and what they want to happen. Yet they are
also ambivalent, caught in an approach–avoidance conflict. A goal of motiva-
tional interviewing is to develop discrepancy—to make use of it, increase it,
and amplify it until it overrides the inertia of the status quo. The methods of
motivational interviewing seek to accomplish this within the person, rather
than relying primarily on external and coercive motivators (e.g., pressure from
the spouse, threat of unemployment, or court-imposed contingencies). This of-
ten involves identifying and clarifying the person’s own goals and values with
which the behavior may conflict. When skillfully done, motivational inter -
viewing changes the person’s perceptions (of discrepancy) without creating
any sense of being pressured or coerced. This is because the discrepancy is be-
tween current behavior and goals or values that are important to the person.
A sense of coercion arises when a person is pressured to change behavior be -
cause it is discrepant with someone else’s goals or values.
The general approach is one that results in the client presenting the rea -
sons for change, rather than the counselor doing so. People are often more
persuaded by what they hear themselves say than by what other people tell
them. When motivational interviewing is done well, it is not the counselor but
the client who gives voice to concerns, reasons for change, self-efficacy, and
intentions to change.
PRINCIPLE 2: DEVELOP DISCREPANCY.
The client rather than the counselor should present the arguments for
change.
Change is motivated by a perceived discrepancy between present behavior
and important personal goals or values.
/G33/G2E /G52/G6F/G6C/G6C/G77/G69/G74/G68/G52/G65/G73/G69/G73/G74/G61/G6E/G63/G65
It follows from this that the least desirable situation, from the standpoint of
evoking change, is for the counselor to advocate for change while the client ar-
gues against it. Such argumentation is counterproductive. Not only is the am -
bivalent person unlikely to be persuaded, but direct argument may actually
press the person in the opposite direction that he or she is caused to defend.
If you don’t argue for change, then what do you do? Jay Haley and other
pioneers in the field of strategic family therapy made the analogy of psycho -
logical judo, referring to martial arts in which an attack is not met with direct
opposition (as in boxing), but rather one goes with the attacker’s momentum,
using it to good advantage. It makes no difference what one throws at a mas -
ter of this art. All blows fall on empty air, and the harder one attacks, the
faster one falls into nothing.
This analogy can easily be taken too far. Motivational interviewing is not
What Is Motivational Interviewing? 39
combat or even a chess match; it is not about winning and losing. The person
is not an opponent to be outsmarted or defeated. Yet the illustration of rolling
with resistance is useful. Resistance that a person offers can be turned or
reframed slightly to create a new momentum toward change. The object that
is in motion here is not a body but a perception. The problems and specifics of
how this works will come later. For now, the point is that in motivational in -
terviewing one does not directly oppose resistance but, rather, rolls or flows
with it.
There is also an element here of great respect for the person. What to do
about a problem, if anything, is ultimately an individual decision. Reluctance
and ambivalence are not opposed but are acknowledged to be natural and un-
derstandable. The counselor does not impose new views or goals; rather, the
person is invited to consider new information and is offered new perspectives.
“Take what you want and leave the rest” is the permissive kind of advice that
pervades this approach. It’s an approach that is hard to fight against.
In motivational interviewing, the counselor also commonly turns a ques -
tion or problem back to the person. It is not the counselor’s job to provide all
the answers and generate all the solutions. Doing so, in fact, invites the person
to find the flaws in each idea (“Yes, but . . . ”). It is assumed that the person is
a capable and autonomous individual, with important insight and ideas for
the solution of his or her own problems. Rolling with resistance, then, in-
cludes involving the person actively in the process of problem solving.
Finally, client behaviors that are labeled as “resistance” represent, in mo-
tivational interviewing, a signal for the counselor to shift approach. Resis-
tance is an interpersonal phenomenon, and how the counselor responds will
influence whether it increases or diminishes.
PRINCIPLE 3: ROLL WITH RESISTANCE.
Avoid arguing for change.
Resistance is not directly opposed.
New perspectives are invited but not imposed.
The client is a primary resource in finding answers and solutions.
Resistance is a signal to respond differently.
/G34/G2E /G53/G75/G70/G70/G6F/G72/G74/G53/G65/G6C/G66/G2D/G45/G66/G66/G69/G63/G61/G63/G79
A fourth important principle of motivational interviewing involves the con -
cept of self-efficacy, which refers to a person’s belief in his or her ability to
carry out and succeed with a specific task. Self-efficacy is a key element in mo-
tivation for change and is a reasonably good predictor of treatment outcome.
A counselor may follow the first three principles outlined here, and thereby
develop a person’s perception that he or she has an important problem. If the
client perceives no hope or possibility for change, however, then no effort will
be made, and the counselor’s efforts have been in vain.
40 PRACTICE
Although self-efficacy is a relatively recent term, healers have long recog -
nized that hope and faith are important elements of change. 6 The counselor’s
own expectations about a person’s likelihood of change can have a powerful
effect on outcome, acting as a self-fulfilling prophecy.
7 A general goal of moti-
vational interviewing is to enhance the client’s confidence in his or her capa -
bility to cope with obstacles and to succeed in change.
Self-efficacy is the other side of personal responsibility for change. To as-
sert that a person is responsible for deciding and directing his or her own
change is to assume that the person is capable of doing so. The person not
only can but must make the change, in the sense that no one else can do it for
him or her. Motivational interviewing does not foster the view that the coun -
selor will change the client. “I will change you” is not the intended message. A
more appropriate message is, “If you wish, I can help you change.” A person
may also be encouraged by the success of others or by his or her own past suc-
cesses in changing behavior.
PRINCIPLE 4: SUPPORT SELF-EFFICACY.
A person’s belief in the possibility of change is an important motivator.
The client, not the counselor, is responsible for choosing and carrying out
change.
The counselor’s own belief in the person’s ability to change becomes a self-
fulfilling prophecy.
/G53/G55/G4D/G4D/G41/G52/G59
Before learning and while practicing motivational interviewing, it is vital to
understand the overall spirit and underlying assumptions of the method. Mo -
tivational interviewing honors and respects the individual’s autonomy to
choose. It is a collaborative, not a prescriptive, approach, in which the coun -
selor evokes the person’s own intrinsic motivation and resources for change.
Implicit is the belief that such motivation and resourcefulness do lie within
each individual and need to be evoked rather than imposed. We believe that
each person possesses a powerful potential for change. The counselor’s task is
to release that potential and to facilitate the natural change processes that are
already inherent in the individual. Motivational interviewing is about helping
to free people from the ambivalence that entraps them in repetitive cycles of
self-defeating or self-destructive behavior.
Motivational interviewing is a skillful clinical method, not a set of tech -
niques that can be easily learned. It is more than a set of techniques for doing
counseling. It is a way of being with people, which is likely to be quite differ -
ent from how others may have treated them in the past. It is designed to re -
solve motivational issues that inhibit positive behavior change. Simpler tech -
niques in the spirit of motivational interviewing have been adapted for use
What Is Motivational Interviewing? 41
where training and consultation time is more limited, but these should not be
understood to constitute the method of motivational interviewing.
Four broad principles underlie the specific methods that are described in
the subsequent chapters of Part II. We have discussed them apart from practi-
cal how-to elements in order to provide a larger context regarding the “why”
of practice. These principles bespeak the more general spirit and philosophy
that underlie motivational interviewing. This way of being is not the whole
story of change, of course. There are many specific treatment strategies that
can be quite helpful as people pursue the course of change. Motivational inter-
viewing is intended to get the person unstuck—to start the change process
happening. Once begun, change may occur rapidly with relatively little addi -
tional assistance, or it may require a span of professional consultation and
support.
We turn now to eight chapters addressing specific aspects of the practice
of motivational interviewing. In Chapter 5 we discuss the polarity of change
talk and resistance, which is the central dimension to which one attends in
practicing motivational interviewing. In Chapter 6, we introduce methods that
are important from the outset and which can help you avoid some common
traps that await you. These methods are most appropriate for building moti-
vation to change, the first of two major phases of motivational interviewing.
In Chapters 7 to 9 we explain three key areas of skill that are fundamental to
motivational interviewing: reflective listening, responding to change talk, and
responding to resistance. Then in Chapter 10 we proceed to discuss methods
appropriate for strengthening the commitment to change, the second phase of
motivational interviewing. Chapter 11 offers a practical case from start to fin-
ish to illustrate how the methods of motivational interviewing are interwoven.
Then in Chapter 12 we address issues of ethics, values, and priorities that arise
when one practices motivational interviewing.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45/G53
1. Rogers (1995).
2. See Chapter 18, this volume; see also Rollnick and Miller (1995).
3. Rollnick, Mason, and Butler (1999).
4. Miller (1983).
5. Festinger (1957).
6. Frank and Frank (1991); Miller (1985); Shapiro (1971).
7. Jones (1977); Leake and King (1977); Parker, Winstead, and Willi (1979).
42 PRACTICE
CHAPTER 5
/G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65 /G61/G6E/G64 /G52/G65/G73/G69/G73/G74/G61/G6E/G63/G65
/G4F/G70/G70/G6F/G73/G69/G74/G65 /G53/G69/G64/G65/G73 /G6F/G66 /G61 /G43/G6F/G69/G6E
“Why are you drinking?” demanded the little prince.
“So that I may forget,” replied the tippler.
“Forget what?” inquired the little prince, who already was sorry
for him.
“Forget that I am ashamed,” the tippler confessed, hanging his
head.
“Ashamed of what?” insisted the little prince, who wanted to help.
“Ashamed of drinking!” The tippler brought his speech to an end,
and shut himself up in an impregnable silence.
And the little prince went away puzzled.
“The grown-ups are certainly very, very odd,” he said to himself.
—A NTOINE DE SAINT-EXUPÉRY, The Little Prince
/G43/G4F/G4E/G53/G4F/G4E/G41/G4E/G43/G45 /G41/G4E/G44 /G44/G49/G53/G53/G4F/G4E/G41/G4E/G43/G45
When things are going well in a motivational interview, there is a sense of
moving together smoothly, like two dancers gliding across a ballroom floor.
There may be some missteps, a small bump or loss of balance here and there,
even occasional stepping on toes, but in general the two partners move to -
gether.
The feeling is quite different when instead of moving together, the coun -
selor and client seem to be struggling against each other, grappling for control
like two adversaries in a wrestling match. One opponent may be bigger or
43
more powerful than the other, but each seeks to pin the other while warily
avoiding being pinned. Consider this dialogue between probation officer and
a man on probation, during a weekly check-in visit.
P
ROBATION OFFICER: What have you been doing this week?
CLIENT: Not much, really.
PROBATION OFFICER: What about finding a job?
CLIENT: Yeah, I’ve been looking.
PROBATION OFFICER: How seriously?
CLIENT: I’ve been looking, OK? I put in two applications this week.
PROBATION OFFICER: Good for you. Where?
CLIENT: At the gas station and the supermarket near my apartment. Listen, it
would be a lot easier for me to find a job if I had my driver’s license back,
and if I didn’t have to come here every week.
P
ROBATION OFFICER: So tell me why you don’t have driving privileges.
CLIENT: I was driving with a suspended license . . . looking for a job!
PROBATION OFFICER: And your license was suspended because . . .
CLIENT: You know why. I didn’t pay the fine for a couple of tickets. I could
pay it if I could get to a job.
PROBATION OFFICER: And you’re telling me that in a whole week you’ve only
put in two job applications?
Although it sounds like these two are talking about the same topic, employ-
ment, in fact they have quite different agendas. Each wants something from
the other. The probation officer wants this man to be employed and, more
generally, to maintain a responsible lifestyle. The man wants greater freedom,
and specifically he wants his driving license reinstated. Both evade the other’s
grasp and seek to shift the conversation to their own preferred topic.
We have chosen the terms “consonant” and “dissonant” as the two poles
of a continuum for describing how a conversation (and counseling relation -
ship) is going at any given time. Clearly, in the preceding example, the conver-
sation was leaning toward the dissonant end of the scale. The ends of the scale
might equally be anchored by the terms “dancing” and “wrestling.” In either
case, the terminology describes the present nature of an interaction. The coun-
seling alliance or relationship fluctuates along this continuum of consonance
versus dissonance.
The probation counselor might characterize the client’s behavior in this
example as defensive or resistant. From the counselor’s perspective, “The cli -
ent is not taking my lead.” In preparing this second edition, we debated
whether to retain or remove the term “resistance” in writing about motiva -
tional interviewing, for there are several aspects of the term that trouble us.
44 PRACTICE
Chief among these is an implicit tone of blaming the person for being uncoop-
erative, or at least attributing the problem to the client’s pathology. What is
happening in the preceding conversation is not the product of one person, but
of two. It is a function of their interaction. Dissonance in a counseling rela -
tionship is not the product of resistance—of only one person’s behavior.
As will be elaborated next, we decided to retain the concept of resistance
and to rehabilitate it. Resistance is something that occurs only within the con-
text of a relationship or a system. In the physics of electricity, it is an attribute
related to current flow within a system. In human psychology, it is something
that happens between people. A difficulty is that within the context of psycho-
therapy, resistance is usually used to describe the behavior of only one person,
the client. Although transference has its countertransference in psychoanaly -
sis, there is no corresponding concept of counterresistance to describe the
counselor’s role in evoking and maintaining this interaction. Later in this
chapter, we propose such a term and offer a more specific behavioral defini -
tion for client resistance.
At a larger level, however, we wanted to describe the fluctuating nature
of a relationship, and this is how we arrived at the continuum of consonance
and dissonance. Drawing on the musical analogy, dissonance cannot be
judged from a single note but involves the relationship between notes. There is
a clear connotation of working together in a manner that is harmonious ver-
sus discordant, and unlike dancing and wrestling, these two terms are direct
antonyms. Our only reluctance was the potential confusion of dissonance
with cognitive dissonance, a concept that sometimes is used in conceptualizing
motivational interviewing,
1 although not in this volume.
When a relationship is going dissonant, it is important to understand
why. To use the term “resistance” as explanatory seems to suggest that things
are not going smoothly because of something that one person (the client) is
doing. We advocate a more relational view, in which client resistance behavior
is, at most, a signal of dissonance in the relationship. In a way, it is
oxymoronic to say that one person is not cooperating. It requires at least two
people to not cooperate, to yield dissonance.
/G57/G48/G41/G54 /G43/G41/G55/G53/G45/G53 /G44/G49/G53/G53/G4F/G4E/G41/G4E/G43/G45/G3F
In the preceding dialogue, one important source of dissonance was that the
two people clearly had different agendas, different aspirations. In part, the
struggle was over whose agenda would be negotiated and whose aspirations
fulfilled. As it went, there was not much negotiation happening at all. Each
wanted something different and eluded the other’s attempts to establish the
topic of conversation.
There are many other possible sources of dissonant communication, be -
sides the two parties having different goals. Some arise from a mismatch of
counselor strategy to client readiness level, even when the two agree about the
Change and Resistance 45
topic of conversation. If a person is ambivalent about a particular change, for
example, and the counselor has jumped ahead to talk about how the person
can take action to accomplish the change, there is dissonance. This happens
not just in counseling relationships but in any interaction where one person
communicates a level of request or demand for change that is higher than the
other’s level of readiness for change.
2 If either the client or the counselor
brings into the room a high level of anger or frustration (as might occur if the
client has been kept waiting for a long period of time), there can be dissonance
at the outset. If a counselor, instead of listening, responds in the ways charac -
terized in Chapter 6 as roadblocks, there is likely to be dissonance. A misun -
derstanding of the other’s intent can yield dissonance.
Another important source of dissonance is particularly pertinent in un -
derstanding motivational interviewing, and that is a lack of agreement about
roles in the relationship. This is common in parental interactions with teenag-
ers. As adolescents mature, their relationship to their parents shifts, and disso-
nance emerges around issues of autonomy. The parent who rigidly maintains
a stance of “I’m in charge here, and you will do whatever I tell you” may run
headlong into an adolescent who asserts, “You can’t tell me what to do.”
Their roles are defined, and the stage is set for a power struggle. Similar dy-
namics can emerge when counselor and client have different implicit assump-
tions about who is in charge and who determines what the client should do.
Remembering that consonance–dissonance is a fluctuating state, the next
question is what happens when dissonance occurs. We believe it is the coun-
selor’s responsibility to perceive the dissonance, understand its source, and
find ways to restore consonance in the working relationship. How to do this is
a primary topic of Chapter 8.
/G43/G48/G41/G4E/G47/G45 /G54/G41/G4C/G4B /G41/G4E/G44 /G52/G45/G53/G49/G53/G54/G41/G4E/G43/G45
This brings us back to the subject of resistance. We are using this term, as is
customary, to describe certain kinds of client responses, albeit with the recog -
nition that they occur in the context of and are influenced by interpersonal
interaction. Whereas consonance–dissonance describes the current nature of a
relationship and interaction, we use resistance (and change talk) to refer to cli-
ent behavior. Putting these two constructs together, client resistance behavior
is a signal of dissonance in the counseling relationship .
Client resistance is a meaningful signal. In counseling where the target
behavior was problem drinking, we found that resistance, defined as we de -
scribe it here, predicted a lack of change in drinking. The more resistance re -
sponses occurred during a single session of counseling, the more the person
was drinking 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months later.
3 This and other re -
search further demonstrated that client resistance behavior is under the exper-
imental control of the counselor; it can be increased or decreased, depending
on how the counselor responds to it. 4
46 PRACTICE
Just as consonance and dissonance are opposite ends of a relationship
continuum, resistance behavior has a conceptual opposite that we now call
“change talk.” (In the first edition we referred to this with the more unwieldy
term “self-motivational statements,” which we have found in training to be a
confusing descriptor.) As a reminder from Chapter 3, we identify four catego-
ries of change talk: disadvantages of the status quo, advantages of change, op-
timism for change, and intention to change. Change talk reflects movement of
the person toward change, while resistance represents and predicts movement
away from change.
It is important, therefore, for the counselor to recognize both change talk
and resistance responses. Within motivational interviewing, there are specific
ways of responding to each of these client behaviors. In fact, ways of respond-
ing are the principal topic of Chapters 8 and 9. Motivational interviewing
tends to evoke high levels of change talk and relatively low levels of resistance.
In contrast, confrontational counseling tends to evoke high levels of resistance
and relatively low levels of change talk, and this pattern predicts a lack of
long-term behavior change.
There are many ways of defining client resistance responses. In our first
edition, we focused on specific observable client behaviors (rather than infer-
ring unconscious processes). The behavior categories shown in Box 5.1 are
adapted from an observational system that was originally developed at the
Oregon Research Institute to study client resistance during treatment ses-
sions.
5 In this system, there are four major categories of client resistance re-
sponses. Each of these four of has been found to predict a lack of future
behavior change.6 To be sure, these categories can overlap. Except for certain
research purposes, it is not necessary to be concerned about which category is
the right classification for a particular client response. The point is that these
responses signal dissonance in the counseling process and may indicate that
the person is moving away from the direction of change.
As we explored further the dynamics of motivational interviewing, how -
ever, we began to encounter some shortcomings in defining resistance simply
as behaviors such as disagreeing. For example, in both of the following exam-
ples, the client’s response could be coded as arguing:
N
URSE: Your diabetes is really unstable, and you’ve got to stop playing Rus -
sian roulette with sweets and insulin.
PATIENT: It’s not that bad, really. I know what I’m doing.
NURSE: It may be that the freedom to eat whatever you want, whenever you
want, is so important to you that you’re willing to put up with the conse-
quences, no matter how severe.
PATIENT: Well, I don’t know if it’sthat important. I don’t want to go blind or
lose my feet or anything like that.
Change and Resistance 47
Similarly, an interrupt may occur because a client vehemently disagrees with
what the counselor is saying, or it could reflect a client’s excitement about
ideas and possibilities. That is, with the exception of negating responses, the
verbal behaviors described here as resistance may, in some circumstances, rep-
resent movement toward change.
48 PRACTICE
BOX 5.1. Four Process Categories of Client Resistance Behavior
1. Arguing. The client contests the accuracy, expertise, or integrity of the counselor.
1a. Challenging. The client directly challenges the accuracy of what the counselor has
said.
1b. Discounting. The client questions the counselor’s personal authority and expertise.
1c. Hostility. The client expresses direct hostility toward the counselor.
2. Interrupting. The client breaks in and interrupts the counselor in a defensive manner.
2a. Talking over. The client speaks while the counselor is still talking, without waiting for
an appropriate pause or silence.
2b. Cutting off. The client breaks in with words obviously intended to cut the counselor
off (e.g., “Now wait a minute. I’ve heard about enough”).
3. Negating. The client expresses an unwillingness to recognize problems, cooperate, ac -
cept responsibility, or take advice.
3a. Blaming. The client blames other people for problems.
3b. Disagreeing. The client disagrees with a suggestion that the counselor has made, of-
fering no constructive alternative. This includes the familiar “Yes, but . . ., ” which
explains what is wrong with suggestions that are made.
3c. Excusing. The client makes excuses for his or her own behavior.
3d. Claiming impunity. The client claims that he or she is not in any danger (e.g., from
drinking).
3e. Minimizing. The client suggests that the counselor is exaggerating risks or dangers,
and that it “really isn’t so bad.”
3f. Pessimism. The client makes general statements about self or others that are pessi-
mistic, defeatist, or negativistic in tone.
3g. Reluctance. The client expresses reservations and reluctance about information or
advice given.
3h. Unwillingness to change. The client expresses a lack of desire or an unwillingness to
change, or an intention not to change.
4. Ignoring. The client shows evidence of ignoring or not following the counselor.
4a. Inattention. The client’s response indicates that he or she has not been following or
attending to the counselor.
4b. Nonanswer. In answering a counselor’s query, the client gives a response that is not
an answer to the question.
4c. No response. The client gives no audible or nonverbal reply to a counselor’s query.
4d. Sidetracking. The client changes the direction of the conversation that the counselor
has been pursuing.
Note. Adapted from a behavior coding system developed by Chamberlain, Patterson, Reid, Kavanagh, and
Forgatch (1984).
This led us to a new perspective: that resistance, like motivation and self-
efficacy, is change-specific. A person may be quite motivated, for example, to
stop using cocaine, but be unconcerned about alcohol and marijuana use.
Change talk and resistance talk can be understood only in relation to a partic-
ular kind of change. Speech that reflects movement toward that particular
change is what we originally referred to as self-motivational statements and
now call change talk. Speech that reflects movement away from a particular
change is what we mean by resistance. Viewed in this way, the same statement
(such as, “I have decided not to break up with my boyfriend”) could consti -
tute change talk for one outcome (e.g., reconciling the relationship), but resis-
tance for another (e.g., stopping drug use, if the boyfriend is a drug dealer).
We therefore define resistance as speech that signals movement away
from a particular kind of change. In this way, it is the mirror image of change
talk (see Box 5.2). Motivational interviewing involves recognizing and re -
sponding in particular ways to these two important forms of client speech.
/G43/G4F/G55/G4E/G53/G45/G4C/G4F/G52/G92/G53 /G52/G4F/G4C/G45 /G49/G4E /G52/G45/G53/G49/G53/G54/G41/G4E/G43/G45
We have alluded in several chapters to counselor styles and behaviors that can
elicit and intensify client resistance and thereby decrease the probability of
behavior change. These are responses that, in essence, are complementary to
client resistance, much as countertransference is complementary to and rein-
forces client transference. Here and elsewhere we have referred to such re-
sponses generically as “confrontational,” and earlier in this chapter we sug-
gested the idea of counterresistance.
What do these counselor behaviors look like? We have chosen the term
“advocacy” to describe this set of counselor responses that tend to elicit and
reinforce resistance behavior. The connotation of the term is to argue or plead
for a particular cause. Thus—like motivation, self-efficacy, change talk, and
resistance—advocacy is also change-specific, and the term itself is morally
neutral. Many of Thomas Gordon’s “roadblocks” (described in the next chap-
ter) are examples of advocacy responses. (This usage should not be confused
Change and Resistance 49
BOX 5.2. Change Talk and Resistance
Change talk Resistance talk
Disadvantages of status quo Advantages of status quo
Advantages of change Disadvantages of change
Intention to change Intention not to change
Optimism about change Pessimism about change
with “client advocacy,” which denotes the clinician’s role in promoting the
rights and welfare of clients.)
We propose six broad types of advocacy responses, as shown in Box 5.3.
They have in common an “I know best, listen to me” tone. Again, each of
these responses is understood in relation to the particular change for which
one is advocating. It is the case, however, that each of these advocacy re -
sponses can also have a more generic effect of damaging rapport and enhanc -
ing dissonance in the counseling relationship.
It can take relatively few such responses to sour an entire consultation,
session, or counseling relationship. In one study
7 we found that counselors
who were trained in motivational interviewing did show significant increases
in the appropriate responses such as reflective listening, affirming, and asking
open questions. These changes in counseling style endured 3 months later, and
yet their clients were not responding any differently! It was then we noticed
that while we had been successful in increasing the rate of some responses
consistent with motivational interviewing, we had done nothing to decrease
the rate of advocacy responses, and it seemed to take only a few of these to in-
terfere with client motivation for change. The same is true in relationships
more generally. It can take a long time to build trust and intimacy, but only a
short time to destroy them.
50 PRACTICE
BOX 5.3. Six Types of Counselor Advocacy Responses
1. Arguing for change. The counselor directly takes up the pro-change side of ambivalence
on a particular issue and seeks to persuade the client to make the change.
2. Assuming the expert role. The counselor structures the conversation in a way that commu-
nicates that the counselor “has the answers.” This includes the question–answer trap of
asking many closed-ended questions, as well as lecturing the client.
3. Criticizing, shaming, or blaming. The counselor’s underlying intent seems to be to shock
or jar the client into changing by instilling negative emotions about the status quo.
4. Labeling. The counselor proposes acceptance of a specific label or diagnosis to charac-
terize or explain the client’s behavior. The focus is on what the client “is” or “has” rather
than on what he or she does.
5. Being in a hurry . Sometimes a perceived shortness of time causes the counselor to be -
lieve that clear, forceful tactics are called for in order to get through. From his experi -
ence in working with horses, Monty Roberts 8 has observed the paradox that “if you act
like you only have a few minutes” it can take all day to accomplish a change, whereas
“if you act like you have all day,” it may take only a few minutes. In counseling, this
most often takes the form of getting ahead of your client’s readiness.
6.
Claiming preeminence. Finally, resistance is invoked when a counselor claims preemi -
nence—that the counselor’s goals and perspectives override those of the client. The
quintessential form is a paternalistic, “I know what is best for you” approach.
As with the roadblocks in Chapter 6, we do not mean to say that it is al -
ways wrong to respond in advocacy terms. There are times when a client spe -
cifically requests the benefit of expertise, for example. A patient presenting
with a distressing rash or infection usually wants the doctor’s expert opinion
and solution. Recognizing a valid diagnosis can be an important step in ad -
dressing bipolar disorder or tuberculosis. When it comes to consultations
about behavior, however, advocacy responses are often counterproductive,
and the focus needs to be on building the client’s intrinsic motivation for
change, the topic to which we turn in Chapter 6.
/G53/G55/G4D/G4D/G41/G52/G59
Client responses must be understood within the context of the counseling rela-
tionship and are substantially influenced by how the counselor, in turn, re -
sponds to them. The counseling relationship fluctuates over time along a con -
tinuum from consonance to dissonance. Certain client responses, specifically
change talk and resistance, are markers of consonance and dissonance, and
they are also meaningful predictors of the probability of behavior change.
Certain counseling responses evoke and exacerbate resistance, and it is impor-
tant to remember to “First, do no harm,” even and particularly when time is
short. Within motivational interviewing, the counselor responds in particular
ways to change talk in order to reinforce it, and to resistance in order to di-
minish it, both in the service of resolving ambivalence and promoting behav-
ior change. Recognizing these two types of client behavior is therefore an im-
portant skill in motivational interviewing.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45/G53
1. Miller (1983).
2. Amrhein (1992).
3. Miller, Benefield, and Tonigan (1993).
4. Patterson and Forgatch (1985).
5. Chamberlain, Patterson, Reid, Kavanagh, and Forgatch (1984).
6. Miller et al. (1993).
7. Miller and Mount (2001).
8. Roberts (1997).
Change and Resistance 51
CHAPTER 6
/G50/G68/G61/G73/G65 /G31
/G42/G75/G69/G6C/G64/G69/G6E/G67 /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E /G66/G6F/G72 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65
What people really need is a good listening to.
—M ARY LOU CASEY
A fool takes no pleasure in understanding, but only in expressing
personal opinion.
—P ROVERBS 18:2
We have conceptualized motivational interviewing as occurring in two phases,
with somewhat different, albeit overlapping, goals. Phase 1 involves building
intrinsic motivation for change. If the person is starting far down the moun -
tain slope of motivation, this can feel like a long and gradual process, perhaps
like snowshoeing upward one step at a time. At some point, importance peaks
enough to begin talking about strategies rather than reasons for change. Phase
2 involves strengthening commitment to change and developing a plan to ac -
complish it. This is often the easier task, more like skiing down the other side
of a summit, and the challenge is akin to avoiding moguls, trees, and cliffs on
the way down.
Because the overall goal in Phase 1 is to resolve ambivalence and build
motivation for change, the amount of work to be done will depend on the per-
son’s starting point. Some people come to counseling already quite convinced
that there are ample reasons for them to make a change, and there is little left
to do in Phase 1 except to gain a clear understanding of those reasons from
52
the client’s perspective. There is no point in prolonging Phase 1 if the person is
ready to ski.
A dimension to which we gave insufficient attention in our first edition,
however, is a person’s confidence in his or her ability to change. Extending
our mountaineering analogy, the person has reached a peak but has no skis.
/G49/G4D/G50/G4F/G52/G54/G41/G4E/G43/G45 /G41/G4E/G44 /G43/G4F/G4E/G46._/G49/G44/G45/G4E/G43/G45
It is useful in understanding a person’s ambivalence to know his or her percep-
tions of both importance and confidence. Both need to be addressed in Phase
1 because both are components of intrinsic motivation for change. One simple
method that we have used is a ruler with gradations from 0 to 10 for each of
these dimensions. Sometimes we directly ask the question using this scale.
“How important would you say it is for you to ?O na
scale from 0 to 10, where 0 is not at all important and 10 is extremely
important, where would you say you are?”
01234567891 0
Not at all Extremely
important important
And how confident would you say you are, that if you decided to
, you could do it? On the same scale from 0 to 10, where
0 is not at all confident and 10 is extremely confident, where would you
say you are?”
It is not necessary to show the client a ruler, though it can be helpful to do so.
It works simply to describe the scale in language like that above. Some prefer
not to use a formal scale at all, but just to talk about importance and confi -
dence and get an informal sense of where the person is on each of these two
dimensions. However you proceed, the idea is to end up knowing how impor-
tant the client perceives change to be, and how confident the person is that he
or she could do it. Notice that the second of these questions is phrased in the
subjunctive: How confident are you that you could make this change? This al-
lows confidence to be somewhat detached from importance. The client can
give you an estimate of confidence without agreeing that the change is impor -
tant to make.
Oversimplifying for the moment, assume that one can think of each of
these two dimensions as being either high or low. This leaves four possible
profiles (see Box 6.1).
For Groups A, B, and C, there is work to do in Phase 1. For A and B there
is importance work, for unless the person comes to perceive change as suffi -
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 53
ciently important, it is unlikely to happen. For Group C, perceived importance
is already there. What they need is self-efficacy, an effective way of pursuing
change in which they believe they can succeed. This is also a task for Group A,
where both importance and confidence are low.
Reality is more complex than this. Instead of falling into two groups, high
and low, people vary along a continuum on each dimension. Furthermore, these
two scales address the willingness and ability aspects of motivation, but not the
third dimension of readiness. Group D say they are willing (importance) and
able (confidence) to change, but they still may not be ready to do so.
These three dimensions—ready, willing, and able—are related to each
other in complex ways. Readiness implies at least some degree of both impor-
tance and confidence. A person who does not see change as important is un -
likely to be ready to change. Similarly, people who see change as impossible
are unlikely to say that they are ready to do it. If importance is high enough,
those with low confidence still might say that they are ready to try. Impor -
tance and confidence can interact in other ways as well. A person with very
low confidence may be reluctant to consider that change is important. High
importance with low confidence (Group C) is a distressing place to be, be -
cause such people see the danger but no way to escape it, or they see a promise
that is beyond their reach. Given low confidence, a person may be reluctant
even to explore importance because “What’s the point in thinking about it?”
Why would anyone want to move from Group A to Group C? Low confi -
dence can therefore be an obstacle, in Group A, to developing discrepancy
(importance) during Phase 1.
54 PRACTICE
BOX 6.1. Four Client Profiles
Group A: Low importance, Group B: Low importance,
low confidence high confidence
These people neither see change as These people are confident that they could
important nor believe that they could make the change if they thought it were
succeed in making such a change if important to do so but are not persuaded that
they tried. they want to change.
Group C: High importance, Group D: High importance,
low confidence high confidence
Here the problem is not in willingness These people see it is important to change
to change, for these people express and also believe that they could succeed.
desire to do so. The problem is low
confidence that they could succeed
if they tried.
Phase 1 therefore can involve either importance work or confidence
work, or both. When both are needed, the order is flexible. It may be neces -
sary to address confidence first, before the person will engage in discussing
importance issues. Such might be the case with a demoralized smoker who has
had many unsuccessful quit attempts. Others will grapple with importance
first and then address confidence issues later. Often importance and confi -
dence are discussed either simultaneously or by going back and forth between
the two.
The focus of this chapter is on how to begin Phase 1. We describe here
some opening methods for motivational interviewing that will allow you to
put into practice the principles outlined in Chapter 5. We begin by explaining
some traps that can be encountered early in motivational interviewing, with
specific examples of counseling dialogue to illustrate how counselors may fall
into or avoid these pitfalls. In essence, these traps are various forms of coun -
selor advocacy, as described in Chapter 5.
/G53/G4F/G4D/G45 /G45/G41/G52/G4C/G59 /G54/G52/G41/G50/G53 /G54/G4F /G41/G56/G4F/G49/G44
/G51/G75/G65/G73/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G96/G41/G6E/G73/G77/G65/G72 /G54/G72/G61/G70
At the outset of a counseling process, it is easy to fall into a pattern whereby
the counselor asks questions and the person gives short answers. This is simi-
lar to what may occur when a physician conducts a general health screening:
The patient responds “Yes” or “No” to a long survey of potential problem ar-
eas. This can happen in part because the counselor feels a need for specific in-
formation. It may also be a response to anxiety—either in the counselor, who
wants to keep control, or in the client, who is more comfortable with the safe
predictability of this passive role. Indeed, counselor anxiousness has been as -
sociated with less empathic responding and may favor the structured format
of question–answer.
1 In this trap, the “expert” counselor controls the session
by asking questions, while the person merely responds with short answers.
Here is an example. In this and subsequent interview segments, we designate
the dialogue as occurring between a counselor-interviewer and a client.
I
NTERVIEWER: You’re here to talk about your gambling, is that right?
CLIENT: Yes, I am.
INTERVIEWER: Do you think you gamble too much?
CLIENT: Probably.
INTERVIEWER: What is your favorite game?
CLIENT: Blackjack.
INTERVIEWER: Do you usually drink when you gamble?
CLIENT: Yes, I do usually.
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 55
INTERVIEWER: Have you ever gone seriously into debt because of gambling?
CLIENT: Once or twice, yes.
INTERVIEWER: How far into debt?
CLIENT: Once I had to borrow eight thousand to pay off a debt.
INTERVIEWER: Are you married?
CLIENT: No, I’m divorced.
INTERVIEWER: How long ago were you divorced?
CLIENT: Two years ago.
It can happen so easily. There are several negative aspects of this pattern.
First, it teaches the client to give short, simple answers, rather than the kind of
elaboration needed in motivational interviewing. Second, it subtly implies an
interaction between an active expert and a passive patient: if you just ask
enough questions, then you will have the answer. It affords little opportunity
for a person to explore motivation and to offer change talk.
This trap is relatively easy to avoid. If you need concrete information at
the outset, we recommend having clients complete a precounseling question-
naire and saving the other specifics for later. This saves you from going
through an inventory of short-answer questions. The open-ended questions
and reflective listening methods explained later in this chapter are also very
helpful in getting around the question–answer trap.
There is a subtler form of this same trap, however, which involves open-
ended questions. The optimal approach is usually to ask an open-ended ques-
tion, then to respond to the client’s response not with another question but
with reflective listening. The use of a series of open-ended questions without
sufficient reflective listening can have a very similar effect to that of a series of
closed questions. The client is directed into a passive, question–answering
role. As a general clinical guideline, avoid asking three questions in a row.
/G54/G72/G61/G70 /G6F/G66 /G54/G61/G6B/G69/G6E/G67/G53/G69/G64/G65/G73
From the perspective of motivational interviewing, taking sides is the most im-
portant trap to avoid, and a common trap it is. Counselors fall into it through
their own good intentions and through a particular conception of motiva -
tional processes. If a counselor makes the wrong opening moves, most clients
will readily play along with this pattern.
How does this trap happen? The familiar script is that the counselor
detects some information indicating the presence of a problem (e.g., “alcohol-
ism”), begins to tell the client that he or she has a serious problem, and pre -
scribes a particular course of action. The client then expresses some reluctance
about this, making statements along two general lines: “The problem isn’t re-
ally that bad,” and “I don’t really need to change that much.”
56 PRACTICE
This response is quite natural and predictable. If people usually enter
counseling in a state of ambivalence, they feel two ways about their current
situation: They want it, and they don’t want it. They think maybe they should
change, and yet they are reluctant to give up their present pattern. They are in
conflict. If the counselor argues for one side of the conflict, it is natural for the
client to give voice to the other side. Here is a sample:
I
NTERVIEWER: Well, it seems clear to me that you have a serious drinking
problem. You’re showing a lot of the signs of alcoholism.
CLIENT: What do you mean?
INTERVIEWER: Well, you’ve had an alcoholic blackout, you’re uncomfortable
when you can’t drink, and you’re losing control of your drinking.
CLIENT: But a lot of people I know drink just like I do.
INTERVIEWER: Maybe so, maybe not. But we’re not talking about other people
here, we’re talking about you.
CLIENT: But I don’t think it’s that serious.
INTERVIEWER: Not serious! It’s just sheer luck that you haven’t been arrested
or killed somebody driving after drinking.
CLIENT: I told you, I can drive just fine. I’ve never had a problem.
INTERVIEWER: And what about your family? They think you’re drinking too
much, and they think you ought to quit.
CLIENT: Oh, Fran came from a family of teetotalers. There’s nothing wrong
with me. They think that anybody who has three drinks is an alcoholic.
By taking responsibility for the “problem-change” side of the conflict, the
counselor elicits oppositional “no-problem” arguments from the client. As the
counselor argues one side more adamantly, the client will defend the other
with greater vigor. It is a familiar script, and probably one that the client has
been through before with others. Clients in this situation can literally talk
themselves out of changing. Hearing themselves vigorously arguing that they
don’t have a problem and don’t need to change, they become convinced. Few
people enjoy losing an argument or being proved wrong.
A counselor can fall into the taking-sides trap inadvertently, even if not
consciously intending to defend or promote one particular side. Consider
these two examples of counseling focused on choice in the midst of ambiva -
lence—the decision whether or not to have children.
C
LIENT: I guess the most pressing issue for me is a family. I’m over 30, and if
I’m ever going to have children, it’s time.
INTERVIEWER: Your biological clock is ticking.
CLIENT: Yes. I really have to decide about this.
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 57
INTERVIEWER: And so you’re wondering now whether you want to have a
family?
CLIENT: I guess I always thought I’d have kids at some point. It’s just that
both of us had to get school out of the way, and then we started working,
and suddenly I’m 34.
I
NTERVIEWER: Of course, women are having babies at later ages now.
CLIENT: But isn’t it risky?
INTERVIEWER: The risks do go up, yes, but they are still relatively low and
there is good prenatal testing available.
CLIENT: If I got pregnant and then found out that there was something
wrong, I don’t know what I’d do.
INTERVIEWER: There are a number of options.
CLIENT: I know that, but I mean—I guess I’m just not sure if I really want to
take the chance.
INTERVIEWER: Why not?
CLIENT: For one thing, it’s such a long commitment. You give 20 years of
your life—more, really, because being a parent never ends.
INTERVIEWER: Of course, there are certain rewards, too. It’s a very special
kind of relationship that you can never have with another human being in
any other way.
C
LIENT: I’m not sure, though, that I really want that kind of relationship with
just one or two children. I’m a teacher, and in a way I can do a lot more
good for children if I’m not tied up for 20 years in raising my own. And
it’s so expensive to raise children these days!
I
NTERVIEWER: And yet, there is that sense that you might be missing some -
thing.
CLIENT: I’d be missing something either way, really. If I have my own chil -
dren, I miss out on all the opportunities that would have happened in the
time I gave to them.
INTERVIEWER: What about just one child? How about that?
CLIENT: I don’t think it’s fair to make someone an only child. They need to
have a brother or sister. It’s a special relationship.
INTERVIEWER: Kind of like being a parent.
CLIENT: Well, yes and no. You usually don’t spend the better part of your life
raising a sibling.
INTERVIEWER: I guess what I’m saying here—what I’m worried about is that if
you let your biological clock run out, you might regret it deeply later on.
CLIENT: But I think that’s better than the opposite. I know parents who regret
58 PRACTICE
having had their kids. They usually don’t say so, but deep down they
wonder what their lives would have been like if they hadn’t had children.
I think kids can’t help but sense that.
I
NTERVIEWER: I’m sure that does happen sometimes, but most parents find it
very rewarding. It’s true that being a mother demands a lot from you, and
yet it also gives you something very special . . .
Now consider the same client and scenario, but this time the counselor hap -
pens for whatever reason to lean the other way at the outset.
C
LIENT: I guess the most pressing issue for me is a family. I’m over 30, and if
I’m ever going to have children, it’s time.
INTERVIEWER: Your biological clock is ticking.
CLIENT: Yes. I really have to decide about this.
INTERVIEWER: And so you’re wondering now whether you want to have a
family.
CLIENT: I guess I always thought I’d have kids at some point. It’s just that
both of us had to get school out of the way, and then we started working,
and suddenly I’m 34.
I
NTERVIEWER: So maybe it’s getting a bit late to begin a family.
CLIENT: Oh, I don’t know. Lots of people are having babies now who are
older than we are. It’s fairly common, really.
INTERVIEWER: I’m not saying that it’s uncommon. I guess I was just hearing
some reluctance in your voice.
CLIENT: Well, of course I’m somewhat reluctant. It’s a major life change, but
I’ve always felt like I would have children at some point, and now is the
time.
I
NTERVIEWER: Why? What appeals to you about having a family?
CLIENT: It’s hard to say, really—it’s mostly a feeling I have. I guess it’s good to
have children when you get older—someone to look after you.
INTERVIEWER: Of course, that doesn’t always happen.
CLIENT: I know. It’s also an experience I don’t want to miss out on. There’s
more to life than work. I just feel it would be nice to be a mother.
INTERVIEWER: What other advantages do you see?
CLIENT: Not advantages, really.
INTERVIEWER: It’s not like you have children for what you can get out of
them.
CLIENT: Right! There’s something about being part of a new life, a part of the
future.
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 59
INTERVIEWER: Sounds pretty romantic.
CLIENT: Well, I think it is! I know that it’s not all roses, and it costs a fortune,
and you open yourself up to pain. It takes a lot of time to raise children.
You have to give a lot.
I
NTERVIEWER: It costs you a lot—not only in money but in time, too.
CLIENT: And yet I feel like it’s worth it. . . .
The client might leave the first of these sessions feeling more committed to not
have a family. In the second example, the same person’s change talk, elicited
by the counselor’s taking one side, might steer the client in the other direction,
toward choosing to have a child. The methods described in Chapter 8 can be
particularly helpful in avoiding the trap of taking sides. In some cases, you
will want to avoid taking sides at all. In situations where a more directive ap -
proach is appropriate, the art is to avoid this temptation to take the “good”
side of the argument.
/G45/G78/G70/G65/G72/G74 /G54/G72/G61/G70
An enthusiastic and competent counselor can unwittingly fall into the expert
trap by conveying the impression of having all the answers. Like the question–
answer trap, its most common effect is to edge people into a passive role,
which is inconsistent with the basic goals of motivational interviewing—
giving people the opportunity to explore and resolve ambivalence for
themselves. A sincere desire to help can lead a counselor to try to “fix” the sit-
uation for a person, shift into problem-solving, and prescribe answers and
solutions. There is an appropriate time for expert opinion (see Chapter 9), but
the focus in Phase 1 is first on building the client’s own motivation. This is un-
likely to happen if the client is placed in the role of passive recipient of expert
advice.
Within motivational interviewing, in a real sense it is the client who is the
expert. No one knows more about his or her situation, values, goals, con -
cerns, and skills. No one is in a better position to anticipate how change will
fit into the person’s life. It is worth remembering the image from Chapter 3, of
two people seated side by side looking through a family album or scrapbook.
It is quite different from the image of a pilgrim seeking enlightenment at the
feet of a master. Motivational interviewing is about collaboration, not instal -
lation.
/G4C/G61/G62/G65/G6C/G69/G6E/G67/G54/G72/G61/G70
Counselors and clients can also easily be ensnared by the issue of diagnostic
labeling. Some believe that it is terribly important for a client to accept (even
“admit”) the counselor’s diagnosis (“You’re an alcoholic,” “You’re in de -
nial,” etc.). Because such labels often carry a certain stigma in the public
60 PRACTICE
mind, it is not surprising that people with reasonable self-esteem resist them.
Even in the field of alcohol problems, where emphasis on labeling has been
high (at least in the United States), there is little evidence for any benefit from
pressuring people to accept a label like “alcoholic,” and the Alcoholics Anon-
ymous (AA) philosophy specifically recommends against such labeling of
others.
Often there is an underlying dynamic in a labeling debate. It may be a
power struggle in which the counselor seeks to assert control and expertise.
With family members, the label may be a judgmental communication. For
some people, even a seemingly harmless reference to “your problem with . . . ”
can elicit uncomfortable feelings of being cornered. The danger, of course, is
that the labeling struggle evokes dissonance, which descends into side-taking
and, in turn, hinders progress.
We recommend, therefore, that you deemphasize labeling in the course of
motivational interviewing. Problems can be fully explored without attaching
labels that evoke unnecessary dissonance. If the issue of labeling never comes
up, it is not necessary to raise it. Often, however, a client will raise the issue,
and how you respond can be quite important. We recommend a combination
of reflection and reframing, two techniques that will be discussed later in this
chapter. Here is a brief example, again from the addiction field where this is-
sue is often most intense. The counselor here quickly sides with the client’s
concern, and then offers a reframe.
C
LIENT: So are you implying that I’m an addict?
INTERVIEWER: No, I’m really not concerned that much about labels. But it
sounds like you are, that it’s a worry for you.
CLIENT: Well, I don’t like being called an addict.
INTERVIEWER: When that happens, you want to explain that your situation re-
ally isn’t that bad.
CLIENT: Right! I’m not saying that I don’t have any problems . . .
INTERVIEWER: But you don’t like being labeled as “having a problem.” It
sounds too harsh to you.
CLIENT: Yes, it does.
INTERVIEWER: That’s pretty common, as you might imagine. Lots of people I
talk to don’t like being labeled. There’s nothing strange about that. I
don’t like people labeling me, either.
C
LIENT: I feel like I’m being put in a box.
INTERVIEWER: Right. So let me tell you how I see this, and then we’ll move on.
To me, it doesn’t matter what wecall a problem. I don’t care if we call it
“addiction” or “problems” or “Rumpelstiltskin,” for that matter. We
don’t have to call it anything. If a label is an important issue for you, we
can discuss it, but it’s not particularly important to me. What really mat-
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 61
ters is to understand how your use of cocaine is harming you, and what,
if anything, you want to do about it. That’s what I care about.
As a final note, we would add that we also see no strong reason to dis -
courage people from embracing a label if they are so inclined. Members of
AA, for example, often report that it was important for them to recognize and
accept their identity as an alcoholic. There is little point in opposing such self-
acceptance. The point here is to avoid getting into needless debates and strug-
gles over labels.
/G50/G72/G65/G6D/G61/G74/G75/G72/G65/G2D/G46._/G6F/G63/G75/G73 /G54/G72/G61/G70
Even if the counselor avoids labeling and taking sides in the client’s ambiva -
lence, resistance may result if client and counselor wish to focus on different
topics. Counselors often want to identify and hone in on what they perceive to
be the client’s problem. The client, in contrast, may have more pressing con -
cerns and may not share the importance placed by the counselor on this
“problem.” In fact, the most common reason for clinical interest in motiva-
tional interviewing is the situation in which the client perceives less impor-
tance for a change than the counselor does.
The trap here is to persist in trying to draw the client back to talk about
your own conception of “the problem.” The probation counseling example in
Chapter 5 is a clear example of such dissonance. The counselor wants to focus
on one subject, and the client has different and perhaps broader concerns. A
struggle may ensue regarding how much attention should be paid to what the
counselor perceives to be the problem. Indeed, in the client’s mind, the coun-
selor’s concern may be a relatively small part of the picture, and it may not be
clear whether and how this is related to the client’s larger life issues. If the
counselor presses too quickly to focus the discussion, dissonance results and
the client may be put off, becoming defensive. The point is to avoid becoming
engaged in a struggle about the proper topic for early discussion. Starting with
the client’s concerns, rather than those of the counselor, will ensure that this
does not happen. Very often, exploring those things that are of concern to the
client will lead back to the topic of concern to the counselor, particularly
when the areas of concern are related. In any event, spending time listening to
the client’s concerns is useful, both in understanding the person and in build -
ing the rapport that is a basis for later exploration of other topics.
A women’s substance abuse treatment program in New Mexico illus -
trates this situation. The professional staff found that women who came to the
program generally had many more pressing concerns than their use of alcohol
and other drugs. They often had health care concerns, had parenting and child
care problems, needed housing, and were traumatized by current or past phys-
ical and sexual abuse. These women had much to talk about, and if a coun -
selor tried to focus on substance use early in treatment, the woman was likely
62 PRACTICE
to drop out. By contrast, if the counselor listened to and addressed the
woman’s immediate concerns, conversations invariably came around to the
role of alcohol and other drugs in her life.
The point, then, is to avoid focusing prematurely on issues that are of
concern to the counselor but of less concern to the client. When encountering
dissonance around premature focus, start where clients’ own concerns are, lis-
ten to their stories, and get a broader understanding of their life situation be -
fore coming back around to the topic.
/G42/G6C/G61/G6D/G69/G6E/G67/G54/G72/G61/G70
Still another obstacle that can be encountered in the first session is a client’s
concern with and defensiveness about blaming. Whose fault is the problem?
Who’s to blame? If this issue is not dealt with properly, time and energy can
be wasted on needless defensiveness. One obvious approach here is to render
blame irrelevant within the counseling context. Usually this can be dealt with
by reflecting and reframing the client’s concerns. If this problem arises, for ex-
ample, the client may be told:
“It sounds like you’re worried about who’s to blame here. I should explain
that counseling is not about deciding who is at fault. That’s what judges
do, but not good counselors. Counseling has a ‘no-fault’ policy. I’m not
interested in looking for who’s to blame, but rather what’s troubling you,
and what you might be able to do about it.”
Concerns about blame may also be prevented by offering a brief structuring
statement like this at the beginning of counseling. Once the client has a clear
understanding of the purpose of counseling, worries about blaming may be al-
layed.
/G41/G42/G4F/G55/G54 /G54/G48/G45 /G46._/G49/G52/G53/G54 /G53/G45/G53/G53/G49/G4F/G4E
The very first session can be crucial as it sets both the tone and the expecta -
tions for counseling. The counselor’s actions in even a single session can have
a powerful influence on a person’s change talk and long-term outcome. Rap -
port in the first session also influences whether the person will come back. It is
important, then, to adopt the proper approach right from the beginning and
to avoid falling into the traps (as just discussed) that can quickly undermine
progress. This section discusses a few practical issues to keep in mind at the
beginning. The next section then presents five clinical methods that are useful
from the first session onward. As a reminder, we are focusing here on the
overall clinical method of motivational interviewing, and we are not yet ad -
dressing adaptations to time-limited contexts such as general medical practice.
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 63
/G4F/G70/G65/G6E/G69/G6E/G67/G53/G74/G72/G75/G63/G74/G75/G72/G65
People come to counseling with widely varying expectations. They may come
expecting to be criticized, healed, advised, questioned, listened to, blamed,
taught, medicated, or consoled. Prospective clients enter treatment with
widely differing expectations, fears, hopes, and concerns. For this and other
reasons, it can be useful at the outset to provide the client with a simple and
brief structuring of the first session and of counseling in general. A good struc-
turing statement can set the client’s mind at rest and get counseling off to a
good start. Some elements that may be included in a good structuring state -
ment are the following:
• The amount of time you have available
• An explanation of your role and goals
• A description of the client’s role
• A mention of details that must be attended to
• An open-ended question
Here is an example:
“We have about an hour together now, and in this time I want to get a be-
ginning understanding of what brings you here. I’ll probably spend most
of this time listening, so that I can understand how you see things and
what your concerns are. You must also have some hopes about what will
and won’t happen here, and I’ll want to hear about those. Toward the
end of this hour I’ll need to ask you for some specific information that I
need, but let’s just get started now. What’s on your mind?”
/G41/G67/G65/G6E/G64/G61 /G53/G65/G74/G74/G69/G6E/G67
Agenda setting is an issue to keep in the back of your mind from the very be -
ginning of the first interview. The basic question here is “What are we going
to talk about?” Sometimes one topic is predefined by the context. If the client
is referred by the court because of domestic violence or is meeting with the di-
etician in a diabetes management clinic, at least one topic of conversation is
already identified. Even in these cases, however, the obvious subject is not
necessarily the topic, the first and only matter to be discussed.
When there is doubt about the topics of conversation, it can be helpful to
spend a few minutes exploring the client’s view of what the agenda might be
and also clarifying your own understanding. Here are two examples:
A dietician to a patient seeking consultation in a diabetes management
clinic: “As you know, there are a number of things that we could discuss
today—such as monitoring your blood sugar levels, healthy diet, exercise,
and your medication—but what are you most concerned about? What
64 PRACTICE
would you like to talk about today? Perhaps there are other things that
you feel are more important to discuss.”
A counselor or probation officer to an offender referred after an arrest
for domestic violence: “I see from the referral sheet that you are here to
talk about what you’ve been through with an episode of violence last
month, and we can do that. First, though, I’m interested in understanding
how you feel about coming here and about what’s happening in your life.
What are your concerns that we should discuss?”
There can be an initial period of uncertainty as you discuss what the agenda
will be. If so, then this period of listening is time well spent. It helps avoid the
premature-focus trap of charging directly into what you assume to be the
topic of conversation.
/G46._/G49/G56/G45 /G45/G41/G52/G4C/G59 /G4D/G45/G54/G48/G4F/G44/G53
There are five specific methods that can be useful from the first session on-
ward and, indeed, throughout the process of motivational interviewing. We
call them “early” methods not because they are used at the beginning and then
abandoned but because it is important to be using them right from the start.
Woven together, they begin to form the fabric of motivational interviewing.
The first four are derived largely from client-centered counseling, although in
motivational interviewing they are used for a particular purpose—that of
helping people to explore their ambivalence and clarify reasons for change.
These first four are summarized by the acronym OARS (Open questions, Af-
firming, Reflecting, and Summarizing). The fifth method is more clearly direc-
tive and is specific to motivational interviewing. It integrates and guides the
use of the other four methods.
/G31/G2E /G41/G73/G6B /G4F/G70/G65/G6E /G51/G75/G65/G73/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73
During the early phase of motivational interviewing, it is important to estab -
lish an atmosphere of acceptance and trust within which clients will explore
their concerns. This means that the client should do most of the talking at this
stage, with the counselor listening carefully and encouraging expression.
When sessions with skillful motivational interviewing practitioners are ana -
lyzed, the client is usually doing more than half of the talking that occurs. This
is also important because part of the process of motivational interviewing in -
volves eliciting and shaping certain kinds of client speech. The first four of
these five early methods—the OARS—directly support this goal of encourag -
ing client speech.
One key for encouraging clients to do most of the talking is to ask open
questions: questions that do not invite brief answers. Some closed (short-
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 65
answer) questions may be necessary, but they should be few and far between
during the early phase of motivational interviewing. It is better to begin and
continue with questions that open the door for the person to explore. Some
people come in almost bursting to talk, and it takes only a simple invitation to
elicit their story. Others are more reticent and require encouragement. How
you respond to the person’s initial answers will strongly influence what hap -
pens next, and that is addressed in the other methods. Our interest here is in
how to ask good open questions.
If you know in advance or otherwise sense that the person has clear
agenda to talk about, a simple opening of the door may suffice. Here are some
examples:
“I assume, from the fact that you are here, that you have some things you
want to talk over. What would you like to discuss?”
“I’d like to understand how you see things. What’s brought you here?”
“I understand that you have some concerns about
. Tell me
about them.”
“You said on the telephone that you have been having some trouble with
, and you want to talk about it. Fill me in. How about
starting from the beginning, and bringing me up to date?”
This may seem like a simple distinction between open and closed questions,
but there are complexities. Box 6.2 contains a set of questions that a counselor
might ask. How would you classify each of them: open or closed?
In discussing a focal problem with more ambivalent clients, it can be use-
ful either to ask for both sides of the coin or to ask a connected cluster of rela-
tively neutral open questions. Some counselors prefer to ask people first what
they have liked about their current (“problem”) behavior or situation, and
then what the not-so-good side includes. Here are some sample openings:”
“Tell me about your use of cocaine. What do you like about it? . . . [Then
later:] And what’s the other side? What are your worries about using
it?”
“Tell me what you’ve noticed about your marriage over the years. What
changes have you seen, and how have these affected you?”
“I understand that you’re here to talk about your gambling. So help me
see the big picture. What do you enjoy about gambling, and what’s the
not-so-good side?”
Remember that the guideline to avoid asking three questions in a row
also applies to open questions. (Each of the clusters illustrated above is essen -
tially a single open question, in that the client has not responded in between.)
The process of motivational interviewing involves helping people openly ex -
plore their own experience, including ambivalence. Even open questions redi -
rect a person’s attention. The general pattern in motivational interviewing is
66 PRACTICE
to ask an open question, setting the topic of exploration, and then follow with
reflective listening and the other responses described next.
These questions are just door-openers, providing opportunities for using
other methods. Obviously, people will vary in how they react to open ques -
tions such as these. Some will respond eagerly to the opportunity to talk about
their difficulties. In such cases, your job is a matter of guiding the client in this
exploration, using the methods described in this and the following chapters.
Others will volunteer relatively little and may change the subject or head off
toward one of the traps described earlier. Skillful motivational interviewing
involves particular ways of responding to what a person offers when open
questions are asked.
/G32/G2E /G4C/G69/G73/G74/G65/G6E /G52/G65/G66/G6C/G65/G63/G74/G69/G76/G65/G6C/G79
Reflective listening is one of the most important and most challenging skills
required for motivational interviewing. In popular conceptions, listening just
involves keeping quiet (at least for a little while) and hearing what someone
has to say. The crucial element in reflective listening, however, is how the
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 67
BOX 6.2. Is It an Open or a Closed Question?
Open or
Closed?
1. What do you like about drinking?
2. Where did you grow up?
3. Isn’t it important for you to have meaning in your life?
4. Are you willing to come back for a follow-up visit?
5. What brings you here today?
6. Do you want to stay in this relationship?
7. Have you ever thought about walking as a simple form of exercise?
8. What do you want to do about your smoking: quit, cut down,
or stay the same?
9. In the past, how have you overcome an important obstacle in your life?
10. What would you like to set as your quit date?
11. What possible long-term consequences of diabetes concern you most?
12. Do you care about your health?
13. What are the most important reasons why you want to stop injecting?
14. Will you try this for 1 week?
15. Is this an open or a closed question?
Answers at the end of this chapter (p. 84).
counselor responds to what the client says. Thomas Gordon 2 outlined 12
kinds of responses that are not listening:
1. Ordering, directing, or commanding
2. Warning, cautioning, or threatening
3. Giving advice, making suggestions, or providing solutions
4. Persuading with logic, arguing, or lecturing
5. Telling people what they should do; moralizing
6. Disagreeing, judging, criticizing, or blaming
7. Agreeing, approving, or praising
8. Shaming, ridiculing, or labeling
9. Interpreting or analyzing
10. Reassuring, sympathizing, or consoling
11. Questioning or probing
12. Withdrawing, distracting, humoring, or changing the subject
Gordon called these responses “roadblocks” because they tend to get in the
way. They divert the person from pursuing the same path. In order to keep ex-
ploring in the same direction, the person has to deal with the roadblock, de-
tour around it, and come back to the original train of thought. Roadblocks
have the effect of blocking, stopping, diverting, or changing direction. As we
will discuss later, there are times when such responses are used intentionally
and directively, as in asking an open question to set a direction of discussion.
Even then, once the question has been asked, it is time to listen.
Roadblocks also tend to imply an uneven or “one-up” relationship. The
underlying message seems to be “Listen to me; I know best.” Instead of con-
tinuing to explore the path, the person then has to deal with the roadblock.
Consider this well-intentioned but unhelpful counselor talking with a client
who feels two ways about an important decision. (The number of each corre -
sponding roadblock from the preceding list is given in parentheses.)
C
LIENT: I just don’t know whether to leave him or not.
INTERVIEWER: You should do whatever you think is best. (#5)
CLIENT: But that’s the point! I don’t know what’s best!
INTERVIEWER: Yes, you do, in your heart. (#6)
CLIENT: Well, I just feel trapped, stifled in our relationship.
INTERVIEWER: Have you thought about separating for a while to see how you
feel? (#3)
CLIENT: But I love him, and it would hurt him so much if I left!
INTERVIEWER: Yet if you don’t do it, you could be wasting your life. (#2)
CLIENT: But isn’t that kind of selfish?
INTERVIEWER: It’s just what you have to do to take care of yourself. (#4)
68 PRACTICE
CLIENT: I just don’t know how I could do it, how I’d manage.
INTERVIEWER: I’m sure you’ll be fine. (#10)
This person has not been helped to explore ambivalence but instead is prema-
turely pressed toward one resolution. The counselor in this situation has never
really listened—has never given the client a chance to keep on talking and ex -
ploring. The client’s time has been spent dodging roadblocks.
What else is there? If one avoids all these roadblocks, what is there left to
say? We don’t mean to imply that it is wrong to use these 12 responses. There
is a time and a place for each of them. We do mean to say that reflective listen-
ing is something different from any of these ways of responding.
The essence of a reflective listening response is that it makes a guess as to
what the speaker means. Before a person speaks, he or she has a certain mean-
ing to communicate. This is encoded into words, often imperfectly. People
don’t always say what they mean. The listener has to hear the words accu -
rately and then decode their meaning. That means there are three steps along
the way where communication can go wrong: encoding, hearing, and decod-
ing. The reflective listener forms a reasonable guess as to what the original
meaning was, and then gives voice to this guess in the form of a statement.
A statement? Why not a question? After all, the listener is not sure
whether the guess is correct. The reason is very practical: a well-formed reflec-
tive statement is less likely to evoke resistance. In the dynamics of language, a
question requires a response. Asking about meaning, through questioning,
seems to distance people from experiencing it. They step back and begin to
ask whether they really do or should feel what they have expressed. The dif-
ference is subtle, and not everyone notices it. Consider the difference in sound
between these reflections:
“You’re feeling uncomfortable?”
“You’re feeling uncomfortable.”
“You’re angry with your mother?”
“You’re angry with your mother.”
The difference is an inflection. The voice tone goes up at the end of a ques -
tion, but gently down at the end of a statement. Reflective listening state -
ments should usually turn down at the end. They are statements of under -
standing.
To offer reflective listening, first train yourself to think reflectively. This
includes the continual awareness that what you believe or assume people
mean is not necessarily what they really mean. Most statements can have mul-
tiple meanings. Emotion words such as “depressed” or “anxious” can have
very different meanings to different people. What could it mean for a person
to say, “I wish I were more sociable”? Here are some possibilities:
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 69
“I feel lonely and I want to have more friends.”
“I get very nervous when I have to talk to strangers.”
“I should spend more time getting to know people.”
“I would like to be popular.”
“I can’t think of anything to say when I’m with people.”
“People don’t invite me to their parties.”
To think reflectively is to make this process more conscious. When hearing
any utterance, one considers what it might mean and guesses about the most
likely meaning. Many people then act as though this were the actual meaning,
and react to it. Reflective listening is a way of checking, rather than assuming
that you already know what is meant.
Reflective listening, then, involves making a statement that is not a road -
block but is, rather, a guess about what the speaker means. Often, but not al -
ways, the subject of the sentence is the pronoun “you.” Here is an exemplary
segment from a counseling session with an ambivalent problem drinker. For
illustrative purposes, every counselor sentence in this segment is a reflective
listening statement. Notice also that the counselor’s reflections move forward
rather than simply repeating what the client has said. In essence, the counselor
is venturing the next sentence in the client’s paragraph, instead of merely
echoing the last one. This is a skillful form of reflection that we call “continu-
ing the paragraph.”
C
LIENT: I worry sometimes that I may be drinking too much for my own
good.
INTERVIEWER: You’ve been drinking quite a bit.
CLIENT: I don’t really feel like it’s that much. I can drink a lot and not feel it.
INTERVIEWER: More than most people.
CLIENT: Yes. I can drink most people under the table.
INTERVIEWER: And that’s what worries you.
CLIENT: Well, that and how I feel. The next morning I’m usually in bad shape.
I feel jittery, and I can’t think straight through most of the morning.
INTERVIEWER: And that doesn’t seem right to you.
CLIENT: No, I guess not. I haven’t thought about it that much, but I don’t
think it’s good to be hung over all the time. And sometimes I have trouble
remembering things.
I
NTERVIEWER: Things that happen while you’re drinking.
CLIENT: That, too. Sometimes I just have a blank for a few hours.
INTERVIEWER: But that isn’t what you meant when you said you have trouble
remembering things.
70 PRACTICE
CLIENT: No. Even when I’m not drinking, it seems like I’m forgetting things
more often, and I’m not thinking clearly.
INTERVIEWER: And you wonder if it has something to do with your drinking.
CLIENT: I don’t know what else it would be.
INTERVIEWER: You haven’t always been like that.
CLIENT: No! It’s only the last few years. Maybe I’m just getting older.
INTERVIEWER: It might just be what happens to everybody when they reach
45.
CLIENT: No, it’s probably my drinking. I don’t sleep very well, either.
INTERVIEWER: So maybe you’re damaging your health and your sleep and
your brain by drinking as much as you do.
CLIENT: Mind you, I’m not a drunk. Never was.
INTERVIEWER: You’re not that bad off. Still, you’re worried.
CLIENT: I don’t know about “worried,” but I guess I’m thinking about it
more.
INTERVIEWER: And wondering if you should do something, so that’s why you
came here.
CLIENT: I guess so.
INTERVIEWER: You’re not sure.
CLIENT: I’m not sure what I want to do about it.
INTERVIEWER: So if I understand you so far, you think that you’ve been drink-
ing too much and you’ve been damaging your health, but you’re not sure
yet if you want to change that.
C
LIENT: Doesn’t make much sense, does it?
INTERVIEWER: I can see how you might feel confused at this point.
Notice that the counselor does not insert any roadblocks throughout this pro-
cess. It would have been easy enough to substitute some of the roadblocks for
these reflections. This is avoided, however, because the purpose is to elicit
talk, particularly change talk, from the client.
Reflective listening statements can be quite simple. Sometimes the mere
repetition of a word or two will keep the client moving (in the preceding ex -
ample, the first reflection could have been “Too much . . . ”). A more sophisti-
cated reflection substitutes new words for what the client has offered or
makes a guess about the unspoken meaning. Sometimes it is helpful, too, to
reflect how the person seems to be feeling as he or she speaks. Reflections that
simply repeat what the person has said can yield slower progress; continuing
the paragraph often adds momentum to the exploration process.
Depth of reflection increases with counselor skillfulness. Sometimes a
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 71
counselor becomes frustrated with reflective listening because it seems to go
around in circles, leading nowhere. We have found that the problem is usually
insufficient depth of reflection; the counselor is staying too close to exactly
what the client just said—like an echo—and the conversation literally is going
nowhere. Skillful reflection moves past what the person has already said,
though not jumping too far ahead. The skill is not unlike the timing of inter -
pretations in psychodyamic psychotherapy. If the person balks, you know you
jumped too far, too fast.
When using reflection to encourage continued personal exploration,
which is the broad goal of reflective listening, it is often useful to understate
slightly what the speaker has offered. This is particularly so when emotional
content is involved. There is a rich array of language for describing emotion.
Within any particular emotion, such as anger, there are descriptors that vary
widely in intensity. There are low-intensity anger words like “annoyed” and
“irritated,” and high-intensity descriptors such as “outraged” and “incensed.”
Intensity can be diminished by adding words like “a little,” “a bit,” and
“somewhat,” or it can be increased by adding “quite,” “very,” or “ex -
tremely.” As a general principle, if you overstate the intensity of an expressed
emotion, the person will tend to deny and minimize it, backing off from the
original statement. (This principle is applied intentionally in Chapter 8, in the
method of amplified reflection for responding to resistance.) If you slightly un-
derstate the expressed intensity of emotion, however, the person is more likely
to continue exploring and telling you about it. When reflecting emotion, err
on the British side and understate:
Overstating
CLIENT: I just don’t like the way she comments on how I raise my children.
INTERVIEWER: You’re really angry with your mother.
CLIENT: Well, no, not angry really. She’s my mother, after all.
Understating
CLIENT: I just don’t like the way she comments on how I raise my children.
INTERVIEWER: You’re a bit annoyed with your mother.
CLIENT: Yes, it just irritates me how she is always correcting and criticizing
me.
Reflection is not a passive process. It can be quite directive. The coun -
selor decides what to reflect and what to ignore, what to emphasize and
deemphasize, what words to use in capturing meaning. Reflection can there -
fore be used to reinforce certain aspects of what a person has said or to alter
its meaning slightly. In motivational interviewing, for example, change talk is
preferentially reflected, so that people hear their own statements at least twice.
These directive applications of reflection are discussed in Chapter 7.
72 PRACTICE
We advise that reflective listening statements should constitute a substan-
tial proportion of counselor responses during the early phase of motivational
interviewing. Reflection is particularly important after open-ended questions.
Once you have asked an open question, respond to the client’s answers with
reflective listening. Because questioning is a much less demanding skill (for the
counselor) than empathic listening, it is easy to fall into the question–answer
trap, asking a series of questions instead of reflecting the client’s statements.
This may evoke resistance more than change talk. Remember, therefore, to
follow up a question with reflective listening rather than another question.
Counselors skillful in motivational interviewing offer two to three reflections,
on average, per question asked, and about half of all their responses (not
counting the short “uh-huh” type of response) are reflections. In coding ordi -
nary counseling sessions, in contrast, we find that questions often outnumber
reflections by a ratio of 10 to 1, and reflections constitute a relatively small
proportion of all responses.
/G33/G2E /G41/G66/G66/G69/G72/G6D
Directly affirming and supporting the client during the counseling process is
another way of building rapport and reinforcing open exploration. This can
be done in the form of compliments or statements of appreciation and
understanding. The process of reflective listening can be quite affirming in
itself, but direct affirmations have a place in counseling, too. Here are some
examples:
“Thanks for coming on time today.”
“I appreciate that you took a big step in coming here today.”
“You’re clearly a resourceful person, to cope with such difficulties for so
long.”
“That’s a good suggestion.”
“I must say, if I were in your position, I might have a hard time dealing
with that amount of stress.”
“It seems like you’re a really spirited and strong-willed person in a way.”
“You enjoy being happy with other people, and making them laugh.”
“I’ve enjoyed talking with you today, and getting to know you a bit.”
As with many aspects of conversation, norms vary from one culture or
subculture to another. For instance, from a British perspective, American
counselors can appear to be rather “over the top” with affirmations. One en -
counters similar issues in assertiveness training. The fundamental idea of as -
sertiveness is sound—finding a middle ground between passive and aggressive
responses—but there is wide variation in what constitutes an assertive versus
aggressive response across societies, and so one adjusts content to social
norms. Similarly, the appropriate level and frequency of affirmation within
counseling will vary across social contexts. The point is to notice and appro -
priately affirm the client’s strengths and efforts.
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 73
/G34/G2E /G53/G75/G6D/G6D/G61/G72/G69/G7A/G65
The fourth OARS method to use early and throughout motivational inter -
viewing is summarizing. Summary statements can be used to link together and
reinforce material that has been discussed. When you are eliciting a person’s
change talk, for example, it is wise to summarize periodically:
“So, this heart attack has left you feeling really vulnerable. It’s not dying
that scares you, really. What worries you is being only half alive—living
disabled or being a burden to your family. In terms of things you want to
live for, you’ve mentioned seeing your grandchildren grow up and contin-
uing some of the work you’ve been doing that is especially meaningful to
you, although maybe not with the intensity at which you’d been working
before. What else?”
Such periodic summaries reinforce what has been said, show that you have
been listening carefully, and prepare the client to elaborate further. They also
allow a person to hear his or her own change talk for a third time.
At least three kinds of summaries are useful in motivational interviewing.
The first of these, the collecting summary just illustrated, is offered during the
process of exploration, particularly when you have heard several change talk
themes. It’s like collecting flowers one at a time and then giving them to the
person in a little bouquet. Collecting summaries are usually short—just a few
sentences—and should continue rather than interrupt the person’s momen-
tum. It is useful to end them with “What else?” or some other invitation to
continue. (Notice, by the way, that “What else?” is an open question and in-
vites continued exploration. “Is there anything else?” is a closed question [in
that the literal answer is yes or no] and invites the answer “No.”) Too-
frequent collecting summaries can have an artificial feeling and can even be
annoying, interrupting the natural exploration process. Use them judiciously
when you have a number of new change-talk flowers to return (see Chapter
7).
Linking summaries tie together what a person has just been saying with
material offered earlier, perhaps in a previous session. The border between
collecting and linking summaries is grey, but their purpose is somewhat differ-
ent. Collecting summaries draw together change talk and invite the person to
keep going. Linking summaries are meant to encourage the client to reflect on
the relationship between two or more previously discussed items. Linking
summaries can be especially helpful in clarifying a person’s ambivalence. The
typical internal experience of ambivalence is to vacillate back and forth be -
tween thinking of reasons to change and reasons to stay the same. A linking
summary is one way to allow a person to examine the positives and negatives
simultaneously, acknowledging that both are present. When reflecting ambiv -
alence, consider using “and” rather than “but” to link discrepant compo -
nents, which has the effect of emphasizing the simultaneous presence of both.
74 PRACTICE
The conjunctions “yet” and “but” have a different function. They function
like erasers, tending to soften and deemphasize what went before, and in this
way they are more like the confusing back-and-forth thought process of am -
bivalence. Other linking phrases, such as “on the one hand . . . and on the
other” and “at the same time,” can also be useful:
“It sounds like you’re inclined in two different directions. On the one
hand, you’re somewhat worried about the possible long-term effects of
your diabetes if you don’t manage it well—blindness, amputations, things
like that. Those are distressing to think about. The emergency room visit
a while back also scared you, and you realize that if no one had found
you, your children could be without a father. On the other hand, you’re
young and you feel fairly healthy most of the time. You enjoy eating what
you like, and the long-term consequences seem far away. You’re con -
cerned, and at the same time you’re not concerned.”
Other sources of information can be incorporated into a linking summary as
well. The results of objective assessment, or information from the courts or
family members, can be combined with the person’s own statements.
Finally there is the transitional summary, which marks and announces a
shift from one focus to another. Such a summary can be used as a wrap-up to-
ward the end of a session, and the transition from Phase 1 to Phase 2 is tested
by such a summary (see Chapter 10). At the end of the first session in particu-
lar, it is useful to offer a substantial transitional summary, pulling together
what has transpired thus far. Remember that in giving such summaries, you
are deciding what to include and emphasize. When introducing a transitional
summary, it can be helpful to use a prefacing statement that formally an-
nounces what is to follow. (We do not recommend doing this with collecting
or linking summaries, which just fit into the flow of ongoing conversation.)
Here is an example of a fairly complete transitional summary at the end of a
first session, complete with prefacing statement:
“Our time is running out, and I’d like to try to pull together what you’ve
said so far, so we can see where we are and where we’re going. Let me
know if I miss anything important that we’ve covered. You came in be -
cause your husband is concerned about your drinking and your mari -
juana smoking. If he hadn’t pushed you, you might not have come right
now, but you’ve been very open in exploring this, and I appreciate that. I
asked you about problems in your life that you think could be related to
alcohol and marijuana, and you have mentioned several. You’ve been
feeling quite depressed and tired, and, as we discussed, alcohol is a de -
pressant. You said you’re having a lot of trouble concentrating and that
you’re feeling as if you aren’t motivated to do anything in your life.
Again, rightly, you think this might be linked to your drinking and smok-
ing, although you believe that’s not the whole picture. You resent your
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 75
husband’s sending you here alone, in a way, because you think he has a
part in these problems, too. The tests that you completed indicate that
you have developed a fairly significant dependence on alcohol and, to a
lesser extent, on marijuana, and you realize that’s something that can
keep growing if you don’t do something about it. When you were ar -
rested that one time 2 years ago, your breath test showed that you were
over 0.20, which is really quite intoxicated, even though you weren’t feel-
ing very drunk. We talked about how this kind of tolerance is in itself a
risk factor. You’re also concerned that you’re not the kind of mother you
want to be, in part because of drinking and smoking, and you don’t want
your kids to grow up with drug problems. Your doctor told you that your
stomach problems are probably caused or at least made worse by your
drinking. At the same time, you have liked alcohol and marijuana be -
cause you use them to relax and to get away from some heavy family
stresses. You’re not sure how you could handle life without drinking and
smoking, and so you’re not sure what to do at this point. Is that a fair
summary so far? Anything I’ve missed?”
The transitional summary is a good way to draw the first session to a close.
Notice the collaborative tone, allowing the client to add to or correct your
summary. A somewhat shorter form of the same statement can be used at the
beginning of the next session, building on progress made earlier.
/G35/G2E /G45/G6C/G69/G63/G69/G74/G69/G6E/G67/G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67 /G65 /G54/G61/G6C/G6B
The preceding four skills, the OARS, are fundamental to motivational inter-
viewing. If these were the only methods employed, however, it would be quite
easy to remain stuck in ambivalence. It is important, therefore, to have a guid-
ing strategy for resolving ambivalence. That is the underlying purpose of the
fifth method, which is consciously directive. The other four skills can all be
applied within this goal-directed approach.
In one sense, motivational interviewing is the opposite of a confronta -
tional approach, in which the counselor advocates for the “problem-change”
position and the client defends against it. We believe that such a confronta -
tional dialogue is often detrimental, precisely because it causes the person to
defend a no-change position. The idea in motivational interviewing is to have
the client give voice to exactly the opposite kinds of statements, to present the
arguments for change. It is the counselor’s task to facilitate the client’s expres-
sion of such change talk, referred to in our earlier writings as self-motivational
statements.
3
Because we are discussing an intentionally directive aspect, this seems a
good place for a reminder of the consciously collaborative nature of motiva -
tional interviewing, as well. Some people misunderstand this method as a way
of tweaking motivation, of manipulating or tricking people into doing what
you want them to do. But both partners bring aspirations to the dance floor;
76 PRACTICE
both have hopes for what will happen. The counselor’s aspirations are not
preeminent, not the model to which a client’s will must be sculpted. Instead,
motivational interviewing is a process of shared decision making, of explora -
tion and negotiation. It is a process shaped and complicated by the opinions,
investment, and relative power of the two partners. We explore some of these
ethical aspects of motivational interviewing in Chapter 12.
As discussed in Chapter 3, change talk falls into four general categories.
The first involves recognizing the disadvantages of the current situation, of the
status quo:
Recognizing disadvantages of the status quo
“I guess there’s more of a problem here than I realized.”
“I never really thought that much before about how this affects my
family.”
“This is serious!”
“Maybe I have been taking foolish risks.”
“I can see that in the long run, this is going to do me in if I don’t make a
change.”
The other side of this coin is change talk that reflects potential advan-
tages of change.
Recognizing advantages of change
“One thing is that I would have a lot more time, and it would help finan-
cially, too.”
“My boys would like it. They’re always after me to quit.”
“Probably I’d feel a lot better.”
“At least it would get the courts off my back.”
“I’d probably be around to enjoy my grandchildren as they grow up.”
Change talk can also express optimism about change. Such statements re-
flect self-efficacy to make a difference in the problem area:
Expressing optimism about change
“I think I could probably do it if I decided to.”
“I’m a fairly stubborn person. If I put my mind to something, I don’t let
go until it’s done.”
“I did quit smoking a few years ago. That was tough, and it took a few
tries, but I did it.”
The fourth type of change talk is direct or implicit intention or determi -
nation to change:
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 77
Expressing intention to change
“I think it’s time for me to think about quitting.”
“I definitely don’t want to keep going the way I have been.”
“I’ve got to do something.”
“This isn’t what I want for my family. What can I do?”
“I don’t know how I’m going to do it, but I’m going to get through this.”
These four kinds of statements encompass cognitive, emotional, and behavior-
al dimensions of commitment to change. From our perspective, every state -
ment of this kind tips the balance a little further in the direction of change.
Some people walk through the counselor’s door already saying things like
this and only need some help in confirming their commitment and planning a
course of action. When this is not the case, how can a counselor evoke such
statements from more ambivalent clients? Evoking change talk is one of the
key motivational interviewing skills. It is also one of the most complex, pre -
cisely because there are so many ways in which to accomplish it.
/G4D/G45/G54/G48/G4F/G44/G53 /G46._/G4F/G52 /G45/G56/G4F/G4B/G49/G4E/G47 /G43/G48/G41/G4E/G47/G45 /G54/G41/G4C/G4B
/G41/G73/G6B/G69/G6E/G67/G45/G76/G6F/G63/G61/G74/G69/G76/G65 /G51/G75/G65/G73/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73
The simplest and most direct approach is simply to ask the person for such
statements. Open-ended questions can be used to explore the client’s own per-
ceptions and concerns. Don’t ask whether the client has such concerns (e.g.,
“Do you think that you have a problem?”). Assume that he or she is feeling
ambivalent and does have such concerns. Some questions for evoking each of
the four categories of change talk are suggested in Box 6.3. Note that these are
all open questions.
As discussed here and in the next chapter, the process requires more than
just asking such questions. There are specific processes for reflecting and rein-
forcing change talk when the person offers it.
/G55/G73/G69/G6E/G67/G74/G68/G65 /G49/G6D/G70/G6F/G72/G74/G61/G6E/G63/G65 /G52/G75/G6C/G65/G72
The rulers described earlier in this chapter can be used to elicit change talk.
Our usual method is to obtain the client’s rating of importance and then ask
two questions:
“Why are you at a
and not zero?”
“What would it take for you to go from to [a higher number]?”
The answers to these questions will very likely be change talk. Note that one
should not ask, “Why are you at a and not 10?” because to answer
that question is to argue against change.
78 PRACTICE
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 79
BOX 6.3. Example Open Questions to Evoke Change Talk
1. Disadvantages of the status quo
What worries you about your current situation?
What makes you think that you need to do something about your blood pressure?
What difficulties or hassles have you had in relation to your drug use?
What is there about your drinking that you or other people might see as reasons for
concern?
In what ways does this concern you?
How has this stopped you from doing what you want to do in life?
What do you think will happen if you don’t change anything?
2. Advantages of change
How would you like for things to be different?
What would be the good things about losing weight?
What would you like your life to be like 5 years from now?
If you could make this change immediately, by magic, how might things be better for
you?
The fact that you’re here indicates that at least part of you thinks it’s time to do
something. What are the main reasons you see for making a change?
What would be the advantages of making this change?
3. Optimism about change
What makes you think that if you did decide to make a change, you could do it?
What encourages you that you can change if you want to?
What do you think would work for you, if you decided to change?
When else in your life have you made a significant change like this? How did you
do it?
How confident are you that you can make this change?
What personal strengths do you have that will help you succeed?
Who could offer you helpful support in making this change?
4. Intention to change
What are you thinking about your gambling at this point?
I can see that you’re feeling stuck at the moment. What’s going to have to change?
What do you think you might do?
How important is this to you? How much do you want to do this?
What would you be willing to try?
Of the options I’ve mentioned, which one sounds like it fits you best?
Never mind the “how” for right now—what do you want to have happen?
So what do you intend to do?
/G45/G78/G70/G6C/G6F/G72/G69/G6E/G67/G74/G68/G65 /G44/G65/G63/G69/G73/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G42/G61/G6C/G61/G6E/G63/G65
As mentioned earlier, it can be helpful to have people discuss both the positive
and the negative aspects of their present behavior, of the status quo. They may
be asked, for example, to say or list what they like about their present pattern,
as a preface to inquiring about the down side. This has the advantage of get -
ting people talking and feeling comfortable and also of clarifying both sides of
their ambivalence. Often, simply asking about one side will elicit the other. It
may be useful to fill in a decisional balance sheet, like the one illustrated in
Chapter 2, to allow a person to see the pros and cons simultaneously—a direct
picture of the ambivalence.
/G45/G6C/G61/G62/G6F/G72/G61/G74/G69/G6E/G67
Once a reason for change has been named, it is often the counselor’s ten -
dency to move on and find others. It can be quite useful, however, to have
the client elaborate on a topic before moving on. For one thing, it is a way
of eliciting further change talk, and it helps reinforce the motivational
theme.
There are several ways of eliciting elaboration once a reason for change
has been raised. They include:
• Asking for clarification: In what ways? How much? When?
• Asking for a specific example.
• Asking for a description of the last time this occurred.
• Asking “What else?” within the change topic.
Here is an illustration:
C
LIENT: One obvious place where this is a problem for me is money.
INTERVIEWER: In what ways is that a concern for you?
CLIENT: Well, I just spend a lot of money on gambling, and I’m not always
paying my bills.
INTERVIEWER: Tell me about the last time that happened.
CLIENT: Just last week I went through about $600. I start out setting a limit,
but then I lose that amount and decide to try to win it back.
INTERVIEWER: Over time it really adds up.
CLIENT: I’ll say. I’ve lost about $30,000 over the last 6 months.
INTERVIEWER: And that’s a lot for you.
CLIENT: We don’t have that kind of money. At least we don’t now.
INTERVIEWER: How much does this money issue concern you?
CLIENT: It’s getting to be a big problem, and I worry about it all the time. I’ve
80 PRACTICE
got people coming to the door, calling on the telephone, sending nasty
letters. I’ve got to do something.
INTERVIEWER : And in what specific ways does it affect you, to lose so
much?
CLIENT: Nobody will give me credit any more, except the casinos. My hus -
band finally noticed all the cash withdrawals, and he’s hardly talking to
me.
INTERVIEWER: What else?
CLIENT: He’s worried about our retirement security, of course. And I can’t
buy things I want.
INTERVIEWER: Such as . . .
CLIENT: The other day I saw this nice dress in just my size, and I couldn’t
afford it. My credit cards have all been canceled. Then I get mad and do
stupid things.
I
NTERVIEWER: Like what?
Early in motivational interviewing, if there is little change talk to elabo-
rate, it may be useful to ask the person to walk you through a typical day in
his or her life. This offers opportunities for asking in more detail about behav-
ior patterns and mood changes, for example, and areas of concern often
emerge quite naturally from such discussion.
/G51/G75/G65/G72/G79/G69/G6E/G67/G45/G78/G74/G72/G65/G6D/G65/G73
When there seems to be little desire for change at present, another way to
elicit change talk is to ask people to describe the extremes of their (or others’)
concerns, to imagine the extreme of consequences that might ensue:
“What concerns you the most about your high blood pressure in the long
run?”
“Suppose you continue on as you have been, without changing. What do
you imagine are the worst things that might happen to you?”
“How much do you know about what can happen if you drink during
pregnancy, even if you don’t see this happening to you?”
At the other extreme, it can be useful to imagine the best consequences that
could follow from pursuing a change:
“What might be the best results you could imagine if you make a
change?”
“If you were completely successful in making the changes you want, how
would things be different?”
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 81
/G4C/G6F/G6F/G6B/G69/G6E/G67/G42/G61/G63/G6B
Sometimes it is useful, in eliciting change talk, to have the client remember
times before the problem emerged and to compare these times with the pres -
ent situation:
“Do you remember a time when things were going well for you? What
has changed?”
“What were things like before you started using drugs? What were you
like back then?”
“Tell me about how you two met, and what attracted you to each other
back then. What was it like?”
“What are the differences between the Pat of 10 years ago and the Pat of
today?”
“How has your pain changed you as a person, or stopped you from
growing, from moving forward?”
Looking back at the past sometimes recalls a time before problems emerged
and can highlight both the discrepancy with how things are at present and the
possibility of life being better. If looking back yields a description of a period
when problems were worse, you can explore what has happened to yield some
improvement to date.
/G4C/G6F/G6F/G6B/G69/G6E/G67/G46._/G6F/G72/G77/G61/G72/G64
Helping people envision a changed future is another approach for eliciting
change talk. Here you ask the client to tell you how it might be after a change:
“If you do decide to make a change, what do you hope might be different
in the future?”
“How would you like things to turn out for you 10 years from now?”
“I can see that you’re feeling really frustrated right now. How would you
like things to be different?”
Similarly, you can invite the client to look ahead in time and anticipate how
things might be if no changes are made:
“Suppose you don’t make any changes, but just continue as you have
been. What do you think your life would be like 10 years from now?”
“Given what has happened so far, what do you expect might be happen -
ing 5 years from now if you don’t make any changes?”
There is some overlap here with querying extremes. In the looking-ahead
method, however, you are asking for either the person’s realistic apprais -
82 PRACTICE
al of a future unchanged or his or her realistic hopes for a future
changed.
/G45/G78/G70/G6C/G6F/G72/G69/G6E/G67/G47/G6F/G61/G6C/G73 /G61/G6E/G64 /G56/G61/G6C/G75/G65/G73
Still another approach is to ask the client to tell you what things are most im -
portant in his or her life. After all, no one is truly “unmotivated.” Their prior-
ities may be quite different from the counselor’s, but every person does have
goals and values. Exploring what those are provides some reference points
against which to compare the status quo.
This method can overlap nicely with the looking-forward process. What
values or goals does this person hold most dear? From the perspective of moti-
vational interviewing, the purpose of this exploration is to discover ways in
which current behavior is inconsistent with or undermines important values
and goals for the person. When the client’s highest or most central values and
goals are defined, you can ask how the problem you are discussing (e.g.,
drinking) fits into this picture. The central point here is to explore and develop
themes of discrepancy between these important goals or values and the client’s
current behavior. Chapter 19 describes some more specific methods for incor-
porating values in motivational interviewing.
/G53/G55/G4D/G4D/G41/G52/G59
In motivational interviewing, eliciting change talk is a primary method for de-
veloping discrepancy. Hearing oneself state the reasons for change tends to in-
crease awareness of the discrepancy between one’s goals and present actions.
The greater this discrepancy, the greater the perceived importance of change.
The first four early methods for motivational interviewing (OARS) can be
integrated with the fifth, eliciting change talk, by (1) asking open questions
that pull for change talk; (2) affirming and reinforcing the client for change
talk; (3) reflecting back, sometimes selectively, change talk that the client has
voiced, which allows him or her to hear it a second time; and (4) offering col -
lecting, linking, and transitional summaries of change talk, allowing the client
to hear once again the statements that he or she has made. Other methods,
such as objective feedback and values exploration, can also serve to increase
perceived discrepancy. Phase 1 of motivational interviewing focuses primarily
on this process of building intrinsic motivation through the amplification and
clarification of discrepancy.
Eliciting change talk can be important, however, not only in early ses -
sions, but throughout counseling. Ambivalence does not usually disappear but
only diminishes in the transition to Phase 2 and the initiation of action toward
change. Evoking change talk can serve as a continuing reminder of the reasons
for commitment to change.
Phase 1: Building Motivation for Change 83
/G41/G4E/G53/G57/G45/G52/G53 /G54/G4F /G42/G4F/G58 /G36/G2E/G32
1. Open question.
2. Closed question, in that it asks for a specific piece of information. An open question
(in imperative form) would be “Tell me about your growing-up years.”
3. Closed question, in its rhetorical structure that implies a “Yes” or “No” answer. An
open form would be “What gives meaning to your life?”
4. Closed question, answered by “Yes” or “No.” An open form would be “What do
you think about coming back for a follow-up visit?”
5. Open question.
6. Closed question, answered by “Yes” or “No.” An open form would be “What
would be the good things and not-so-good things about staying in this relation -
ship?”
7. Advice veiled as a closed question, for which the literal answer is “Yes” or “No.” An
open version would be “If you decided to exercise more, what kinds of exercise
might be most appealing or acceptable to you?”
8. Closed question. Drop the multiple-choice options at the end, and it becomes an
open question.
9. Open question.
10. Closed question, asking for a specific piece of information—a date.
11. Open question.
12. Rhetorical closed question. An open form would be “In what ways is it important to
you to be in good health?”
13. Open question.
14. Closed question answered by “Yes” or “No.”
15. Closed question, two choices.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45/G53
1. Rubino, Barker, Roth, and Fearon (2000).
2. Gordon (1970).
3. Miller (1983).
84 PRACTICE
CHAPTER 7
/G52/G65/G73/G70/G6F/G6E/G64/G69/G6E/G67 /G74/G6F /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65 /G54 /G61/G6C/G6B
It is the truth we ourselves speak rather than the treatment we
receive that heals us.
—O. H OBART MOWRER (1966)
/G57/G48/G45/G4E /G49/G53 /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G44/G49/G52/G45/G43/G54/G49/G56/G45/G3F
In the preceding chapters we have defined motivational interviewing as a di -
rective yet client-centered counseling style. In one sense, motivational inter -
viewing is always directive, in that it is consciously directed toward the resolu-
tion of ambivalence in order to facilitate change. In another sense, however,
the directiveness of motivational interviewing varies, depending on the extent
to which its goal is to resolve ambivalence in the direction of a particular kind
of change. Consider what might be the differences in doing motivational inter-
viewing with these particular clients:
A couple trying to decide whether or not to adopt a child
An overweight person who has lost a significant amount of weight several
times but has always gained it back
A person with diabetes, seen in emergency room because of poor
glycemic control
A sex offender entering treatment as an alternative to incarceration
An obvious dimension along which these four examples vary is the extent to
which the counselor is likely to have a clear sense of the desirable outcome of
85
change. In the first case, the counselor may have no opinion or investment at
all in which way the couple decides. With regard to being overweight, knowl -
edgeable counselors vary in their opinions about the desirability of continued
weight loss efforts. The life-threatening nature of out-of-control diabetes is
likely to inspire clearer conviction about the desirable change—namely, im -
proved glycemic control. Finally, in the case of an offender, there are potential
victims to consider as well, along with society’s general consensus as to the de-
sirability of changed behavior.
There are clearly cases, then, in which motivational interviewing is di -
rected toward a particular change goal that the counselor judges to be desir -
able, even though the person at the moment may or may not feel ready, will -
ing, or able to pursue such change. That was, in fact, the context within which
motivational interviewing was originally developed: to enhance intrinsic moti-
vation for change in people with persistent addictive behaviors that are harm-
ful to themselves and others. Such discrepancy between client and counselor
goals raises complex and fascinating ethical issues that are explored in Chap -
ter 12.
We realize, however, that a motivational interviewing style can also be
used in helping people who are stuck to resolve ambivalence and move on
with change, even when the counselor is truly indifferent to the direction of
the change. Choice counseling is a legitimate and helpful process even (and
perhaps especially) when the counselor has no particular opinion or invest-
ment about the choice that results.
How one responds to change talk within motivational interviewing will
vary, then, depending on the extent to which the goal of counseling is to elicit
intrinsic motivation for a particular kind or direction of change. We begin
with the more familiar situation in which there is a particular change toward
which counseling is directed.
/G57/G48/G45/G4E /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G49/G53 /G44/G49/G52/G45/G43/G54/G49/G56/G45
Just eliciting change talk is not enough when the intent of motivational inter -
viewing is to enhance intrinsic motivation toward a particular change out -
come. It is here that one responds differentially to client statements, depending
on whether they move toward (change talk) or away from (resistance) the
change goal. As noted earlier, counselors do this even without being aware of
it, encouraging clients in a particular direction. The skillful motivational inter-
viewer is consciously aware of and intentional in this process of differential re-
sponding.
It is worth an aside here to note that in this motivational interviewing
context, the terms “change talk” and “resistance” are usually defined in rela -
tion to a particular type of change. One need only analyze a few counseling
sessions to realize that people talk about making many different kinds of
changes. In fact, talk directed toward one kind of change might be judged to
86 PRACTICE
be resistance if it favors change in the direction opposite to a counseling goal.
Consider this example:
“I know I really ought to get out of this relationship. It’s tough to quit
when the person you live with is constantly using. I’d like to have a life of
my own and a real job, and to raise my kids in a better environment. But
I do love him, and it’s hard to think about leaving him.”
What would be considered change talk or resistance in this example? It de -
pends on how one thinks about the change goal(s). What counts as change
talk would vary, depending on whether the person had come seeking career
counseling, marital counseling, or treatment for drug dependence; had been
referred because of concerns about possible child abuse; or was being shel -
tered as a victim of domestic violence. It depends on the identified goal(s) of
change. In this context, then, change talk refers to speech that is directed to -
ward the desired kind of change, and resistance refers to speech that moves
away from the desired kind of change.
When there is a clear goal for change, motivational interviewing involves
not only eliciting but also responding in particular ways to change talk. The
methods for eliciting change talk have been described in Chapter 6. This sec-
tion focuses on clinical aspects of how to respond when it does occur, with the
general technical goal of reinforcing and increasing change talk. The four gen-
eral strategies described are by now familiar: elaborating, reflecting, summa-
rizing, and affirming change talk. Chapter 8 takes up the topic of how to re-
spond to resistance (that is, to talk that moves away from the desired direction
of change).
/G45/G6C/G61/G62/G6F/G72/G61/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65 /G54/G61/G6C/G6B
Whether a person will continue to explore change talk or veer away from it
depends on how you respond. When a client voices a change statement,
even tentatively, respond with particular interest, both nonverbally (for
example, with attention and a simple head nod) and by asking for elabora -
tion.
Once the process has begun, straightforward encouragement to continue
is often effective. The general form here is “What else?”:
“In what ways?”
“Give me an example. When was the last time this happened?”
“What else have you noticed or wondered about?”
“What other concerns have you had about
?”
“What are some other reasons why you might want to make a change?”
“What other things have people told you?”
“Why else do you think you could succeed?”
“How else could you do it?”
Responding to Change Talk 87
/G52/G65/G66/G6C/G65/G63/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65 /G54/G61/G6C/G6B
Reflective listening both clarifies the person’s meaning and encourages contin-
ued exploration of the content that is reflected. Simple reflection of change
talk, then, is likely to elicit further elaboration and exploration.
Consciously or not, reflective listening is selective. One does not and can-
not reflect all shades of meaning, explore all possible avenues, or capture all of
the content offered or implied in the person’s speech. For one thing, you can
reflect only those aspects that you perceive. Within the range of perceived con-
tent, however, you select what to reflect and what to leave unsaid. In motiva -
tional interviewing, this selection process is conscious and purposeful. The
person’s change talk is reflected selectively.
Consider this example of how a counselor might respond to the ambiva -
lent distress of the woman in the preceding example, if counseling her toward
distancing from an abusive relationship:
C
LIENT: . . . Maybe it’s easier just to stay together and work on our relation -
ship, at least until my daughter starts school.
INTERVIEWER: So one of the most important considerations for you is how
staying together or separating would affect your daughter.
CLIENT: Right. I don’t want to mess up her life, just because mine has been a
mess. It might be better for her to have two parents around, I guess, but
then in some other ways he’s not the best influence on her.
I
NTERVIEWER: What are some of those ways?
CLIENT: Well, like I told you, he has a bad temper. He’s never hit her so far,
but she’s seen him beat me up, and that really upsets her.
INTERVIEWER: It’s not good, you think, for her to see him hurting you, and
you also worry that eventually he might hurt her physically as well.
CLIENT: That’s got to be bad. It was awful last time. She was screaming and
crying, but it didn’t stop him.
INTERVIEWER: She was really scared, but that didn’t seem to matter; it didn’t
keep him from hurting you more.
CLIENT: Once he gets going like that, he doesn’t care about anyone or any -
thing. It’s like he’s in a blind rage.
INTERVIEWER: And that’s terrifying for a 4-year-old girl, and for you as well.
So even if you didn’t mind particularly what happens to you, it’s impor-
tant to you to protect that little girl of yours.
CLIENT: She’s so sweet. I just love her so much.
INTERVIEWER: Enough, perhaps, to make this really hard choice . . .
The righting reflex gets very strong in a situation like this. It is quite easy to
imagine the counselor taking over with forceful advice, telling the mother her
88 PRACTICE
duty, warning, even ordering. Sometimes this may be necessary, but it is
worth considering the assumptions that underlie and are communicated by
the use of such roadblocks. They implicitly assume that the mother does not
see and cannot appreciate the danger, is not capable of making the right deci -
sion on her own, and needs an outsider to take control and tell her what to
do. There are situations in which this is exactly the appropriate thing to do, as
in the case of an acutely depressed and intoxicated person with the means at
hand to commit suicide and a plan to do so. In many other situations, how -
ever, we believe it is more effective to elicit the intrinsic motivation and plan
for change from the person rather than trying to install them.
There is a danger in selective reflection of change talk that is worth not -
ing. Remember that an ambivalent person may respond with the opposite
when you seem to be taking up one side of the argument. Reflecting change
talk, then, can sometimes have the paradoxical effect of evoking the other side
of the ambivalence (resistance). If this occurs, it is easy enough to recover with
a double-sided reflection. The point is not to fall into defending the change
side while the client argues the other.
C
LIENT: My parents really are too strict, and
I hate that, but I guess it’s because they
worry about me.
I
NTERVIEWER: They care enough about you Reflecting one side . . .
to set limits.
CLIENT: But their rules are just . . . elicits the other.
unreasonable!
INTERVIEWER: You wish, sometimes, that A double-sided reflection
they didn’t care about you so much, recaptures both sides . . .
because they go way overboard
in trying to protect you.
C
LIENT: Right! I mean, I know they care . . . and restores a balanced
about me. I’d just like them to give perspective.
me more freedom and to trust me
more.
Always keep in mind that the overall purpose here is for the client to voice the
change side of the conflict and, ultimately, to move in that direction.
/G53/G75/G6D/G6D/G61/G72/G69/G7A/G69/G6E/G67 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65 /G54/G61/G6C/G6B
A third useful way to respond to change talk, besides reflecting and asking for
elaboration, is to offer summaries that gather together bouquets of change state-
ments that the person has offered. In the previous chapter we distinguished col-
lecting, linking, and transitional summaries, but all three kinds serve a similar
function: they allow the person to hear once again their own change talk.
Responding to Change Talk 89
Like reflections, summaries are consciously selective. Certain flowers are
placed in the bouquet, while others are not. Some flowers are put up front in a
prominent position, and others are put behind. In general, summaries are col -
lections of change statements the person has made: disadvantages of the status
quo, reasons for change, optimism about change, and desire to change (Chap-
ter 6). Particularly in transitional summaries, that tend to be somewhat lon -
ger, it can be important to include in the background an acknowledgment of
the other side of ambivalence, as well. Including both sides can head off the
person responding to your summary with a “Yes, but . . . ” Here is an exam -
ple of a transitional summary that includes resistance themes sandwiched
within prominently placed change talk:
“What you seem to be thinking, then, is that you want to make a fairly
significant change in your lifestyle. In fact, it sounds like the change
needs to be large in order to work: moving to a different neighbor -
hood, finding a whole new set of friends, getting a job to have more
structure in your life, and maybe getting reconnected with a church.
There’s a part of you that has wanted to hold onto your old life, be-
cause you would be losing so much that is familiar to you now, but
mostly you believe that it’s time to move on with your life. One possi-
bility that you’re considering is enlisting in one of the armed forces,
which could help you do all of this at once. You see a number of im-
portant reasons for taking this leap now, difficult though it will be.
One of them is freedom. You see yourself headed for jail, maybe even a
life in prison if you don’t turn your life around very soon. You also
have this feeling that it’s time to grow up, that adolescence was fun but
now it’s time to be an adult. You had some sense of loss in that, too—
giving up childhood and taking on responsibility—but you seem to be
ready to move on. It’s also really important to you to be there for your
son and not have him grow up without you. All of that is why you
want to make such a major change now.”
Note some artful nuances of language here. Resistance themes are stated in
past tense, change talk in present tense. In discussing summarizing in Chap -
ter 6, we suggested using the conjunction “and” to capture ambivalence
rather than “but,” because the former acknowledges the simultaneous pres -
ence of both sides. Later in the process, however, as ambivalence begins to
move toward change, it can be useful to alter the structure of language for
describing the resistance side. This is illustrated in the preceding example.
Points of reluctance (resistance) are stated first within a sentence, then
joined by “but” to counteract points of change talk. The conjunction “but”
has a partial eraser effect, directing attention toward what follows it and
away from what goes before. It has a subtle effect of partially detracting
from or invalidating whatever precedes it. Consider an example from a per -
formance evaluation:
90 PRACTICE
“In general, Jones, you’re doing a fine job here. You are reliable, and the qual-
ity of your work is good, but . . . ”
Suddenly, all that went before is forgotten, and the employee’s attention is
fixed on whatever comes next. The conjunction “but” (and its functional
equivalents such as “however, “yet,” and “although”) can therefore be useful
syntax when you wish to acknowledge the other side of ambivalence but di -
rect momentum toward change.
/G41/G66/G66/G69/G72/G6D/G69/G6E/G67 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65 /G54/G61/G6C/G6B
Finally, one can reinforce change talk simply by commenting positively on it.
A few examples will suffice:
“That sounds like a good idea.”
“I can see how that would concern you.”
“I think that could work.”
“You’re very considerate of how your actions affect other people.”
“That’s a good point.”
“It’s important to you to be a good parent.”
“I think you’re right about that.”
In closing this rather technical section, we are inclined to reiterate the
overall spirit within which these methods are applied. Motivational interview-
ing is not a set of quick-trick techniques for making people change. The per-
son’s autonomy is always respected, and the reasons for change arise from the
person’s own values and goals. It is a collaborative process of shared decision
making.
/G57/G48/G45/G4E /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G49/G53 /G4E/G4F/G4E/G44/G49/G52/G45/G43/G54/G49/G56/G45
There are other times when counseling is not directed toward any particular
change outcome. There are still goals for the counseling, of course. A common
one is to help the person get unstuck, resolve ambivalence, and move on with
life. What we mean here is that the counselor is not interested in directing the
resolution of ambivalence toward any particular kind of change.
The goal is to help people explore the options and their possible conse -
quences in relation to their own values and goals. The counselor may provide
requested information but has no directional advice to give, being truly indif -
ferent to the direction chosen. Medical ethicists term this “equipoise,” when
the physician has no clear attachment to or recommendation for one resolu -
tion more than another.
In a way, this situation requires a still higher level of clinical skillfulness
than the directive variety of counseling, because one must avoid inadvertently
Responding to Change Talk 91
tipping the scales in one direction or the other (for examples, see Chapter 6).
There is also the opposite risk, of negating each change statement by eliciting
its opposite and thereby exacerbating and entrenching ambivalence:
C
LIENT: I suppose it would be fun to go. I’ve never visited a place like
Greneda, but I also hate to use up my holiday time.
INTERVIEWER: There are other things you’d like to do with your time off.
CLIENT: I have work to do in the house, and I would enjoy planting a garden
in the back. It’s nice sometimes just to stay home.
INTERVIEWER: Yet the adventure of visiting an exotic place is appealing, too.
CLIENT: It is! I like the idea of just taking off for some place I’ve never seen,
and leaving everything else behind. I might not want to come back!
INTERVIEWER: And still, it’s nice to relax at home, too, and accomplish a few
things there.
/G43/G6C/G61/G72/G69/G66/G79/G69/G6E/G67 /G41/G6D/G62/G69/G76/G61/G6C/G65/G6E/G63/G65
One key task is to clarify the ambivalence, to explore each side in some depth.
The back-and-forth process just illustrated can be quite frustrating. In fact, it
resembles how people ordinarily remain stuck in ambivalence, going back and
forth in thinking about pros and cons, until in exasperation they stop turning
it over.
One approach is to thoroughly explore each side of the ambivalent con-
flict. This is best done by making it clear that you are exploring together one
option at a time. (Note that there may well be more than two options under
consideration: not ambivalence as much as mutivalence.) For the time being,
the attractiveness of other alternatives is suspended, and together you go
down one road at a time, exploring its good things and not-so-good things.
Then the process is repeated for another option. It may be useful to keep deci-
sional balance notes about the pros and cons of each option, making the argu-
ments for each side visible simultaneously (see Chapters 2 and 6).
Summary reflections should contain the important elements of each side
of the conflict. Double-sided reflections with “and” (not “but”) conjunctions
are a normal part of this process.
/G43/G6C/G61/G72/G69/G66/G79/G69/G6E/G67 /G56/G61/G6C/G75/G65/G73
Once the ambivalence is clear, then what? The way out of ambivalence is like
the way out of a deep forest. Pick a direction and keep moving in as straight a
line as possible. The question is how to pick the direction.
A primary basis for resolving ambivalence is in relation to the person’s
values. What does the client hold most dear? What goals and values are cen -
tral to his or her life? Which values particularly pertain to this choice point?
92 PRACTICE
How would each possible resolution move the client toward or away from im-
portant values and goals? Looking ahead, where does the client want to be in
5 or 10 years? How would each possible resolution move the client toward or
away from that envisioned horizon?
Here is an example of nondirective motivational interviewing with a per -
son who is choosing between staying in her present community or moving to
take a new job in another area. It illustrates briefly the methods described:
double-sided reflection, clarifying ambivalence by exploring one avenue at a
time, summary reflections, and incorporating values.
I
NTERVIEWER: Let me suggest that we try something here. It’s easy to get stuck
in a decision like this because as soon as you think of an advantage of one
possibility, you then think of its down side or an advantage of the other
possibility. Let’s take the possibilities one at a time: stay here, or move.
Let’s begin with staying here. What are the advantages?
C
LIENT: It’s familiar—the devil you know, as they say. I’m not that happy at
work, but I get along OK, and I know how to do my job well.
INTERVIEWER: So your job here is OK. What else?
CLIENT: I have plenty of friends here, including some really close friends. I’d
miss them a lot. I say I’d write or telephone, but the truth is that I get
busy and don’t do it, and those friendships would drift away. Of course,
I’m sure I could make new friends if I moved.
I
NTERVIEWER: But that’s about option number two. Let’s stick with option
one for now: staying here. So far you’ve said that your work situation is
satisfactory, not great but familiar, and that you have good close friends
here who are important to you. What else?
C
LIENT: It’s kind of related, but the synagogue I attend is one that I really like,
and it might be hard to find a community like that in a new city. It means
a lot to me to go every sabbath, and I’m close to the rabbi and the people
there. It builds me up spiritually.
I
NTERVIEWER: OK. You have a strong faith community here. What else?
CLIENT: It might be better for Alison to finish school here. She has three more
years to go, and she doesn’t want to move to a new school. And I like the
weather here.
I
NTERVIEWER: Work, friends, synagogue, school, weather. What else would be
good about staying here?
CLIENT: I guess that’s about it. It’s always uncomfortable to pick up roots and
start over in a new place, but it’s kind of exciting, too.
INTERVIEWER: All right, good. Now let’s take a look at the other option you’re
considering, to move for this new job. What would be the advantages of
that?
Responding to Change Talk 93
CLIENT:( Laughs.) The first thing that occurs to me is that I’d be far away
from my ex. The divorce was pretty ugly, and in a way I’d like to leave all
that behind and start over. It’s silly, I guess, but somehow I think that
moving would give me more of a feeling of starting a new life, without all
of the constant reminders.
I
NTERVIEWER: Funny that that’s the first thing you think of.
CLIENT: Well, it would be getting away from unpleasant memories here.
They are offering me a much better salary, too. I haven’t even told my
boss here that I’m thinking about moving. It might be a better work
environment, but it’s hard to tell. The people I met seem to enjoy
working there. I’d have a little more responsibility in my new position,
as well.
I
NTERVIEWER: The new job itself has some real attractions for you: better pay,
better colleagues, a more responsible position . . .
CLIENT: Not better colleagues, really. I like the people I work with now, but
it’s a more pleasant building. It has big windows and doesn’t feel so
cramped. I guess they need big windows, though, because it rains there all
the time.
I
NTERVIEWER: Nice windows, not such nice weather.
CLIENT: The cost of living is higher there, too, but it’s a bigger city and has a
lot to offer.
INTERVIEWER: For example . . .
CLIENT: They have more museums and concerts and things, and a really good
zoo. I think the schools are better.
INTERVIEWER: Which might be better for Alison, and there would be more for
you to do in your free time.
CLIENT: I guess so.
INTERVIEWER: What else?
CLIENT: I don’t really know that much else about it. Mainly it’s a way to get
away from here and start over.
INTERVIEWER: OK, so here we go with the big picture. Let me know if I leave
something out. The advantages of staying here are that you’re settled in
and it’s familiar. Moving to a new place always involves a certain amount
of disruption. You know your job here, and while it’s not perfect, you
know what to expect and how to do it. You have good friends here, and
particularly important is your synagogue and the community you have
there. You like the weather here, and Alison would prefer to stay here
and finish school. Perhaps the biggest factor in favor of moving is your
feeling of having a fresh new start. It would get you away from your ex,
and painful reminders, and would give you a new lease on life. The job is
94 PRACTICE
more responsible and the pay is better, in the context of a somewhat
higher cost of living. The building where you would work is nicer, and
the weather isn’t. There is more to do there, and the schools might be
better for Alison. How’s that?
C
LIENT: Excellent—but it doesn’t help me much. I still feel confused.
INTERVIEWER: Of course you do. There’s not one clear right answer here. Did
anything else occur to you as I was talking?
CLIENT: I realize I can tell my boss about the possibility of moving and see
what happens. If she gets angry, that might help me decide to go. Or she
might offer me a raise if she wants to keep me.
I
NTERVIEWER: You’re not really sure which way it would go.
CLIENT: I think probably she’d try to keep me. She seems to like my work. So
that wouldn’t make the decision for me, either.
INTERVIEWER: It might only remove one of the differences, the pay difference,
and it sounds like that’s not one of the most important for you.
CLIENT: Well, it’s important. I’d like to have a better salary, but it’s not the
whole picture by any means.
INTERVIEWER: Then let me ask you this: What is most important to you?
CLIENT: In my job?
INTERVIEWER: No, in life. What do you care most about? What do you value?
What do you want to do with your life?
CLIENT: Big question! I care about Alison. I’m not just saying that because I’m
supposed to. I really want the very best for her.
INTERVIEWER: Specifically . . .
CLIENT: I want her to be happy. I don’t particularly care what she decides she
wants to do in life. If she decides she wants more education, she’ll get it.
INTERVIEWER: You love her very much.
CLIENT: I do. We’re very close.
INTERVIEWER: What else is important to you in life?
CLIENT: I’m a very spiritual person. I know there is more to life than what we
can see. I feel like a kindergartner when it comes to religion, but I want to
keep growing spiritually.
I
NTERVIEWER: In what ways?
CLIENT: I don’t know how to explain it exactly, but there is a path that I’m
meant to walk, and I want to be sure I’m on it. I keep a Jewish home, and
that’s important to me.
I
NTERVIEWER: So that’s part of the question here, too. One of these two possi-
bilities is on the right path for you, but which one?
Responding to Change Talk 95
CLIENT: Yes. It seems like it ought to be clear, but it’s not.
INTERVIEWER: Alison, spiritual growth . . . What else is top priority for you?
CLIENT: I want to be with someone again, probably to be married again. I
don’t want to live out my life alone. I have Alison, but she’ll need to have
her own life.
I
NTERVIEWER: What about the things you cherish most in life?
CLIENT: I love being outdoors, in nature. I love music; I’m not a musician, but
I love listening to classical music. And my friends are important to me—
having at least a few good, close friends who share everyday life with me.
I
NTERVIEWER: What about your work?
CLIENT: I don’t think I’m going to change the world. Work is a job. I enjoy
doing it, but when I go home, then I’m home. I’m much more a people
person.
I
NTERVIEWER: What you’ve mentioned so far, as the things in life that really
matter to you, are your daughter, your faith, being married again or at
least having a life partner, nature, and music, and having close friends.
How might these values fit in with staying here or moving?
C
LIENT: It sounds like moving just for a new job doesn’t make much sense.
That’s not really what this is about. I have friends, and synagogue, and a
life here, and Alison wants to stay. There are some attractive things there,
but really it’s this feeling of needing a new start, wanting to break free.
I
NTERVIEWER: And a move would do that.
CLIENT: You know, I’m not even sure about that. It’s more a feeling I have . . .
Without pushing in one direction or the other, the counselor helps the client
explore both sides of the ambivalence and to evaluate them in relation to
important personal values. At the end of this example the client seems to be
moving toward resolution without the counselor having tried to influence its
direction. This exemplifies how motivational interviewing can be used to
resolve ambivalence when the counselor has no personal commitment to a
particular outcome.
Without the directive aspect, isn’t this just client-centered counseling? In
many ways, yes it is. The fundamental skills being used are methods described
well by Rogers, and the goal is to be nondirective as well as client-centered.
An important refinement, we believe, is being consciously nondirective. As an
evolution of client-centered counseling, motivational interviewing brings into
clearer focus when, how, and why this method can be directive. By under -
standing when and how client-centered skills can be used directively, one is
also, we hope, more prepared to maintain equipoise when appropriate.
96 PRACTICE
/G53/G55/G4D/G4D/G41/G52/G59
The client-centered methods of motivational interviewing can be used either
directively or nondirectively. The difference is in how one responds to change
talk and (as we shall see in Chapter 8) to resistance relative to a particular di -
rection of change. When used directively, motivational interviewing involves
selectively elaborating, reflecting, summarizing, and affirming change talk. In
a nondirective application, the approach is much closer to the original method
of client-centered counseling, but with clearer consciousness of how to main -
tain a neutral balance.
Responding to Change Talk 97
CHAPTER 8
/G52/G65/G73/G70/G6F/G6E/G64/G69/G6E/G67 /G74/G6F /G52/G65/G73/G69/G73/G74/G61/G6E/G63/G65
You’re kind of young yet, and we don’t know if you’ve had
enough.
—D R.B OB TO CLARENCE S., quoted in Ernest Kurtz,
Not-God: A History of Alcoholics Anonymous
/G52/G45/G46._/G4C/G45/G43/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G53 /G4F/G4E /G52/G45/G53/G49/G53/G54/G41/G4E/G43/G45
Some people believe that resistance occurs because of a client’s character
armor. Some psychodynamic theories, for example, construe resistance as
symptomatic of unconscious conflicts and psychological defenses that are
established during early childhood. Primitive defense mechanisms such as de -
nial were once believed to be an inherent part of, even diagnostic of, alcohol -
ism. In this way of thinking, resistance walks through the door with the client.
We question this view, which attributes resistance primarily to the client.
Instead, we emphasize that, to a significant extent, resistance arises from the
interpersonal interaction between counselor and client. In most psychothera -
peutic writing, in fact, it is a phenomenon that occurs only in the context of
psychotherapy. Research clearly demonstrates that a change in counseling
style can directly affect the level of client resistance, driving it upward or
downward (Chapter 1). This suggests a practical, here-and-now view of resis -
tance. It means that it is not fixed and that there is something you can do
about it.
Yet what is resistance? Clearly it is observable client behavior that occurs
within the context of treatment (Chapter 4), and it represents an important
signal of dissonance within the counseling process (Chapter 5). In a way, it is
98
a signal that the person is not keeping up with you; it is the client’s way of say-
ing, “Wait a minute; I’m not with you; I don’t agree.” Your general task when
this occurs is to double back, understand the reason for resistance behavior
and for dissonance in the counseling relationship, and address it. To do this,
you need to be able to recognize resistance behavior as a signal, a subject that
was addressed in Chapter 5. It is also worth a reminder here that resistance,
like change talk, is specific to a particular kind of change. A given client, for
example, may be resistant to quitting marijuana use but quite motivated to
give up cocaine.
Resistance behavior is more than just interesting information about the
process of counseling. Resistance early in treatment is associated with drop -
out, and the more a person resists during brief counseling, the less likely it is
that behavior change will occur.
Yet resistant responses are normal during counseling, and their appear -
ance is not reason for concern. In medicine, in fact, resistance is a term associ-
ated with a healthy immune system. Resistance and change talk are like traffic
signals that tell you to go ahead, proceed with caution, slow down, or stop
what you are doing. You also have the means to change these signals. The oc-
currence of a red light is normal and helpful (unless you’re in too much of a
hurry). It is a problem only if the red light stays on, if resistance responses per-
sist or escalate as the client’s general pattern throughout a session or a course
of treatment.
What happens thereafter, however, is importantly influenced by your
own counseling style. It is how you respond to client resistance that makes the
difference, and that distinguishes motivational interviewing from other ap-
proaches. If resistance is increasing during counseling, it is very likely in re-
sponse to something that you are doing.
Implicit in this argument is another working assumption of motivational
interviewing: persistent resistance is not a client problem, but a counselor skill
issue. Perhaps this seems an overstatement. For example, some clients may be
highly resistant, no matter what therapeutic approach is taken; there are ex -
ceptions to every rule. We also recognize that people enter counseling with
widely differing initial levels of resistance. Some enter treatment quite angry
and defensive, and there is evidence that motivational interviewing can be par-
ticularly effective with such clients.
1 Agency-referred clients have been re -
ported to show more initial resistance than self-referred clients.2 Nevertheless,
research clearly demonstrates that the extent to which clients “resist’’ is pow-
erfully determined by counseling style. The lesson here is that counselors can
change their style in ways that will decrease (or increase) client resistance, and
it is desirable to decrease client resistance because this pattern is associated
with long-term change. This also means, as discussed in Chapter 5, that you
can judge your effectiveness in motivational interviewing, in part, from cli -
ents’ responses during counseling.
In sum, how you respond to resistance matters. In this chapter we discuss
some general methods that can be used to diminish resistance by rolling with
Responding to Resistance 99
it. These methods can be useful both in Phase 1, when building motivation for
change, and also in Phase 2, when commitment is being strengthened and a
change plan is being negotiated (Chapter 9). The skillful handling of resistance
is important, in fact, throughout the course of counseling.
We organize methods for responding to resistance into two categories.
The first category consists of variations on reflective listening statements: sim-
ple reflection, amplified reflection, and double-sided reflection. The second
category contains five other responses that move beyond reflection: shifting
focus, reframing, agreeing with a twist, emphasizing personal choice and con-
trol, and coming alongside.
/G52/G45/G46._/G4C/G45/G43/G54/G49/G56/G45 /G52/G45/G53/G50/G4F/G4E/G53/G45/G53
/G53/G69/G6D/G70/G6C/G65 /G52/G65/G66/G6C/G65/G63/G74/G69/G6F/G6E
A good general principle is to respond to resistance with nonresistance. A sim-
ple acknowledgment of the person’s disagreement, feeling, or perception can
permit further exploration rather than continued defensiveness, thus avoiding
the trap of taking sides. A reflective listening statement will often suffice for
this purpose. Sometimes a small shift in emphasis can also be accomplished
through reflection. Here are some examples.
C
LIENT: I’m trying! If my probation officer would just get off my back, I could
focus on getting my life in order.
INTERVIEWER: You’re working hard on the changes you need to make.
or
INTERVIEWER: It’s frustrating to have a probation officer looking over your
shoulder.
CLIENT: Who are you to be giving me advice? What do you know about
drugs? You’ve probably never even smoked a joint!
INTERVIEWER: It’s hard to imagine how I could possibly understand.
or
INTERVIEWER: Sounds like you’re pretty angry at me.
CLIENT: I just don’t want to take pills. I ought to be able to handle this on my
own.
INTERVIEWER: You don’t think that medication would work for you.
or
INTERVIEWER: You don’t want to rely on a drug. It seems to you like a crutch.
CLIENT: I couldn’t keep the weight off even if I lost it.
100 PRACTICE
INTERVIEWER: You can’t see any way that would work for you.
or
INTERVIEWER: You’re rather discouraged about trying again.
/G41/G6D/G70/G6C/G69/G66/G69/G65/G64 /G52/G65/G66/G6C/G65/G63/G74/G69/G6F/G6E
A related and quite useful response is to reflect back what the person has said
in an amplified or exaggerated form—to state it in an even more extreme fash -
ion. If successful, this will encourage the person to back off a bit and will elicit
the other side of ambivalence. This must be done empathically, because any
sarcastic tone or too extreme an overstatement may itself elicit a hostile or
otherwise resistant reaction:
C
LIENT: I couldn’t just give up drinking. What would my friends think?
INTERVIEWER: You couldn’t handle your friends’ reaction if you quit.
CLIENT: I can take care of myself. I don’t need my parents always checking up
on me.
INTERVIEWER: So you might be better off, really, without parents.
CLIENT: My wife is always exaggerating. I haven’t ever been that bad.
INTERVIEWER: It seems to you she has no reason for concern.
CLIENT: Those studies about cancer don’t really prove anything anyway.
INTERVIEWER: It seems to you that lung cancer doesn’t really have anything to
do with smoking. It just happens.
We emphasize again that such reflections must be made in a straightforward,
supportive, matter-of-fact manner. Any vocal hint of sarcasm, irony, incredu -
lity, or impatience can quickly recast your response as hostile and thus elicit
client resistance.
/G44/G6F/G75/G62/G6C/G65/G2D/G53/G69/G64/G65/G64 /G52/G65/G66/G6C/G65/G63/G74/G69/G6F/G6E
Another approach within the realm of reflective listening is to capture both
sides of ambivalence. If the person’s recent statement manifests only the resis-
tant side of the argument, a double-sided reflection acknowledges what the
client has said and adds to it the other side of his or her own ambivalence (not
yours). This requires the use of material that the client has offered previously,
perhaps not even in the same session. Here again we encourage use of the con-
junction “and” rather than “but” in order to maintain balance of emphasis
Here are some examples:
Responding to Resistance 101
CLIENT: I know it makes sense, but you don’t seem to understand how bad the
pain is. When I even try to get out of bed, let alone exercise, the pain in
my back is terrible. I hurt all the time.
I
NTERVIEWER: You think that in the long run exercise is likely to help you de -
crease your pain, and at the same time you’re suffering quite a lot, and
that makes it hard to get started walking or even to think about it.
CLIENT: I know that what you’re trying to do is help me, but I’m just not go-
ing to do that!
INTERVIEWER: On the one hand, you know that there are some real problems
here I’m trying to help with, and, on the other, what I suggested is just
not acceptable to you.
C
LIENT: Look, I don’t smoke any more than most of my friends. What’s
wrong with having a joint now and then?
INTERVIEWER: I can see how this is confusing for you. You’ve told me how
you’re concerned about your smoking and how it affects you, and also it
seems like you’re not using any more than your friends do. Hard to sort it
out!
C
LIENT: OK, maybe I’ve got some problems with gambling, but it’s not like
I’m addicted to it.
INTERVIEWER: You see that your gambling is causing problems for you and
your family, and it’s also important that people not think of you as some
kind of addict.
/G4F/G54/G48/G45/G52 /G52/G45/G53/G50/G4F/G4E/G53/G45/G53 /G42/G45/G59/G4F/G4E/G44 /G52/G45/G46._/G4C/G45/G43/G54/G49/G4F/G4E
There are other helpful ways to respond to resistance, besides variations on re-
flective listening. The intent behind them all is to defuse the underlying disso -
nance and thereby diminish resistance.
/G53/G68/G69/G66/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G46._/G6F/G63/G75/G73
One approach is to shift the person’s attention away from what seems to be a
stumbling block in the way of progress. This amounts to going around barri -
ers rather than trying to climb over them. Such detouring can be a good way
to address or at least postpone dissonance when encountering a particularly
difficult issue. The general structure of a shifting focus response is to first de -
fuse the initial concern and then direct attention to a more readily workable
issue.
102 PRACTICE
CLIENT: You’re probably going to give me a diet that I need to stick to, and
tell me I have to get some of these exercise machines or go to a gym every
day
I
NTERVIEWER: Hey, slow down! We’re just sitting down at the beginning of
the game, and you’re already worrying about the final score! I’m certainly
not ready to jump to any conclusions at this point. What is it that you
want to do?
C
LIENT: Well now that we’re both here, I guess you’re going to tell us which
one of us is at fault.
INTERVIEWER: That’s not the issue at all, and I don’t want you worrying about
it. It’s not going to help to place blame. I am worried, though, that there
have been some rather painful things happening between you, that are
hurtful to you both and to your relationship. Tell me a little more
about . . .
C
LIENT: OK, the judge said I had to come here, so tell me what I have to do.
INTERVIEWER: I don’t know enough about you yet for us to even start talking
about what it makes sense for you to do. What we need to do right now
is . . .
/G52/G65/G66/G72/G61/G6D/G69/G6E/G67
Another response to resistance behavior is to reframe what the client is offer-
ing. This approach acknowledges the validity of the person’s raw observations
but offers a new meaning or interpretation for them. The client’s information
is recast into a new form and viewed in a new light that is more likely to be
helpful and to support change.
A particularly good example of a reframing opportunity is provided by
the phenomenon of alcohol tolerance among heavy drinkers. It is quite com -
mon for heavy drinkers to report that they are less affected by alcohol than
other people. They can drink large and medically hazardous quantities with -
out feeling or showing the degree of intoxication that would normally be ex -
pected. Over a career of heavy drinking, this capacity tends to increase (at
least up to the point where liver damage becomes significant, and metabolic
tolerance drops). Mostly, tolerance amounts to a failure to feel or show the
high level of alcohol that is actually in the bloodstream. The drinker may reg -
ularly consume quantities of alcohol that are large enough to do substantial
damage to the body but will not feel or show evidence of intoxication. In es -
sence, the person lacks the normal warning system that protects most people
from drinking to excess. Here, then, is the opportunity for reframing in medi -
cal or counseling consultation. Many heavy drinkers regard the ability to
“hold their liquor” as a sign that they are safe, more able to drink with impu-
Responding to Resistance 103
nity than most people. The truth is exactly the opposite: alcohol tolerance is a
risk factor for alcohol problems. Here is an extended example of such educa -
tional reframing.
INTERVIEWER: So something you’ve noticed about your drinking is that you
can really hold your liquor, so to speak. You can drink a lot more than
most people without feeling or looking drunk. You’ve even been able to
fool people, so that they can’t tell how much you’ve had to drink.
C
LIENT: That’s right. I’ve always been like that.
INTERVIEWER: I don’t know whether you’re aware of this or not—many peo -
ple aren’t—but that is actually a reason for concern. You see, ordinary
people will have one or two drinks, and then they start to feel the effects
and something happens. They don’t want any more. Something tells them
that they’ve had enough. Other people, unfortunately, have a high toler -
ance. They don’t have the normal built-in warning systems. Maybe
they’re born without them, maybe they lose them or ignore them. What-
ever the cause, the result is that they damage themselves without realizing
it.
C
LIENT: But if I’m not feeling anything, how can I be drunk?
INTERVIEWER: Imagine this: Suddenly you lose all sense of pain. Never again
in your life will you feel any physical pain. The sensation is gone. Is that
good or bad?
C
LIENT: Sounds great!
INTERVIEWER: Many people think that would be wonderful, an incredible
blessing, but if you think about it, actually it would be a curse. Your
health and your life would be in great danger. The first warning you
would have that your hand is resting on a hot stove would be the smell of
the smoke. You could strain or break your limbs and go on using and
damaging them, because you wouldn’t realize what was happening. You
wouldn’t feel the pains that are early warnings of tooth decay or illness,
and by the time you discovered the problem it could be too late to do
anything about it. People with a high tolerance for alcohol are like that.
They drink large amounts of alcohol, enough to do serious damage to
their bodies, but don’t feel or show their intoxication. The people around
them can’t see it as easily, because they don’t look drunk. They damage
themselves because they’re missing the normal warning signs. What
you’re talking about, “being able to hold your liquor,” is not your body’s
ability to get rid of alcohol at superhuman speed. The alcohol is there,
doing its damage. What you’re talking about is tolerance, the lack of this
warning system, and that’s a reason for concern.
This excerpt shows how reframing can involve some detailed teaching—the
communication of new information that the person needs in order to under -
104 PRACTICE
stand his or her situation in a new light. Often reframing is much simpler than
this, however, and can be accomplished with a few sentences, even one or
two. Here are three more examples:
C
LIENT: I’ve tried so many times to change, and failed.
INTERVIEWER: You’re very persistent, even in the face of discouragement. This
change must really be important to you.
CLIENT: My husband is always nagging me about taking my medicine. He’s
always reminding me to take my insulin and telling me to watch what I
eat.
I
NTERVIEWER: It sounds like he really cares about you, and is concerned for
you. I guess he expresses it in a way that you’re angry about, and maybe
we can help him learn to tell you in a better way that he loves you and is
worried about you.
C
LIENT: I’ve tried to quit smoking three times now and failed every time. I
don’t think I can do it.
INTERVIEWER: What strikes me is that you’ve given it three good tries already.
You remember that wheel of change we talked about? Every time you
give it a good try, you’re one turn closer to getting off the wheel. In fact,
the average number of tries before people quit is four, so don’t give up
now!
/G41/G67/G72/G65/G65/G69/G6E/G67 /G77/G69/G74/G68/G61 /G54/G77/G69/G73/G74
A related way of rolling with resistance is to offer initial agreement, but with a
slight twist or change of direction. This retains a sense of consonance between
you and the client, while allowing you to continue influencing the direction
and momentum of change. Agreement with a twist is basically a reflection fol-
lowed by a reframe:
C
LIENT: Nobody can tell me how to raise my kids. You don’t live in my house.
You don’t know how it is.
INTERVIEWER: The truth is that it really is up to you how your kids are raised
and what they learn. You’re in the best position to know which ideas are
likely to work and which aren’t, and I can’t just be prescribing things for
you. You need to be a full partner in this process.
C
LIENT: Why are you and my wife ganging up on me about my temper? What
about all her problems? You’d blow up, too, if your family were aggra -
vating you all the time.
INTERVIEWER: You’ve got a good point there, and that’s important. There is a
Responding to Resistance 105
bigger picture here, and maybe I haven’t been paying enough attention to
that. Conflict isn’t as simple as one person’s problem, and I agree with
you that it’s not a matter of placing blame. Temper problems like this do
involve and affect the whole family. I think you’re absolutely right.
C
LIENT: You’re probably going to give me a diet that I need to stick to, and
tell me I have to get some of these exercise machines or go to a gym every
day. I just get so discouraged by that kind of advice!
I
NTERVIEWER: If I were to tell you a whole lot of things that you have to do, it
would immobilize you even further. It’s ironic, isn’t it? When you feel like
you have to do something, it actually prevents you from doing what you
want to do.
/G45/G6D/G70/G68/G61/G73/G69/G7A/G69/G6E/G67 /G50/G65/G72/G73/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G43/G68/G6F/G69/G63/G65 /G61/G6E/G64 /G43/G6F/G6E/G74/G72/G6F/G6C
Resistance sometimes arises from the phenomenon of psychological reac -
tance.3 When people perceive that their freedom of choice is being threatened,
they tend to react by asserting their liberty (e.g., “I’ll show you; nobody tells
me what to do!”). It is a common and natural reaction to a threatening loss of
choice. Probably the best antidote for this reaction is to assure the person of
what is surely the truth: in the end, it is the client who determines what hap-
pens. An early assurance of this kind can diminish reactance. Here are some
examples:
C
LIENT: Why are you giving me this booklet? Are you telling me I have to use
condoms?
INTERVIEWER: It’s just information. What you do with it is completely up to
you. Naturally, no one can make you use condoms.
CLIENT: I don’t like the idea of blood pressure medicine. I hear it can have
some bad side effects.
INTERVIEWER: And it really is your decision. All I can do is tell you the advan-
tages and disadvantages for you, and give you my opinion. If you decide
you don’t want to take medication, then you won’t. If you do want to,
it’s available. It’s up to you.
C
LIENT: What if I tell you I like smoking and don’t want to quit?
INTERVIEWER: You’re a free person, and it’s your choice. I couldn’t make the
decision for you, even if I wanted to.
CLIENT: The judge told me that I have to come here. I don’t have any choice
about it.
INTERVIEWER: Actually you do, in several ways. You chose to come here in -
106 PRACTICE
stead of taking your chances with the judge. Also, if you find that you
don’t want to come here, I can work with you and the court to find a dif-
ferent program for you, one you might like better.
/G43/G6F/G6D/G69/G6E/G67 /G41/G6C/G6F/G6E/G67/G73/G69/G64/G65
If taking up one side of the argument causes an ambivalent person to defend
the other, then the process ought to work both ways. When a counselor advo-
cates for change, the ambivalent person argues against it, but what happens if
the counselor defends the other side, the counterchange side?
Much has been written about this as a general strategy in psychotherapy.
Variations on this theme have been called “reverse psychology” and “thera -
peutic paradox.”4 Within strategic family therapy, it is used to place the client
in a position where opposition or resistance to the counselor results in move -
ment in a desired direction. Another familiar variation is “prescribing the
problem.” If all change efforts are met with opposition, the counselor recom -
mends that the client should continue on as before, without changing, or
should even increase the behavior in question. This is not done in an angry,
exasperated, “I give up” manner. Most often it is done in a calm and matter-
of-fact way. A detailed rationale may even be given for why the person should
not change.
Although this method fits well with the ambivalence model described in
earlier chapters, we confess some serious discomfort with the ways in which
therapeutic paradox has sometimes been described. There is often the sense of
paradox being a clever way of duping people into doing things for their own
good. In some writings on paradox, one senses almost a glee in finding inno-
vative ways to trick people without their realizing what is happening. Such
cleverness lacks the respectful and collaborative tone that we understand to be
fundamental to the dialectical process of motivational interviewing. We do
not mean to imply that motivational interviewing is value-neutral or free from
concerns about manipulation. We have devoted Chapter 12 to a consideration
of such ethical issues.
What, then, is the role of this method of coming alongside? In a way, it is
a special case of amplified reflection. It is a straightforward extension of the
conceptual model of ambivalence that is presented in Chapters 2 through 5.
Motivational interviewing is essentially a dialogue about the client’s ambiva -
lence, and the interviewer explores both sides. By the nature of ambivalence,
when the counselor raises only one side the client is inclined to explore the
other. Because of principles of self-perception theory,
5 it is important for the
counselor to be mindful of this process, because a person who is caused to de-
fend one side of the dialogue can be influenced (inadvertently or intentionally)
to move in that direction.
Knowing this, it follows that siding with the counterchange perspective
should elicit change talk from the client. We postulate nothing more elaborate
than this linguistic attribute of ambivalence. We do not conceptualize resis -
Responding to Resistance 107
tance as strategic or defensive on the client’s part; consequently, we have
moved away from the chess-match concept of paradox as counterstrategic
outsmarting. Coming alongside as the client argues against change is just an -
other way of defusing the argument and eliciting change talk. There is a clear
and immediate test of whether this response is having the desired effect: Does
it decrease resistance and evoke change talk?
C
LIENT: I don’t think this is going to work for me, either. I feel pretty hope -
less.
INTERVIEWER: It’s certainly possible that after giving it another try, you still
won’t be any better off, and so it might be better not to try at all. What’s
your inclination?
C
LIENT: That’s about it, really. I probably drink too much sometimes, and I
don’t like the hangovers, but I don’t think it’s that much of a concern, re-
ally.
INTERVIEWER: It may just be worth it to you to keep on drinking as you have,
even though it causes some problems. It’s worth the cost.
CLIENT: I’m not sure if I want to do this program or not. It sounds like it takes
a lot of time.
INTERVIEWER: And that’s something that concerns me. A program like this
does require a lot of motivation and effort. We don’t really want to start
working with somebody until they’re serious about wanting to change,
and, frankly, I’m not sure how ready you are. As I listen to you, I’m not
convinced that you’re motivated enough to carry through.
There is no reason why the client has to be kept in the dark about the dia-
logue. Consistent with the example of exploring one side of ambivalence at a
time (Chapter 7), one can set up a direct debate in which the client defends the
need for change. In this case, the counselor simply takes over the counter -
change side of the argument:
“One thing that I find is helpful is to clarify the real reasons for change.
I’ve heard from you some of the reasons you are reluctant to think about
making a change, and now I have a suggestion. I want to have a little de -
bate with you. I’ll defend the position that you don’t really have a prob-
lem and don’t need to change, and I’d like you to do your best to con -
vince me otherwise. Do you understand? I’m going to be you, arguing
that I don’t need to change, and your job is to persuade me that there re-
ally is a problem here that I need to examine and do something about.
OK?”
Clients sometimes need extra encouragement to get rolling with a contrived
dialogue of this kind. Have the client speak in “you” language, while you as
108 PRACTICE
the counselor speak in “I” language and voice the client’s prior counterchange
arguments. Here’s how it might go:
INTERVIEWER: Look, I just can’t see the point in all this jumping up and down
exercise stuff. I’d rather just relax when I have the time. That’s good for
my health, too.
C
LIENT: Well, I’ve been putting on some weight . . .
INTERVIEWER:( Interrupting.) Sorry. Use “you” instead of “I” when you talk
to me. Try it again.
CLIENT: Well, you’ve been putting on a good bit of weight these last few
years, and relaxing isn’t going to help you there.
INTERVIEWER: I’m not that overweight, really. I feel pretty good.
CLIENT: But remember that the doctor told you your blood pressure is up, and
there aren’t really any symptoms with high blood pressure. [out of role]
Am I doing OK?
I
NTERVIEWER: [out of role] You’re doing great. Don’t go so easy on me,
though. Don’t let me get away with anything. [in role] You only live
once, after all. Besides, I’ve heard that exercise doesn’t really make you
live any longer . . . it just makes it seem like you do.
C
LIENT: Nonsense! You know you felt better when you weren’t so over-
weight. And getting some fresh air would be good for you.
Over time, the counselor allows the person to persuade him or her that there
is reason for concern and change. This technique is not appropriate for every
client, but it can be an appealing, even entertaining way to externalize and ex-
amine ambivalence. At the same time, it can elicit quite a lot of change talk
from the client, as he or she defends the need for change.
/G54/G48/G45 /G44/G52/G41/G4D/G41 /G4F/G46._ /G43/G48/G41/G4E/G47/G45
Resistance is a key to successful treatment if you can recognize it for what it is:
an opportunity. In expressing resistance, the client is probably rehearsing a
script that has been played out many times before. There is an expected role
for you to play—one that has been acted out by others in the past. Your lines
are predictable. If you speak these same lines, as others have done, the script
will come to the same conclusion as before.
But you can rewrite your own role. Your part in the play need not be the
dry predictable lines that the client is expecting. In a way, counseling is like
improvisational theater. No two sessions run exactly the same way. If one ac -
tor changes role, the plot is headed off in a new direction.
Resistance is often the life of the play. It is the twist that adds drama and
excitement to the plot. Viewing resistance as a perverse character flaw is a sad
Responding to Resistance 109
mistake. Resistance lies at the very heart of human change. It arises from the
motives and struggles of the actors. It foreshadows certain ends to which the
play may or may not lead. The true art of a counselor is tested in the recogni -
tion and handling of resistance. It is on this stage that the drama of change un-
folds.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45/G53
1. Project MATCH Research Group (1997b).
2. Chamberlain, Patterson, Reid, Kavanagh, and Forgatch (1984).
3. Brehm and Brehm (1981).
4. For example, Frankl (1963), Haley (1963), and Stanton, Todd, and Associates
(1982).
5. Bem (1967, 1972).
110 PRACTICE
CHAPTER 9
/G45/G6E/G68/G61/G6E/G63/G69/G6E/G67 /G43/G6F/G6E/G66/G69/G64/G65/G6E/G63/G65
Things do not change: We change.
—H ENRY DAVID THOREAU, Walden
Much of the foregoing discussion has focused on increasing the perceived im-
portance of change, on the situation in which a person is ambivalent about
wanting to change. As discussed in Chapter 1, however, importance is only
one of the three natural language components of motivation for change, the
“willing” in “ready, willing, and able.” A person can strongly desire change
(be willing) but perceive that it is beyond reach. “Confidence” is the term we
use to describe the extent to which a person feels able to change.
In general, people cannot be ready to change until they perceive both that
they want to (importance) and are able to do so (confidence). We would love
to play Grieg’s piano concerto and would willingly do so, but we lack the abil-
ity. Both importance and confidence, therefore, are Phase 1 issues, and they
can interact in complex ways. Sometimes people are reluctant to consider the
importance of change if they see no possibility of it happening. If change is be-
yond reach, then what’s the point even in thinking about it? Often, however,
it seems to go the other way. Importance increases first, and then the person
begins searching for ways in which change might be accomplished. In any
event, both importance and confidence are needed in sufficient quantity be -
fore moving on to a change plan (Phase 2).
Using just these two constructs—importance and confidence—one can
imagine several reasons for low motivation for change, as discussed in Chap -
111
ter 6. (The third issue of readiness is discussed in Chapter 10.) One might be
“unmotivated” because:
Importance is low, but confidence is high.
Importance is high, but confidence is low.
Both importance and confidence are low.
When importance is low (whether with high or low confidence), we generally
recommend working first on enhancing the perceived importance of change
by developing discrepancy. If low confidence is an obstacle to increasing im -
portance, it will become apparent soon enough.
What about the situation in which importance is high—the person wants
to change—but confidence is low? How can motivational interviewing be ap -
plied then? That is the focus of this chapter: enhancing confidence for change.
The methods described here can also be used, of course, when both impor -
tance and confidence are low. Confidence is again treated as an ambivalence
issue. It is unlikely that the person feels totally unable to change. There are
within the person confidence arguments for why he or she could change, as
well as arguments for why it cannot happen. A motivational interviewing ap-
proach seeks to elicit and strengthen the former.
A further clarification is warranted here. The discussion in this chapter is
directed to the problem of low self-efficacy and not to more generalized confi-
dence problems such as depression, low self-esteem, and learned helplessness.
The methods described here are not remedies for these broader confidence
problems, for which other effective treatment approaches are available.
/G43/G4F/G4E/G46._/G49/G44/G45/G4E/G43/G45/G54/G52/G41/G50/G53
Just as there are traps to avoid when beginning motivational interviewing to
enhance the importance of change, there are also a few to avoid in building
confidence.
/G93/G49/G92/G6C/G6C/G54/G61/G6B/G65/G4F/G76/G65/G72/G4E/G6F/G77/G2C/G54/G68/G61/G6E/G6B/G59/G6F/G75/G94
One temptation is to abandon a motivational approach once the person seems
to perceive the importance of change. “Now that’s behind us, and we can get
on with real counseling.” The approach to confidence building that we are
suggesting here is consonant with the importance-enhancing style described
earlier and with motivational interviewing more generally. It continues to be
collaborative in spirit, drawing on the person’s own resources. It remains re -
flective and evocative rather than prescriptive. This first trap, then, is to meet
low confidence with a prescription: “Here’s how you can do it.” Falling into
this trap involves taking responsibility for the “can” side of the confidence ar-
gument, leaving the person to defend the “can’t” side. This is not to say that
112 PRACTICE
the counselor withholds ideas, only that prescription is not the primary line of
response.
/G93/G54/G68/G65/G72/G65/G2C/G54/G68/G65/G72/G65/G2C/G59/G6F/G75/G92/G6C/G6C/G42/G65/G46._/G69/G6E/G65/G94
Another potential trap is not taking the confidence issue seriously enough. A
bald assurance that “I’m sure you can do it” is unlikely to address a genuine
lack of self-efficacy. It is also another form of taking up the “can” side of the
argument, inviting a “can-not, can-too” struggle.
/G47/G6C/G6F/G6F/G6D/GE0/G44/G65/G75/G78
Still another trap is to fall into and share the person’s perception of helpless -
ness or hopelessness. At least one person in the room needs to be optimistic,
focused on problem solving rather than despair. Of course, there are things
that genuinely cannot be changed, and we are not advocating delusional opti -
mism. Most often, however, some form of change is feasible, and clients need
to be able to borrow hope from the counselor until they have their own.
1
Trust that the client has inner resources and creativity to draw on in pursuing
change.
/G45/G4C/G49/G43/G49/G54/G49/G4E/G47/G41/G4E/G44/G53/G54/G52/G45/G4E/G47/G54/G48/G45/G4E/G49/G4E/G47/G43/G4F/G4E/G46._/G49/G44/G45/G4E/G43/G45/G54/G41/G4C/G4B
/G45/G76/G6F/G63/G61/G74/G69/G76/G65/G51/G75/G65/G73/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73
One of the four categories of change talk described in Chapter 3 is optimism
about ability to change—in other words, self-efficacy. Confidence talk is one
kind of change talk. Consistent with the style of motivational interviewing,
one approach is to elicit the person’s own ideas, experiences, and perceptions
that are consistent with ability to change. For example, open questions can be
used to evoke confidence talk:
“How might you go about making this change?”
“What would be a good first step?”
“What obstacles do you foresee, and how might you deal with them?”
“What gives you some confidence that you can do this?”
/G43/G6F/G6E/G66/G69/G64/G65/G6E/G63/G65/G52/G75/G6C/G65/G72
The ruler introduced in Chapter 6 can be used in a similar manner to elicit
confidence talk.
How confident are you that you could ? On a scale from 0
to 10, where 0 is not at all confident and 10 is extremely confident,
where would you say you are?”
Enhancing Confidence 113
01234567891 0
Not at all Extremely
confident confident
The same follow-up questions discussed in Chapter 6 are then used to elicit
the client’s perspectives of confidence:
“Why are you at a and not 0?”
“What would it take for you to go from to [a higher number]?”
The answers to these questions will be confidence talk. As before, remember
not to reverse the questions and ask, “Why are you at and not 10?”
/G52/G65/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67/G50/G61/G73/G74/G53/G75/G63/G63/G65/G73/G73/G65/G73
Another resource to tap in enhancing confidence is the client’s past successes.
“When in your life have you made up your mind to do something, and did
it? It might be something new you learned, or a habit that you quit, or
some other significant change that you made in your life. When have you
done something like that?”
What you are looking for are changes that the client made on their own initia-
tive (rather than being coerced), particularly those that he or she seems
pleased about. Look for several examples (“When else?”) and then explore
them in some depth. What did the client do that worked? Was there specific
preparation for change? You are looking in particular for personal skills or
strengths that might be generalized and applied in the current situation. In -
stead of just asking, “Tell me how you did it,” it can be useful to have the cli-
ent go through in some detail what change occurred and how it came about.
What did the person do to initiate and maintain change? What obstacles were
there, and how did he or she surmount them? Ask to what the client attributes
his or her success, and explore what that may mean about his or her re -
sources, skills, and strengths. Remember that you want the client rather than
yourself to be making the arguments for confidence.
/G50/G65/G72/G73/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C/G53/G74/G72/G65/G6E/G67/G74/G68/G73/G61/G6E/G64/G53/G75/G70/G70/G6F/G72/G74/G73
Another route to confidence talk is ask about more general personal strengths
and resources that may be helpful in making the desired change. What you’re
looking for here are positive personal characteristics that, from an attribu -
tional perspective, are stable, internal traits.
“What is there about you, what strong points do you have that could help
you succeed in making this change?”
114 PRACTICE
Sometimes it is useful to prompt the client with a list of positive attributes that
can help people make changes. One such list is reproduced in Box 9.1, from
which almost anyone could find at least a few personal strengths with which
he or she can identify.
2
When the client identifies a personal strength, ask for elaboration. In
what ways is this characteristic of the person? Ask for examples, and follow
with reflective listening.
It can also be useful to explore here what sources of social support the cli-
ent has for pursuing change. Are there others on whom he or she could call for
support? in what ways? Who else could help with change?
/G42/G72/G61/G69/G6E/G73/G74/G6F/G72/G6D/G69/G6E/G67
A classic approach for problem solving is brainstorming, which involves freely
generating as many ideas as possible for how a change might be accomplished.
The list is generated without critique—all ideas are acceptable, no matter how
silly or unrealistic they might seem. The purpose is to stimulate creative, diver-
gent thinking about how change could be achieved. It’s OK to suggest ideas
Enhancing Confidence 115
BOX 9.1. Some Characteristics of Successful Changers
Accepting Committed Flexible Persevering Stubborn
Active Competent Focused Persistent Thankful
Adaptable Concerned Forgiving Positive Thorough
Adventuresome Confident Forward-looking Powerful Thoughtful
Affectionate Considerate Free Prayerful Tough
Affirmative Courageous Happy Quick Trusting
Alert Creative Healthy Reasonable Trustworthy
Alive Decisive Hopeful Receptive Truthful
Ambitious Dedicated Imaginative Relaxed Understanding
Anchored Determined Ingenious Reliable Unique
Assertive Die-hard Intelligent Resourceful Unstoppable
Assured Diligent Knowledgeable Responsible Vigorous
Attentive Doer Loving Sensible Visionary
Bold Eager Mature Skillful Whole
Brave Earnest Open Solid Willing
Bright Effective Optimistic Spiritual Winning
Capable Energetic Orderly Stable Wise
Careful Experienced Organized Steady Worthy
Cheerful Faithful Patient Straight Zealous
Clever Fearless Perceptive Strong Zestful
here, but mostly you should rely on the client’s creativity to generate possibili-
ties. Write them down.
Once a list has been generated, ask the client which ideas on the list seem
most promising or acceptable, and why. Don’t forget that through all of these
methods there runs the common theme of eliciting and reinforcing confidence
talk by the client. Within the context of motivational interviewing, brain -
storming is not only a method for generating ideas but also another format for
eliciting confidence talk.
/G47/G69/G76/G69/G6E/G67/G49/G6E/G66/G6F/G72/G6D/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6E/G64/G41/G64/G76/G69/G63/G65
It is not necessary, of course, for the client to have all the ideas. It is perfectly
appropriate to provide information and advice that could be helpful in bol -
stering confidence. The danger is taking sides: you advocate for a change solu-
tion, and the client explains why it won’t work.
This issue is discussed in more detail in Chapter 10, but the basic ap -
proach is to provide information and advice within a motivational interview -
ing–consistent context when the client desires it and thus feels free to take or
leave it. One such context is when the client asks for your input. It is also pos-
sible to ask permission to provide information or advice that may be helpful.
Specific methods for doing the latter are found in Chapter 10.
/G52/G65/G66/G72/G61/G6D/G69/G6E/G67
Sometimes a person bogs down in attributions of failure, and a process of
reframing or reattribution can be helpful. A common theme is “I’ve tried sev-
eral times, and each time I failed.” The general method here is to reframe
“failure” in a way that encourages rather than blocks further change attempts.
The concept of “try” is helpful here. Often the client will use the word (as
above) in describing reasons for perceived failure. It is a short step to recast
“failures” as “tries.” One need not resort to platitudes (“If at first you don’t
succeed, try, try again”) to discuss what the client has done in the past as suc-
cessive tries toward a goal. Some knowledge of change research can be helpful
here. For example, dependent smokers usually do not succeed in quitting on
their first try. On average, it requires between three and four serious tries be -
fore a smoker permanently escapes the grip of tobacco dependence. Whereas a
“failure” sounds like a shameful thing, a “try” is laudable. If one has tried
several times without success, it may only mean that one has not yet tried the
right approach. Even the same approach may work if tried again. “Try again
later” is the message one receives when attempting to log onto an Internet ser-
vice if no line is available. Gamblers are notoriously persistent in trying their
luck. “Trying” is a routine and necessary step toward winning, toward suc -
cessful change.
Other reframes can facilitate confidence. Explanations of “failure” as be-
ing due to internal, stable factors (like inability: “I can’t do it”) can be
116 PRACTICE
reattributed to external and unstable factors like effort or luck: “The time
wasn’t right.” “I haven’t done it yet.” “I wasn’t quite ready.” “I was unlucky
that time.” “I didn’t try hard enough, or long enough.” Take a lesson from
the gambler: Maybe next time is my time.
/G48/G79/G70/G6F/G74/G68/G65/G74/G69/G63/G61/G6C/G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65
If the person is struggling with practicalities, it may be helpful to leap into
hypo-space, to think in the hypothetical. Subjunctive syntax is useful here:
“Suppose that you did succeed and are looking back on it now: What
most likely is it that worked? How did it happen?”
“Suppose that this one big obstacle weren’t there. If that obstacle were re-
moved, then how might you go about making this change?”
“Clearly you are feeling very discouraged, even demoralized about this.
So use your imagination: if you were to try again, what might be the
best way to try?”
/G52/G65/G73/G70/G6F/G6E/G64/G69/G6E/G67/G74/G6F/G43/G6F/G6E/G66/G69/G64/G65/G6E/G63/G65/G54/G61/G6C/G6B
A common purpose that runs through all the methods just outlined is for the
client to talk about ways in which change can occur, about confidence: why
and how he or she can succeed with change. Consistent with the overall moti-
vational interviewing perspective, it is useful for the client to make these argu-
ments. When such confidence talk occurs, it is important to respond in a man-
ner that reinforces and consolidates it. The same principles outlined in
Chapter 7 apply here, for this is just a special case of responding to change
talk (in this case, confidence talk).
Reflective listening remains a central skill here. Listen for themes, experi-
ences, ideas, and perceptions that imply confidence, that bespeak the person’s
ability to make the desired change. Reflect these preferentially, both immedi -
ately as they occur and in subsequent reflective summaries. Appropriately af -
firm the client’s expressions of confidence.
As confidence talk emerges, it can also be useful to raise possible prob -
lems and challenges that may be encountered, asking the client for solutions:
“What might you do if . . . ?”
“How could you respond if . . . ?”
“What do you think would happen if . . . ?”
In turn, this elicits further change talk. In fact, it is exactly the opposite of pro-
posing solutions and having the client point out their limitations. Your role
here is not to refute the client’s change talk but to stimulate further thought
and specificity. Asking for examples and elaboration is likewise appropriate.
It is also common to encounter some resistance behavior when discussing
Enhancing Confidence 117
issues of confidence, even when importance seems to be high. This occurs
most often when a client takes up the counterchange side of ambivalence. Al -
though the content of resistance may be focused on the ability to or feasibility
of change, there are no special methods here beyond those discussed in the
preceding Chapter 8. The nonoppositional style of rolling with resistance re -
mains the same.
/G52/G61/G64/G69/G63/G61/G6C/G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65
Finally, there are times when the desired change is not circumscribed but in -
volves a number of interrelated problems that are unlikely to respond to a
simple solution. For a complex example, consider the situation of a polydrug-
dependent commercial sex worker in a city where prostitution is illegal. Like
many such women, she may place high importance on escaping from her co -
nundrum but see no possible way of doing so. Complex though it may be, this
is a confidence issue. Change might require escaping from dangerous and re -
sourceful associates; finding temporary food and shelter, geographic reloca -
tion, and polydrug detoxification and treatment; resolving legal problems; de-
veloping new job skills; and finding employment, child care, and housing. To
talk about change in any one of these problems (such as drug dependence)
without addressing the others is clearly unrealistic, and low confidence is un-
derstandable.
In such situations, the only avenue in which a person can have confidence
might be one involving radical change that simultaneously addresses multiple
problems. Without underestimating complexity, it is possible to discuss how
such radical change might occur. Rather than trying to modify a particular
behavior, this requires thinking about the big picture of change.
/G43/G4C/G49/G4E/G49/G43/G41/G4C/G45/G58/G41/G4D/G50/G4C/G45
The following clinical dialogue illustrates a motivational interviewing ap -
proach to enhancing confidence, using the radical change scenario just de -
scribed. We debated whether so complex a situation would be optimal—as
opposed to a single-behavior confidence issue that would have the advantage
(and disadvantage) of greater simplicity. The greater complexity, however,
lent itself to illustrating the use of a broader range of confidence-enhancing
methods. The dialogue begins after a period of discussion about the impor -
tance of change, which the client summarizes so concisely that there is no need
for the interviewer to do so. The challenge now, before a concrete change plan
can be addressed, is very low confidence.
C
LIENT: I just can’t do this work much longer. On the importance ruler ,
It’s too dangerous, and I’m going to end she rates herself at a 9.
up dead. I have my daughter to think of,
118 PRACTICE
too. I don’t want her to have the same
kind of life I’ve had. I’m a wreck as a
mother—shooting up in the bathroom
so she doesn’t see me, out half the night.
Now the social worker is threatening to
take her away from me again, and I
don’t blame him. I can’t go on like this.
I
NTERVIEWER: It’s a desperate situation
you’re in, and you really want out.
CLIENT: I came close to getting out the
other night, but not the way I want
to—in a box.
I
NTERVIEWER: You were nearly killed.
CLIENT: I’ve come close before, but
that one really scared me—the
guy I told you about.
I
NTERVIEWER: So what’s the next step?
How do you get out?
CLIENT: That’s just it. What can I do? . . . An invitation to provide
solutions. . .
INTERVIEWER: You feel stuck, with . . . which the interviewer
no way out. simply reflects.
CLIENT: No shit! I have no money. I’m
on probation. CC watches me like
a hawk, and beats me up and cuts off One can anticipate here
my drugs if he even thinks I’m the likely result of making
holding out on him. We live in a suggestions or prescribing
cheap motel room. What am I tasks (“Well, how
supposed to do? about . . . ?”).
I
NTERVIEWER: That’s exactly the question
you’re faced with. You want out, but Again the interviewer
how in the world can you overcome reflects instead of jumping
so many incredible obstacles? in with answers.
CLIENT: I just don’t see a way.
Otherwise I’d be out of here. Confidence ruler=1o r2 .
INTERVIEWER: I certainly don’t have the
answers for you, but I have a lot
of confidence that you do, and that
working together we can find a way out. Lending hope.
C
LIENT: What do you mean?
Enhancing Confidence 119
INTERVIEWER: Well, for one thing, you’re
an amazing survivor. I can’t believe
how strong you are, to have gone
through all you’ve been through and
even be alive, let alone sitting here and
talking to me about what you want
your life to be like in the future. I don’t
think I could have survived what Utterly genuine affirmation
you’ve been through. and reframe.
C
LIENT: You do what you have to.
INTERVIEWER: How have you come this far
and still have the amount of love and
compassion that I see in you—not only
for your daughter, but for the women
you work with, and for other people as
well? How do you do it?
Affirmation and open
question.
C
LIENT: Just one day at a time, like they say.
I don’t know. I just go way inside, like
when I’m doing some john. I don’t let
myself get hurt. I take care of myself.
I
NTERVIEWER: Like you take care of Linking reflection.
your daughter.
CLIENT: I hope I take better care of her than
I do of myself. But yeah, I take care of
myself. Nobody else does.
I
NTERVIEWER: So you have this amazing in -
ner strength, a solid core inside you
where you can’t be hurt.
CLIENT: Or don’t let myself be hurt.
INTERVIEWER: Oh, right! It’s not that you
can’t feel anything, because you do. You
have a way of preserving that loving
woman inside you, keeping her safe. So
one thing you are is strong. How else
might you describe yourself? What other
qualities do you have that make you a
survivor?
Asking for personal
strengths.
C
LIENT: I think I’m pretty smart. I mean, you
wouldn’t know it to look at me, but I
can see what’s going on around me, and
I don’t miss much.
Confidence talk begins .
120 PRACTICE
INTERVIEWER: You’re a strong and loving
woman, and pretty smart. What else?
A collecting summary .
CLIENT: I don’t know.
INTERVIEWER: What might someone else say
about you, someone who knows you
well? What good qualities might they see
in you, that could help you make the
changes you want?
C
LIENT: Persistent. I’m downright bullheaded
when I want something.
INTERVIEWER: Nothing stops you when you
make up your mind, like a bull.
CLIENT: I do keep going when I want some -
thing.
INTERVIEWER: Strong and loving, smart,
persistent. Sounds like you have a lot
of what it takes to handle tough changes.
How about this? Give me an example
of a time when you really wanted
something, and you went after it. Reviewing past successes .
C
LIENT: You won’t like it.
INTERVIEWER: Try me.
CLIENT: I was out of shit last week, and I re-
ally wanted it something bad. CC
thought I was cheating him, keeping
money and not telling him, and so he cut
me off. I asked around and nobody had
any to give me. It was the afternoon and
nothing was happening on the street. So
I took my daughter and went over to the
freeway entrance. I had to wait until CC
went for dinner. I made up this sign that
said, “Hungry. Will work for food.” In
an hour I had enough to get what I
needed, and some food for us, too. CC
never found out about it.
I
NTERVIEWER: It’s all the things you said.
You had to time it all carefully, but
you’re so aware of what’s happening
around you that you could do it. You
Enhancing Confidence 121
think quickly, and came up with a solu -
tion. You stuck with it, and made it hap -
pen. How did you make the sign?
CLIENT: Cardboard I found in the motel
dumpster, and I borrowed a marker at
the desk.
I
NTERVIEWER: They seem like little things,
but I’m impressed at how quickly you
solved this one. I’m sad, of course, that
all this creativity was spent on getting
drugs, but it’s just one example of how
you can make things happen when you
put your mind to it.
C
LIENT: Now that’s another thing. What do I
do about being hooked? The withdraw -
als are bad.
INTERVIEWER: You’ve been through them be-
fore, then.
CLIENT: Sure. In jail, on the street, even in a
detox once, but I don’t want to go
through it again.
I
NTERVIEWER: Tell me about the detox.
When was that?
CLIENT: Last year. I got real sick and they
took me to the emergency room, and
from there they took me to detox. I
stayed about five days, but I got high
right afterward.
I
NTERVIEWER: But what was the detox like
for you?
CLIENT: It was OK. They were nice to me,
and they gave me drugs so that I didn’t
feel uncomfortable. As soon as I hit the
street, though, I wanted a fix.
I
NTERVIEWER: So it was possible, at least, for
you to get through the withdrawal process
comfortably. The problem came when you
went back out. Now let me ask you this.
Imagine that you’re off the street—like
magic. You’re through withdrawals and
away from the street, out of CC’s reach,
122 PRACTICE
somewhere else completely. Don’t worry
for the moment about how you got there—
we’ll come back to that—but you’re free,
just you and your daughter. What would
you do? What kind of life would you
choose? Using the hypothetical .
C
LIENT: I’d need to find a real job. Maybe
I’d go back to school and then get a
good job. I’d like to get out of the
city—live in a little place out in the
country somewhere. Change talk.
I
NTERVIEWER: A complete change of scenery.
CLIENT: That’s what it would take.
INTERVIEWER: And you can imagine it, a new
life somewhere with your daughter.
CLIENT: I can imagine it, yes. But how could
I get there?
INTERVIEWER: It’s such a big change, with so
many obstacles, that you don’t think you
could do it.
C
LIENT: I don’t know. I might be able to.
I just haven’t thought about it for a
long time. Confidence ruler=3o r4 ?
I
NTERVIEWER: Maybe, just maybe, with all
your strength and smarts and creativity
and stubborn persistence, you could find
a way to pull it off. It’s what you want,
is it?
C
LIENT: Yeah, it would be great, getting off
the street.
INTERVIEWER: Is this just a pipe dream here,
or do you think you might actually be
able to do it?
C
LIENT: It seems kind of unrealistic, for me
at least.
INTERVIEWER: For you. But it might be
possible for . . .
CLIENT: I guess I was thinking of my
daughter. Or maybe some other women I
Enhancing Confidence 123
know, but then I think I’d have as good
a chance as they would.
INTERVIEWER: Good! You can imagine you
doing it, just like others might. Let me
just ask you to do one more thing, then,
before we get any more specific. Let’s
think about what it would take for you
to get from the street to that place you
imagined. And let’s be creative. Let’s
think of any way at all that it might
happen, as many different ways as
possible. They can be completely
unrealistic or unlikely, no matter. Introducing the idea of
What we want is a lot of ideas. OK? brainstorming.
C
LIENT: Sure, why not.
INTERVIEWER: So how might it happen?
CLIENT: I could meet a sugar daddy, like that
girl in the Pretty Woman movie.
INTERVIEWER: OK, good. That’s one. What
else?
CLIENT: There could be a miracle. ( Laughs.)
INTERVIEWER: Right. One miracle coming up.
What else?
CLIENT: I could talk my mom into bailing me
out again. If she thought I was really se -
rious this time, she might do it.
INTERVIEWER: So your mom could help get
you out of here, with money.
CLIENT: She’s worried about her granddaugh -
ter, I know. We might even be able to
live with her for a while, but I don’t
know if she’ll ever trust me again.
Confidence talk is gradually emerging over the course of this 10-minute seg -
ment, and there are the beginnings of a possible change plan. Rather than
jumping straight to a how-to-do-it discussion with this high-importance/low-
confidence woman, the interviewer spends some time in eliciting confidence in
her broader adaptive abilities. This paves the way for later development of
and commitment to a specific change plan.
124 PRACTICE
/G53/G55/G4D/G4D/G41/G52/G59
A motivational interviewing approach for enhancing confidence differs from
traditional advice-giving or skill-building strategies. While it is not at all in -
compatible with giving advice or teaching new skills, a motivational inter -
viewing method places its main bets on the person’s own resourcefulness. The
overall view is that confidence (like the importance aspect of motivation for
change) is not something to be imposed but, rather, is evoked from the person,
literally called (voiced) forth in the person’s own words and ideas. Although
there are some special issues and adaptations, the methods used to elicit and
reinforce confidence are similar to those discussed in earlier chapters with re -
gard to change talk more generally. Finding hope and confidence for change is
a collaborative process in which the counselor is privileged to participate.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45/G53
1. Yahne and Miller (1999).
2. This list was developed by Shelby Steen for Miller (in press).
Enhancing Confidence 125
CHAPTER 10
/G50/G68/G61/G73/G65 /G32
/G53/G74/G72/G65/G6E/G67/G74/G68/G65/G6E/G69/G6E/G67 /G43/G6F/G6D/G6D/G69/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G74/G6F /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65
It takes two to speak truth—One to speak, and another to hear.
—H ENRY DAVID THOREAU,
A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers
/G52/G45/G43/G4F/G47/G4E/G49/G5A/G49/G4E/G47 /G52/G45/G41/G44/G49/G4E/G45/G53/G53
The first phase of motivational interviewing involves building intrinsic moti -
vation for change. This takes much longer with some people than with others.
Some come to counseling having given little or no thought to a need for
change. Others are in the firm grip of ambivalence, and still others come al -
ready voicing the intention to change and needing relatively little motivation
building.
There comes a point when it is time to shift approach—when the goal
changes from enhancing importance and confidence (Phase 1) to strengthen -
ing commitment to a change plan (Phase 2). At the typical point for this tran -
sition, the person is willing and able to change and is on the brink of readi -
ness. Salespeople recognize a comparable point in selling: when the customer
has privately decided to make a purchase, and they shift strategies toward
closing the sale. A leading sales trainer once told us that this is the most criti -
cal period in a sale and that the main task at this point is to help the person
confirm and justify the decision that has been made. Knowing exactly when to
126
shift strategies is one of the skills that separates successful from unsuccessful
salespeople.
Similarly, in cooking there are crucial timing judgments to be made: when
the liquid has boiled sufficiently, how long to knead the dough and let it rise
before baking, or when the candy is hot enough to set before it burns. Pro -
ceeding either too soon or too late can spoil the recipe.
Don’t worry about this too much. We doubt that there is often an exact,
ideal moment for the transition from Phase 1 to Phase 2. We do believe,
though, that once a person has reached a point of readiness, there is a certain
window of time during which change should be initiated. How long this win -
dow stays open will vary widely, but the recognition of an important discrep -
ancy is just too uncomfortable to sustain forever. If change isn’t begun, the
person is likely to start using cognitive defensive strategies to decrease the dis-
comfort (rationalizing, minimizing, denying, forgetting, projecting, etc.). It is
important to recognize when the window is open, so that you can help the
person start stepping through it—and to make sure that it’s on the ground
level.
What are the signs of an open window? Good research is needed here. At
present, we can offer some of the cues that we have used in intuiting when to
shift from Phase 1 to Phase 2 (see Box 10.1). Not all of these will happen in all
or even most cases, but they are some indicators of readiness for change.
Phase 2: Strengthening Commitment 127
BOX 10.1. Signs of Readiness for Change
1. Decreased resistance. The wind seems to have gone out of the sails of resistance. Disso-
nance in the counseling relationship diminishes, and resistance decreases.
2. Decreased discussion about the problem. The client seems to have talked enough about
the area of concern. If the client has been asking questions about the problem area,
these stop. There is a feeling of at least partial completion, of waiting for the next step.
3.
Resolve. The client appears to have reached some kind of resolution, and may seem
more peaceful, relaxed, calm, unburdened, or settled. This can also have a tone of loss,
tearfulness, or resignation.
4.
Change talk. Whereas resistance diminishes, change talk increases. The client makes di-
rect change statements (see Chapter 5), reflecting disadvantages of the status quo, ad -
vantages of change, optimism about change, and/or intention to change.
5. Questions about change. The client may begin to ask what he or she could do about the
problem, how people change once they decide to, or the like.
6. Envisioning. The client talks about how life might be after a change. This can be mis -
taken for resistance, in that looking ahead to change often causes a person to anticipate
difficulties if a change were made. Of course, the client may also envision positive out -
comes of change.
7. Experimenting. If the client has had time between sessions, he or she may have begun
experimenting with possible change actions since the last session.
When there are such signs of readiness, it may be time to shift direction to the
new goal of strengthening commitment. This can be a useful process even if a
person is entering treatment apparently having already decided to change. The
methods presented in this chapter are appropriate for strengthening commit -
ment to change, once a person perceives sufficient importance and confidence
to be ready to move on toward action.
Don’t expect “Eureka!” experiences to occur at a magical moment of
readiness. Typically the signs of readiness for change emerge gradually and
subtly. When people do have Eureka! moments, it is most often outside the
consulting room.
1
This is often quite an enjoyable part of counseling. Phase 1 can be slow
and hard work—a bit like slogging up a mountain in snowshoes. Once this
hard work is done, Phase 2 may proceed much more easily—like skiing down
the other side. To be sure, there are hazards on the way down, and we begin
by discussing a few of these. Nevertheless, the going tends to be faster and
more pleasant. There is a sense of companionship with the client, like the feel-
ing of sitting next to someone on the ski lift, looking over the trails and sort -
ing out which way to go, then pushing off together.
At the top of the mountain, the main task is to persuade the client to
come with you down the other side, rather than staying there and ultimately
deciding to go back down the way you came. When you reach Phase 2, most
of the hard work of motivational interviewing is done. It remains for the client
to put on the skis, pick an appropriate slope, make that fateful decision to
push off, and enjoy the journey down while avoiding its rocks, moguls, and
chasms. As the counselor, you can be a guide throughout this process, or the
client may decide to ski on alone.
/G50/G48/G41/G53/G45 /G32 /G48/G41/G5A/G41/G52/G44/G53
There certainly are a few hazards to watch for in negotiating the slopes of
Phase 2. Here are three to beware.
/G55/G6E/G64/G65/G72/G65/G73/G74/G69/G6D/G61/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G41/G6D/G62/G69/G76/G61/G6C/G65/G6E/G63/G65
It is quite tempting to assume that once the client is showing signs of readiness
for change (see Box 10.1), the decision has been made and it’s all downhill
from there on. This confuses the commitment-strengthening process with a
Eureka! decision. Most decisions to change are not made suddenly, once and
for all. People often begin action toward change while still feeling a good bit
of ambivalence. They take their first tentative steps over the crest of the hill,
still unsure which way it is they want to go, and as they look down the slope
they may begin to rethink whether they want to go at all. Sometimes they
seem to have progressed well into the journey, only to turn around and double
back. There is a substantial risk, then, of becoming overeager at the first signs
128 PRACTICE
of a shift toward change. In our alpine analogy, the client in this situation may
be like the reluctant student who has finally built up the courage to get to the
top, only to be coaxed by the instructor to the edge of what seems the steepest
and most menacing slope. The same care and style that characterizes Phase 1
should be maintained during Phase 2 and, indeed, throughout the entire coun-
seling process. Ambivalence does not disappear just because the change pro -
cess has begun.
/G4F/G76/G65/G72/G70/G72/G65/G73/G63/G72/G69/G70/G74/G69/G6F/G6E
Another danger in Phase 2 is to prescribe a plan that is unacceptable to the cli-
ent. There can be a tendency to say, “Now that you’re ready to change, here’s
what you need to do.” This violates the collaborative tone of motivational in-
terviewing and runs the risk of undoing what progress has been made. There
is no point in carefully eliciting a person’s motivation, only to offer a change
plan that is unacceptable. Sometimes one can run into difficulty even when
making what seems to be a simple suggestion. The client responds, “Yes, but
that won’t work because . . . ” and adopts the passive role of someone who is
waiting for solutions to be provided—a reincarnation of the expert trap. The
Phase 1 emphasis on personal responsibility and choice extends to Phase 2
and the negotiation of change strategies.
/G49/G6E/G73/G75/G66/G66/G69/G63/G69/G65/G6E/G74 /G44/G69/G72/G65/G63/G74/G69/G6F/G6E
The opposite risk is to provide the client with too little help. The question
“What can I do?” is better answered in Phase 2 by a menu of alternatives than
by reflective listening. If a wholly nondirective approach is sustained in Phase
2, the person may flounder. Imagine a novice skier accelerating down a chal -
lenging slope and asking for direction, while the instructor reflects, “So you’re
wondering what it is that you should do next.” The methods that we describe
in this chapter are meant to guide you between the two extremes of
overprescription and insufficient direction. The goals are to channel intrinsic
motivation into a negotiated, workable plan for change and to strengthen the
client’s commitment for carrying out that plan.
/G49/G4E/G49/G54/G49/G41/G54/G49/G4E/G47 /G50/G48/G41/G53/G45 /G32
/G52/G65/G63/G61/G70/G69/G74/G75/G6C/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E
A good first step in making the transition to Phase 2 is to summarize once
again the client’s current situation, as reflected in your conversations thus far.
This is meant to have the effect of drawing Phase 1 to a close. The length of
your summary will depend on the complexity of the client’s situation. It is
usually appropriate to begin this transitional summary with a statement an -
nouncing that you are attempting to draw together what has been discussed
Phase 2: Strengthening Commitment 129
thus far, for the purpose of evaluating what to do next. Your recapitulation
could include the following elements:
1. A summary of the client’s own perceptions of the problem, as reflected
in his or her change talk
2. A summing-up of the client’s ambivalence, including some acknowl -
edgment of what remains positive or attractive about the status quo
3. A review of any objective evidence you may have that is relevant to
the importance of change
4. A restatement of any indications the client has offered of wanting, in -
tending, or planning to change, and of his or her confidence talk
5. Your own assessment of the client’s situation, particularly at points
where it converges with the client’s own concerns
The purpose of this summary is to draw together as many reasons for change
as possible, while simultaneously acknowledging the client’s reluctance or am-
bivalence. The recapitulation is used as a final preparation for the transition
to commitment and leads directly to a key question.
/G4B/G65/G79 /G51/G75/G65/G73/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73
Consistent with the spirit of motivational interviewing, Phase 2 does not in-
volve telling people what they must do but, rather, eliciting what they want
and plan to do. That is the purpose of a key question, which ordinarily fol-
lows directly from a recapitulation of Phase 1.
Key questions are always open questions. They cannot be answered with
a simple “Yes” or “No,” and their purpose is to start a person thinking and
talking about change. Their basic theme is the question: What is the next step?
Though the first key question normally follows the recapitulation, they can be
useful throughout Phase 2. There are many variations, but here are some ex -
amples of key questions:
“What do you think you will do? What are you thinking at this point
about
?”
“What changes, if any, are you thinking about making?”
“At this point, after reviewing all of this, what’s the next step for you?”
“What could you do? What are your options?”
“It sounds like things can’t stay the way they are now. What do you think
you might do?”
“Of the things we have talked about, which ones concern you the most?
What do you want to do at this point?”
“What happens next?”
“Where do we go from here?”
“How would you like things to turn out for you now, ideally?”
“What would be some of the good things about making a change?”
130 PRACTICE
The client’s answers to such key questions are met, as usual, with reflective lis-
tening. This serves to clarify the client’s thoughts and plans and to encourage
further exploration. Reflection can also be used selectively to reinforce change
talk that is offered (Chapter 6) and to diminish resistance that may arise
(Chapter 8). Personal responsibility, freedom, and choice can be emphasized
again during this process. Be careful not to shift wholly into a problem-solving
mode. The methods from earlier chapters continue to be useful during Phase
2.
/G47/G69/G76/G69/G6E/G67 /G49/G6E/G66/G6F/G72/G6D/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E /G61/G6E/G64 /G41/G64/G76/G69/G63/G65
Because of its client-centered roots, motivational interviewing is sometimes as-
sumed to be incompatible with giving information and advice. In fact, it is
quite possible and appropriate, within the spirit and principles of motivational
interviewing, to share one’s expertise with clients. It is the context within
which such information and advice are given that determines consistency with
the overall clinical method.
This is not license to dispense professional advice or information when-
ever it crosses one’s mind. There are two circumstances under which such ex-
pertise is offered in motivational interviewing: when a person requests it, or
with the person’s permission. In the latter case, it is the clinician who initiates
the advice or information giving, and some further guidelines are appropriate
here. Ask yourself the following questions before you initiate advice or infor-
mation giving:
“Have I elicited the client’s own ideas and knowledge on this subject?”
and
“Is what I am going to convey important to the client’s safety, or likely to
enhance the client’s motivation for change?”
When the answer to both questions is “Yes,” proceed with the client’s permis-
sion.
What, then, constitutes permission? It is, in essence, some form of ac -
knowledging a person’s choice to take or not take the advice you will offer, to
hear or not hear the information you want to provide. It may be (but is not al-
ways) a direct asking for permission. When you do make such a direct request,
it could sound like one of these:
“Would it be all right if I told you a concern that I have about what
you’re proposing to do?”
“I have an idea here that may or may not be relevant. Do you want to
hear it?”
“I think I understand your perspective on this. I wonder if it would be
Phase 2: Strengthening Commitment 131
OK for me to tell you a few things that occur to me as I listen to you,
which you might want to consider.”
“I don’t know if this will matter to you, or even make sense, but I am
a little worried about your plan. Would you mind if I explained
why?”
“There are a few things that may or may not be important to you here,
and I want to make sure that you know them before we go on. You
probably already know some of these, but I want to make sure. Would
that be all right with you?”
Asking permission in this way honors the person’s autonomy and makes it
easier for him or her to hear and consider what you have to say. People almost
always give permission for you to continue, but still it’s important to ask be -
cause of what the asking process communicates: respect, choice, and collabo -
ration.
There are also indirect forms of asking permission. Such language does
not request a direct approval from the client. Instead, qualifiers are added that
acknowledge the client’s freedom to listen or not, and to heed or not:
“I don’t know if this would work for you or not, but I can give you an
idea of what some other people have done in your situation.”
“This may or may not make sense to you, but it’s one possibility. You’ll
have to judge whether it applies to you.”
“I can give you an idea, but I think you’d have to try it out to see if it
would work for you.”
“All I can give you, of course, is my own opinion. You’re really the one
who has to find what works for you.”
Often during Phase 2, a person will ask you for information or ideas. It is en -
tirely appropriate in this circumstance to offer your own best advice. It is im -
portant, however, to guard against falling into the “Yes, but . . . ” pattern,
which is really a variation on the trap of taking sides. In this script, the coun -
selor gives information and the client says what is wrong with it, or the coun -
selor offers an idea and the client responds by saying why it will not work. A
few rounds of this can establish an unhelpful pattern.
There are several ways to guard against this. First, don’t be too eager to
offer advice. Wait for a direct invitation or request for information. Perhaps
even be a bit reluctant to give advice, evoking from the person additional re -
quests and permission for your advice:
“I’ll be happy to give you some ideas, but I don’t want to get in the way
of your own creative thinking, and you’re the expert on you. I’m not
sure if you really want or need my advice. Maybe you have some ideas
of your own about what to do.”
“Of course I can tell you what I think, if you really want to know. But I
132 PRACTICE
don’t want you to feel like I’m telling you what you have to do. Does
my opinion really make that much difference to you?”
Another useful approach is to offer not one, but a cluster of options.
There is evidence that when people choose a course of action from among al -
ternatives, they are more likely to adhere to it and succeed. This further avoids
the easy “Yes, but . . . ” pattern in which the person rejects suggestions one at
a time:
“Well, there really isn’t any one way that works for everybody. I can tell
you about some approaches that other people have used successfully,
and you can see which of those might fit you best.”
“Let me describe a number of possibilities, and you tell me which of these
makes the most sense for you.”
It is also possible to solicit requests from the person for information and ad -
vice. This can be done, for example, in Phase 2 after offering a closing sum -
mary. You might say something like this:
“We’ve talked over quite a bit of material here, and you seem to have been
giving this a lot of thought. I wonder if there is anything you’d like to ask
me now, or that you’ve been wondering about.”
This may evoke requests for more information about material discussed in
Phase 1 or for advice about change options. If you are asked something that
you do not know, feel free to say that you don’t know but will find out.
A common-sense qualification is in order here. This is the general style of
motivational interviewing in Phase 2, but as indicated, if you see the person
charging down a slippery ski slope headed straight for a tree, politeness may
have to wait.
/G4E/G45/G47/G4F/G54/G49/G41/G54/G49/G4E/G47 /G41 /G43/G48/G41/G4E/G47/G45 /G50/G4C/G41/G4E
Through the client’s responses to key questions and your own provision of in-
formation and advice, a plan for change can begin to emerge. The develop -
ment of this plan is a process of shared decision making and negotiation that
involves (1) setting goals, (2) considering change options, (3) arriving at a
plan, and (4) eliciting commitment.
/G31/G2E /G53/G65/G74/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G47/G6F/G61/G6C/G73
Motivation is driven by a discrepancy between a person’s goals and his or her
perceived present state. A first step in instigating change, then, is to have clear
goals toward which to move. Key questions in this regard might be as follows:
Phase 2: Strengthening Commitment 133
“How would you like for things to be different?”
“What is it that you want to change?”
“If you were completely successful in accomplishing what you want now,
what would be changed?”
“Let’s take things one step at a time. What do you think is the first step?”
This brings us to the probability that the client’s goals may not correspond
with your own. For example, you may aspire for a particular person to swear off
alcohol and all other psychoactive drugs for the rest of her life, whereas she may
be more concerned about improving her marriage and, at most, reducing her
drinking to a moderate level. How could you handle this situation?
The fact is that you cannot impose your own goals on another person. In
fact, your own goals probably have very little relevance to most clients. You
can offer your best advice, but the client is always free to accept or disregard
it. Further arguing and insisting would likely evoke defensiveness rather than
agreement. It makes little sense to work within a motivational interviewing
method throughout Phase 1, only to alienate the client with a rigidly prescrip-
tive style in Phase 2. It is far better, we believe, to maintain a strong working
alliance with the client, and to start with the goals toward which he or she is
most eager to make progress. If these goals are misguided, it will become ap-
parent soon enough.
Remember to keep a broad view in discussing goals. Although there may
appear to be a focal problem, the client also has wider goals and values that
are important to consider. Sometimes a person’s presenting problem turns out
to be entangled with a much deeper issue of values or with broader life goals.
Awareness of these larger goals and values can be helpful in building motiva-
tion for change (see Chapter 19 for a more thorough discussion of values and
motivational interviewing). You may also want to suggest (with permission)
additional goals that you believe are important to the client’s welfare and
change efforts.
Another important consideration is whether a goal is realistic. Too large
a gap between present and desired behavior can be demoralizing rather than
motivating. There are various ways to evaluate whether a particular goal is
achievable, beyond your own judgment on the matter. One is to ask for a con-
fidence rating (Chapter 9). Another is to ask the client to consider what conse-
quences might follow from taking this particular course of action. A person
may well have concerns that have not been expressed. Some other possible
questions are the following:
“How would your life be different if you pursued this goal and reached
it?”
“So that’s your goal. What can you think of that might go wrong with
this plan?”
“What might be good, and what might be not so good, about reaching
this goal?”
134 PRACTICE
Also keep in mind that there are almost always multiple goals along
with multiple and interrelated areas of concern. It can therefore be neces -
sary to prioritize goals through a process of shared decision making regard -
ing which are most urgent or important (see the discussion of agenda set -
ting in Chapter 6).
Goal setting leads naturally to the second step: considering how the per -
son might go about achieving the goal. Sometimes all it takes to trigger change
is the decision to have a goal, but usually there are things that a person can do
to increase the chances of success. Before proceeding, however, make sure the
goal seems right. If the client is expressing serious importance or confidence
concerns about the goal, there is more work to do before proceeding.
/G32/G2E /G43/G6F/G6E/G73/G69/G64/G65/G72/G69/G6E/G67 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65 /G4F/G70/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73
Once a person’s relevant goals have been clarified, the next step is to consider
possible methods for achieving the chosen goals. Involve the client directly in
this process of brainstorming and evaluating possible change strategies, draw-
ing on his or her own ideas. Remember that there are almost always multiple
ways to achieve a behavior change goal. One option is formal treatment, and
within it there is often a range of alternative approaches with reasonable evi-
dence of efficacy. A central focus in motivational interviewing, however, is to
draw on a person’s own internal resources and natural social support. Once
people are willing, able, and ready to change, they often go ahead and do so
on their own.
The discussion in Chapter 9 of brainstorming is relevant here. It can be
useful to generate a range of options, even far-fetched ones, before moving to-
ward a plan. This process can be a pooling of the client’s ideas and your own.
Introduce this as a creative brainstorming phase, with evaluation temporarily
suspended—no discussion of how realistic or acceptable or effective each op -
tion might be. This allows the person to suggest ideas without being blocked
by their shortcomings and also provides a context within which you can sug -
gest options without immediate resistance. If an option that you add to the list
yields a resistant response, reflect the concern, reminding the client that this is
only a creative list of options and that you will come back later to evaluate
and compare them.
When suggesting change options, it is often good to provide a menu of
strategies rather than one at a time. Suggesting one possibility invites a per -
son to say what’s wrong with it, essentially voicing counterchange argu -
ments. Offering a menu gives a person a different mental set. In essence,
you say:
“Here is a variety of possibilities that people have used successfully. Which
of these do you prefer? Which do you think might work best for you?”
The client’s task becomes one of choosing rather than refuting.
Phase 2: Strengthening Commitment 135
/G33/G2E /G41/G72/G72/G69/G76/G69/G6E/G67 /G61/G74 /G61 /G50/G6C/G61/G6E
This discussion leads directly toward the negotiation of a plan for change. As
much as possible, elicit this plan by having the person voice it. Key (open)
questions are useful here:
“So what is it specifically that you plan to do?”
“What do you think is the first step?”
“How will you go about it?”
It can be useful with some people to fill in a written change plan, summa-
rizing what it is that the client plans to do. One possible format is shown in
Box 10.2.
What you are working toward in Phase 2 is a clearly stated plan of ac -
tion. On the basis of your discussion, summarize the plan that you have devel-
oped together, which seems to fit the client’s goals, needs, intentions, and be-
liefs. This is best done in “you” language. Here are two examples:
“What you want to do, then, is to work on getting your weight and blood
pressure down through diet and exercise. You prefer this to going on
medication, although if it doesn’t work you know that there is medica-
tion that can help. You want to give this a try for at least 2 months, and
you’ll make an appointment for a month from now just to check in.
There is a health club near your house, and you plan to go join today or
tomorrow and have them help you develop a realistic exercise plan. You
want to stay away from restaurants for a while, and I’ve given you some
guidelines for food preparation, and you want to find a class you can take
on healthy cooking that is also good-tasting. You plan to weigh yourself
every second day in the morning, and keep a chart, and you’ll get a blood
pressure monitor so you can also check that every other day. Have I
missed anything?”
“Let me see if I can accurately summarize where you are, then. You
wanted to know about different ways that people can change their drink-
ing, and we’ve talked about a number of possibilities. You’re thinking
that you may need to quit completely in the long run, but you’re really
not ready to do that without first giving moderation a good try. You con-
sidered different options and decided that you’d like to work on your
own with the self-control materials I showed you. We should be able to
tell in 6 to 8 weeks whether that is going to work for you, and that
should tell us what you want to know. Even if you decide then that what
you want to do is quit, cutting down is a reasonable step on the way. So
what you are going to do is read this material I’ve given you, begin keep-
ing daily records, and come back in 2 weeks to let me know how you’re
136 PRACTICE
Phase 2: Strengthening Commitment 137
BOX 10.2. A Change Plan Worksheet
The most important reasons why I want to make this change are:
My main goals for myself in making this change are:
I plan to do these things in order to accomplish my goals:
Specific action When?
Other people could help me with change in these ways:
Person Possible ways to help
These are some possible obstacles to change, and how I could handle them:
Possible obstacle to change How to respond
I will know that my plan is working when I see these results:
doing. We also discussed bringing Jan along to that session, and you
thought that would be a good idea. You’re still a little nervous about this
plan, I think, but you do see that you need to make a change, and this
sounds like the one you’ve chosen. Do I have it right?”
/G34/G2E /G45/G6C/G69/G63/G69/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G43/G6F/G6D/G6D/G69/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74
Ideally, this plan summary brings you to the point of commitment. You are
looking for the client’s approval of and assent to the plan. The simplest way to
get such commitment is to ask for it. The basic question is: “Is this what you
want to do?” The answer you hope for is: “Yes.”
Getting to a “Yes” may require a few more steps. The client may want to
amend the plan as you have stated it. If the response you get indicates a low
level of commitment (e.g., “I guess so” or “I’ll think about it”), you still have
some work to do. Explore what reluctance the client still has about this plan,
using Phase 1 methods to resolve ambivalence.
Commitment to a plan can be enhanced by making it public. If a spouse
or other loved one is present in the session, the commitment is made with that
person’s knowledge and consent. You can suggest that the client visit, write,
or telephone other people to let them know about the decision and to ask for
their help. Such a telephone call can even be made during the counseling ses-
sion. If the client has had positive contact with other staff members within the
clinic, you may ask permission to share his or her plan with them, or you may
call them into the session to have the client describe it. The more the client
verbalizes the plan to others, the more commitment is strengthened. There is
also the very real social support benefit of recruiting the help and support of
others. If it appears that telling others may be difficult or risky, rehearse this
with the client during the session.
The point is to arrive at a clear plan, to obtain the client’s verbal decision
to follow the plan, and to reinforce the client’s decision. It can be useful to
agree on and initiate some immediate steps for implementing the plan.
If a person is not quite ready to make a commitment, do not press, for to
do so would be to fall into the taking-sides trap at the very last step. One op -
tion is to come alongside the reluctance:
“If you’re not quite ready, then I don’t want you to make a commitment
yet. This is too important, and you don’t have to make up your mind this
minute. Go home and think about it, and we can talk about it more next
time.”
In this case, do follow up with the person and maintain contact to keep the
door open. When checking back, avoid closed questions like, “Have you de -
cided yet?” and instead ask what the person is thinking at this point or what’s
been happening with regard to his or her plan for change.
138 PRACTICE
/G54/G52/G41/G4E/G53/G49/G54/G49/G4F/G4E
The commitment to a change plan completes the formal cycle of motivational
interviewing. Sometimes people proceed with change on their own from here.
It can also work well, however, to transition from this initial motivational
consultation into action-focused counseling if the person so chooses. Further -
more, the general style of motivational interviewing can be used to facilitate
change throughout the process of counseling. Ambivalence, after all, rarely
disappears on the first step of a journey.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45
1. See Miller and C’de Baca (2001).
Phase 2: Strengthening Commitment 139
CHAPTER 11
/G41 /G50/G72/G61/G63/G74/G69/G63/G61/G6C /G43/G61/G73/G65 /G45/G78/G61/G6D/G70/G6C/G65
We found that . . . drinkers would not take pressure in any form,
excepting from John Barleycorn himself. They always had to be
led, not pushed. . . . We found we had to make haste slowly.
—B ILL WILSON, 1955, quoted in Ernest Kurtz,
Not-God: A History of Alcoholics Anonymous
The practice of motivational interviewing involves a creative integration of the
methods we have outlined. There are no standard scripts that can be followed.
Each person is unique and poses different challenges.
For this reason, we have hesitated about offering a case example from
start to finish. There is a limited amount that can be learned from observing
any single clinical example. No particular case can demonstrate the rich vari -
ety of situations and problems you will face or the range of ways in which
these challenges can be met. Still, we have thought it helpful to provide a de -
tailed example of how motivational interviewing proceeds. The exact counsel-
ing approach reflected here may not be well suited to other individuals, but it
does illustrate how motivational interviewing methods are interwoven in ac -
tual practice.
The case to be described is that of a 38-year-old photographer who came
for consultation about his drinking. He had never sought help for alcohol
problems before, and he certainly was not ready or willing to quit drinking.
He was not at all certain that he even needed help or change, but two events
had precipitated his coming. The first was a check-up by his physician, in re -
sponse to some stomach pains he had been having. Based on this examination,
the physician had told him that both his complaints and his memory black -
140
outs indicated he was drinking too much, and he recommended that he see a
specialist. Second, when he discussed this with his wife, she to his surprise
voiced her own concern that his drinking was getting out of hand. The combi-
nation of these comments was just enough to prompt him to make an appoint-
ment.
I
NTERVIEWER: Good morning. Please have
a seat here. I believe you wanted to talk
about some concerns with your drinking.
We have about 45 minutes today, and
mainly I want to hear about your
situation and your concerns. I’ll need
to get some specific information from
you later, but right now perhaps you The interviewer begins with a
could start by telling me what your brief structuring statement
concerns are. and an open question .
C
LIENT: Well, to tell you the truth, I’m
not really sure that there’s anything
to be concerned about. My wife seems
to think that I drink too much. My
doctor did some blood tests, and he
told me those showed I am probably
drinking too much. “Probably,” he said,
but ever since I told my wife about that,
she’s been worried about my The client immediately
drinking. So I told her I would expresses ambivalence that
come here, but I’m not really sure could easily be understood
if I should be here. as defensiveness.
I
NTERVIEWER: So at least two other people, A simple reflection .
your wife and your doctor, have been
worried that maybe alcohol is harming It would have been easy
you. But I wonder: What have you here to fall into the
noticed yourself? Is there anything that question–answer trap, by
you have observed about your drinking asking a series of specific
over the years that might be reason for questions. Instead the
concern? Tell me something about your counselor asks a cluster of
drinking. open questions.
C
LIENT: I guess maybe I drink more than I Change talk: The client
used to. My wife says I’ve been drinking acknowledges a possible
more over the past few years. reason for concern .
INTERVIEWER: So one thing you’ve noticed Reflection and “What
is that you are drinking more now else?”
than you used to. What else?
Case Example 141
CLIENT: I can’t really think of anything else.
It doesn’t really affect me much. I don’t
get drunk very often.
I
NTERVIEWER: Although you know that your
drinking has gone up over the past few
years, it doesn’t really seem to affect you Reflection, slightly
any more than before. amplified.
C
LIENT: Right. I can drink all night and it
doesn’t make me drunk. Other guys
have trouble keeping up with me.
I
NTERVIEWER: That’s interesting. What do
you make of that? Open question.
CLIENT: I think it runs in my family. My dad
was like that. He could drink most guys
under the table, and it never seemed to
bother him.
I
NTERVIEWER: He was like you. Is he still Reflection and closed
living? question .
CLIENT: No, he died of a heart attack a
few years ago. But that was after he A hint of defensiveness in
had stopped drinking. this response.
INTERVIEWER: Why did he stop? An open question, and
useful information, but a
risk of too many questions
in a row .
C
LIENT: My mother wanted him to. He used
to tell people that he quit for his
health—that he wanted to lose some
weight, and beer contains a lot of calo -
ries.
I
NTERVIEWER: So you think your drinking
has been increasing over the years, and
you’ve noticed that, as with your dad,
alcohol doesn’t seem to affect you as A linking summary of
much as it does other people. And you change talk offered thus
think that since you father was like far, picking up a possible
that, it might be something that runs motivational theme related
in the family. to the father’s drinking.
C
LIENT: Is that possible?
INTERVIEWER: Yes, it is, and that may be Because it is a bit early for
important. What else have you noticed? information giving, the
142 PRACTICE
What about other ways in which your counselor gives a short
drinking seems like your father’s? answer and returns to
eliciting change talk .
CLIENT: Lately, there have been some times
when I can’t remember things that
happened. I’ll be drinking at a party,
and the next morning I can’t remember
getting home. It’s not too pleasant to More change talk—
wake up and have no idea where you disadvantages of status
left your car. quo.
I
NTERVIEWER: That can be scary, especially The counselor reflects
the first few times it happens. Give me feeling, then asks for
an example. elaboration of the change
talk.
CLIENT: About 2 weeks ago, I was out with
Bob, and I guess I drank a little more
than usual. We were playing billiards,
with loser buying rounds. When I woke
up in the morning, I couldn’t think of
where my car was, and I remembered
starting this one game but I couldn’t re-
member how it ended. I looked out the
window and my car was in the driveway,
so I guess I drove it there. I felt terrible.
I
NTERVIEWER: In what ways? Again, asking for
elaboration.
CLIENT: Well, I wondered if I had done
anything stupid. I guess I could wake
up in jail. More change talk .
I
NTERVIEWER: For driving while intoxicated. Continuing the paragraph .
CLIENT: I don’t usually get that drunk, but
probably that time I was.
INTERVIEWER: What else bothered you that
morning? Asking for elaboration .
CLIENT: I know that happened to my dad,
too. He told me about it.
INTERVIEWER: It worries you that the same The counselor stays with
thing is happening to you. What do you reflection of feeling, with
think it means? open question for
elaboration.
CLIENT: I don’t know. I haven’t really
Case Example 143
thought that much about it. I
remember he’d get up in the morning
looking pretty shaky and needing
a drink.
I
NTERVIEWER: You feel that way yourself A guess—continuing the
sometimes. paragraph.
CLIENT: No, I don’t think I ever feel like I
need a drink. But I have felt pretty bad
some mornings. I don’t usually drink in
the morning, though.
I
NTERVIEWER: That’s a rule you’ve kept for
yourself.
CLIENT: Yes, except on rare occasions. I
don’t think it’s good to drink in the
morning.
I
NTERVIEWER: Why is that?
CLIENT: I’ve noticed that I feel better; it gets
rid of the hangover. That could get to be
a bad habit. I usually just tough it out
and it goes away.
INTERVIEWER: When you stop to think about
it, then, there are several things you’ve
noticed. Your drinking seems to be going
up over the years, and you know that
you’ve driven sometimes when you’ve had
too much. Your wife is concerned about
you, as your mother was about your father,
and your doctor has told you that it’s
affecting your health. You’ve noticed that,
like your father, you can drink quite a bit
without feeling intoxicated, and you’ve
been having these problems with your
memory. You’ve had some bad hangovers,
and you notice that if you drink some A collecting summary,
more in the morning you feel better. drawing together the
Which of these things concern you change-talk themes that
the most? have emerged.
C
LIENT: My health, I suppose.
INTERVIEWER: So if you thought that you
were harming your health, that would
worry you. What else concerns you?
C
LIENT: I don’t like not remembering things.
144 PRACTICE
INTERVIEWER: That doesn’t seem normal to Reflection, continuing the
you. paragraph.
CLIENT: No. But I don’t think I’m an Resistance, perhaps in
alcoholic. I’ve know some alcoholics, response to the reference
and I’m not like that. to “normal.” The labeling
trap opens up .
INTERVIEWER: Your situation doesn’t seem Reflection.
so bad to you.
CLIENT: No, it doesn’t. I’ve quit drinking for
weeks at a time with no problem. And
I can have a couple of drinks and leave
it alone. I have a good job and family.
How could I be an alcoholic?
I
NTERVIEWER: That must be confusing to
you, as you think about it. On the one
hand, you can see some warning signs
that you are drinking too much, like
your father did, and it worries you. On
the other hand, you don’t really fit Reflection of feeling, and a
your picture of an alcoholic. double-sided reflection.
C
LIENT: Right. I mean I’ve got some The client responds by
problems, but I’m not a drunk. acknowledging both sides
of the ambivalence .
INTERVIEWER: And that’s why thus far
it hasn’t seemed like you needed to Reflection by continuing
do anything. But now you’re here. the paragraph then an
Why now? open question.
CLIENT: It just seemed like I ought to talk
to somebody. I don’t want to ignore
this. I saw what happened to my dad,
and I don’t want that to happen to
me and my family. Change talk.
I
NTERVIEWER: Your family is really Reflection, reinforcing an
important to you. important value.
CLIENT: I love my wife and my son.
INTERVIEWER: And it sounds like they
love you, too. Your wife cared
enough to tell you how worried
she is about your drinking. And
though you don’t see yourself as
an alcoholic, you’re a little worried
yourself. Reframe and reflection .
Case Example 145
CLIENT: Yes, I guess so.
INTERVIEWER: It must have been a difficult
thing for you to decide to come here.
You must care quite a bit about
yourself and your family, and I respect
you for being so open here. It’s not an
easy thing that you did, coming here. Affirmation.
C
LIENT: I didn’t really want to come. Do
you think I’m an alcoholic? Labeling trap yawns again .
INTERVIEWER: That’s a term that means
many things to different people. What
matters, really, is that we take a good
close look at what’s going on here. I
can see why you’re concerned, and I’d
like to help you get clear on what risk
you’re facing, and then what, if
anything, you want to do about it.
A simple “yes” here would
likely have led to disso -
nance and resistance. In -
stead the counselor
reframed the issue and
shifted the focus back to
the task at hand: exploring
his drinking and its effects .
C
LIENT: What do you think I should do?
Commentary. This is an example of the Phase 1 process of eliciting
change talk as a means for building intrinsic motivation for change. Most of
the counselor’s responses up to this point were in the form of open questions
to elicit change talk, or they indicated reflective listening and summaries to re-
inforce motivational themes. At many points where it might have been tempt-
ing to begin confronting, the counselor retained a generally empathic stance
and avoided argumentation. Clients are often surprised and relieved at this;
instead of resisting, they tend to be willing to continue the self-evaluation pro-
cess.
At this point, the client asks an important question: “What do you think I
should do?” The counselor has to make a decision here. Is there enough of a
motivational base to begin discussing strategies for change? If this had been an
office consultation with a physician, where time was quite limited, or if this
had been a one-time opportunity, it might have been best to try strengthening
commitment and negotiating a plan (Phase 2). The risk, however, is that not
enough Phase 1 work has been done, and the counselor could be put in the
role of making suggestions that the client would then reject (a form of the trap
of taking sides). In this case, the client is consulting a specialist, and it is there-
fore possible to engage him in a longer counseling process. One option is to
continue the present interview with Phase 1 methods, accumulating further
change talk that could be used to develop discrepancy. Another is to use the
limited rapport base that has been established to involve the client in a more
detailed evaluation, which, in turn, would provide more material to discuss.
The counselor chose the latter route and offered a transition to structured as -
146 PRACTICE
sessment. Such assessment is not an essential part of motivational interview -
ing, but the following illustrates how assessment results can be integrated into
the motivational interviewing process.
CLIENT: What do you think I should do?
INTERVIEWER: There are quite a few possibil -
ities, and I could help you think about
your options right now if you like. But if
you want my opinion, I think that first
we ought to get a better picture of your
present situation. What you have told me
so far raises a few concerns, but we re -
ally don’t know enough yet to make
good decisions. What I would suggest,
then, is that we take some time for a
good check-up. There are some question -
naires you could answer, and I’d also
like to spend a couple of hours with you
getting more helpful information. After
that, when we have a clearer picture of
exactly what is happening in your life,
we can focus on your options. What do
you think? Are you interested enough to
spend a couple of hours finding out
more about yourself?
The client completed several questionnaires at home, and in this case the
counselor administered an assessment about drinking practices. It is possible,
of course, to conduct a simpler assessment or to do motivational interviewing
without special assessment. This material is included here to illustrate how the
style of motivational interviewing can be used to provide assessment feed -
back.
1 Here is a portion of the subsequent interview, in which this feedback
was provided. The client was given a written report to follow as the counselor
reviewed the findings.
I
NTERVIEWER: I appreciate the time and care This typifies the
that you took with these tests. What I motivational interviewing
want us to do now is to review the style for presenting results.
results together. First, you remember that The client’s score is
we went through a typical week and explained, relative to
added up your drinking, That came out normative data. Rather
to about 53 standard drinks a week, than being told what to
with one “drink” here being a regular think or how to feel
glass of either beer or wine or about an about the result, the
Case Example 147
ounce of liquor. If we compare that to person is asked for
the whole population, you’re drinking reactions, which are
more than 95% of adults. How does then reflected.
that sound to you?
CLIENT: It sounds like a lot. I never really
added it up before, but I don’t think
of myself as a heavy drinker.
I
NTERVIEWER: You’re surprised. Instead of confronting, the
counselor uses simple re -
flection.
CLIENT: Yes! I know that when you were
asking me about how much I drink usu -
ally, it sounded like a lot. But I drink
about the same as most of my friends
do.
I
NTERVIEWER: So this is confusing for you.
On the one hand, you can see that it’s a
lot, and this says it’s more than 95% of
adults drink. Yet it seems about normal
among your friends. How could both
things be true?
Double-sided reflection.
C
LIENT: I guess I can drink with the
top 5%.
INTERVIEWER: Your friends are pretty heavy
drinkers.
The counselor would have
done better to understate
this reflection.
C
LIENT: I don’t know about “heavy.” I guess
we drink more than our share.
INTERVIEWER: We also have a computer pro -
gram that estimates blood alcohol levels
based on drinking patterns. Most drink -
ers stop somewhere between 20 and 50
on this scale. Fifty here is the same as
0.05, which is enough to impair driving.
Our estimate is that you get up around
179 units, or 0.179, in the course of a
typical week of drinking. That’s over
three times the upper limit for most
drinkers and far into the legal intoxica -
tion range for impaired driving.
148 PRACTICE
CLIENT: You mean every week?
INTERVIEWER: From what you told me, yes,
that’s right. I believe you said there are
three nights a week when you get up
around this level.
C
LIENT: That can’t be right. I never even feel
drunk. I drive home all the time, and I’ve
never had a problem.
Resistance: Challenging.
I
NTERVIEWER: It seems to you that something
must be wrong with the computer.
Amplified reflection, with -
out a hint of irony or sar -
casm in the voice .
CLIENT: Well, no, but I don’t ever feel that
drunk.
The client backs down a
bit.
INTERVIEWER: You can’t see how you possi -
bly could have that much alcohol in your
body without feeling it.
Agreement with a twist .
CLIENT: Is that possible?
INTERVIEWER: Not only that, it’s common
among heavy drinkers. It’s called “toler-
ance,” although most people call it “be-
ing able to hold your liquor.” We talked
about that the first time I saw you.
Giving information.
C
LIENT: So I can drink a lot and not feel it?
INTERVIEWER: That’s right. You can have a
fairly high blood alcohol level—enough
to make driving unsafe and even do
damage to your internal organs—but not
feel like you’re intoxicated.
C
LIENT: So I’m driving around legally drunk
three times a week?
INTERVIEWER: That’s how it looks. What do
you make of that?
CLIENT: I guess I’ve been lucky.
INTERVIEWER: Now this score is for those
heavier drinking times we talked about.
On one of those weekends, we estimate,
you get up as high as 220 units, or 0.22.
That makes sense, because that’s the
range in which memory blackouts can
occur.
Case Example 149
CLIENT: Wow!
INTERVIEWER: That seems high to you. Simple reflection.
CLIENT: I just . . . I never thought about it.
INTERVIEWER: Well, that’s why we’re doing
this, and I appreciate how honestly you
answered these questions. I can see,
though, that this is hard for you. I’ve
been through this with a lot of people,
and it’s tough to look at yourself in the
mirror like this. Do you want to go on?
Affirmation.
Asking permission.
C
LIENT: It’s OK.
INTERVIEWER: This next one is a rough mea -
sure of alcohol’s effects in your life, the
number of places it has caused problems.
Your score of 18 falls in the middle of
the range that we call “significant prob-
lems”—not quite severe, but more than
just mild or moderate effects. Does that
make sense to you?
Giving information.
C
LIENT: About right, I guess.
INTERVIEWER: OK. I don’t know what you’ll
make of this next result. This reflects the
degree to which you are depending on
alcohol, becoming dependent on it. Your
score here is at the bottom of the range
we call “definite and significant symp -
toms of dependence.” Roughly, that
means that you are starting to show
some of the common signs of alcohol de -
pendence, although you still have a way
to go before getting into severe problems.
Giving information.
C
LIENT: You mean I’m addicted?
INTERVIEWER: It’s not as simple as either you
are or you aren’t addicted. Dependence is
something that happens gradually, in
steps or degrees. This tells you about
how far along that path you’ve gone. It
says there is definitely something happen -
ing here, that you are starting to show
early signs of dependence on alcohol.
Giving information
C
LIENT: I don’t like that at all.
150 PRACTICE
INTERVIEWER: You don’t like the idea of be -
ing dependent on alcohol.
CLIENT: On anything!
INTERVIEWER: You like to be in charge of
yourself, in control.
CLIENT: Yes.
INTERVIEWER: Well, we’re not talking about
severe problems yet. Dependence in -
creases over the years, sometimes at a
fast rate, sometimes more slowly. You’re
just in the middle range now. But it
looks like that one really concerns you.
Here the counselor takes
up the status quo side,
voicing the “maybe it’s
not so bad” side of the
person’s ambivalence,
and then ending with a
reflection.
C
LIENT:( Silent for some time .) Let’s go on to
the next one.
INTERVIEWER: I’m worried that I’m giving
you too much new information here.
This is difficult, and I don’t want to give
you too much at once. Do you want
some more time to take this in or talk
about it?
The counselor offers
support and some personal
choice about how to
proceed.
C
LIENT: No, it’s OK. Let’s go ahead.
Commentary. This feedback process can be difficult for a person, and
counselor empathy is needed throughout this phase. Feedback of this kind
can be quite useful in developing discrepancy and the perception that a
change is needed. Resistance is commonly encountered in response to some
results and should be responded to empathically rather than opposed (see
Chapter 8). At the conclusion of this process, the counselor invites any
questions, then summarizes the feedback and integrates it with the person’s
own stated concerns. This recapitulation prepares the way for asking key
questions (Chapter 10).
I
NTERVIEWER: We’ve covered a lot of ground.
I wonder if there’s anything you’d like to
ask me—anything you’ve wondered
about so far, or something else you’d
like to know.
An invitation to receive
information and advice.
C
LIENT: Well, yes. Is this something I could
have inherited from my father?
INTERVIEWER: There is good evidence that
people can inherit a predisposition to al -
Case Example 151
cohol problems. It’s not quite as simple
as inheriting a condition called “alcohol -
ism.” It’s a bit more like hereditary risk
for high blood pressure or heart disease.
Your blood pressure is determined in
part by genetics, but it is also influenced
by your diet and exercise, your stress
level, your use of salt, and so on.
Drinking is like that, too. Men who have
biological relatives with drinking prob -
lems seem to have a higher risk them -
selves. And tolerance is also a risk factor.
C
LIENT: So I have a higher risk, then.
INTERVIEWER: That’s it, really. You have
more reason than most people to be
careful about your drinking. Anything
else you’re wondering about?
C
LIENT: I guess not.
INTERVIEWER: Then let me try to summarize In recapitulation, the
where we are, and you can tell me if I’ve counselor collects the
left anything out.You came here partly change-talk themes that
at the urging of your wife, partly because emerged throughout the
of your doctor, and partly because you two interviews.
were concerned about your own
drinking, though you hadn’t really
thought that much about it before. You
were aware that your drinking has been
going up over the years, and now it’s
over 50 drinks in a typical week. You
were also aware that you drink more
than other people, and you seem to have
a substantial tolerance for alcohol. You
can drink a lot of it without feeling
drunk, even though—as we discussed to -
day—you have enough alcohol in your
bloodstream to affect you and do some
damage. You want to take care of your -
self, and you are concerned for your own
health. The blood tests that your physi -
cian did suggest that your body is being
damaged by your drinking. You’ve al -
ready piled up some problems related to
drinking, and there are some indications
152 PRACTICE
that you are becoming dependent on al -
cohol, particularly when you want to so -
cialize or change how you feel. At the
same time, you don’t think of yourself as
an alcoholic, and in the past you’ve as -
sumed that if you’re not an alcoholic you
have nothing to worry about in regard to
drinking. You don’t like the idea of be -
ing dependent on anything. You’ve had
some bad hangovers, and you’re con -
cerned about alcohol’s effects on your
memory. I know you’ve thought about
how your drinking is looking like your
father’s in some ways, and that’s a
worry. We talked about your family his -
tory, and how you probably have a
higher risk than most people for being
harmed by alcohol. You especially want
to make sure that your drinking doesn’t
hurt your family, because you know
firsthand what that hurt is like. Is that a
fair summary?
C
LIENT: Yes, except that I didn’t really think
when I came here that I was drinking
more than other people.
I
NTERVIEWER: Right—I forgot that. It had
seemed to you that your drinking was
perfectly normal.
Amplified reflection.
C
LIENT: Well, maybe not normal, but not ab -
normal, either. I just hadn’t thought
about it.
INTERVIEWER: And now you are thinking
about it. I’ve given you a lot of informa -
tion, and some of it is fairly new. What
are you thinking at this point? What do
you make of all this?
Key question.
C
LIENT: It’s kind of depressing. I really didn’t
think I had a problem, at least not this
bad.
I
NTERVIEWER: This isn’t what you expected Reflection.
to hear, and I can see how it must be
distressing for you. Let me put this in
perspective, though. On all of these
Case Example 153
measures, you are roughly in a twilight
zone, a border region. The good news is Reframing.
that you realized what was happening
before any of these troubles became
severe. People who discover what is
happening and do something about it in Supporting self-efficacy.
time can head off serious damage. Other
people wait until they have done severe
or irreversible damage. You didn’t wait.
It’s like so many other problems:
the earlier you catch it, the better your
chances are of turning it around and
staying healthy.
C
LIENT: What would I do on the weekend if
I gave up alcohol? ( Grins.)
Envisioning.
INTERVIEWER: It’s hard to imagine how
different your life might be.
Commentary. Here is another choice point: The counselor has to decide
whether to press on toward setting goals, negotiating a plan for change, and
obtaining commitment. It would have been possible to continue with Phase 1
methods, perhaps by constructing a decisional balance sheet with the pros and
cons of change. The question is this: How ready is this person for change?
Several of the signs listed in Box 10.1 (Chapter 10) are evident. There is little
resistance, and the client is asking few questions about the problem. He is of-
fering some change talk, although the counselor could at this point seek to
elicit more (e.g., “What do you think are the most important reasons for con -
cern here? Of the things we’ve talked about, what are the most important rea-
sons for making a change? What do you think will happen if you don’t change
your drinking?’’). There is an indication of the client’s envisioning how life
might be without alcohol. The client’s nonverbal cues at this point might sug-
gest a kind of surrender, a sad resignation. The counselor decides to test the
waters with a key question about change.
I
NTERVIEWER: So what does this mean about
your drinking? What happens now?
Key question.
CLIENT: Well, I want to do something. I
don’t want to just let this go on.
Change talk.
INTERVIEWER: And what are the possibilities
on that “do something” list? What’s the
next step?
Key question.
C
LIENT: I guess I have to do something about
my drinking—either cut it down or give
it up.
The client opens up the
negotiation process by dis -
cussing goals.
154 PRACTICE
INTERVIEWER: One or the other.
CLIENT: Well, I can’t just let it go! If I keep
drinking, won’t all of this get worse?
Change talk.
INTERVIEWER: Probably.
CLIENT: Then something’s got to change.
I either cut down or quit.
INTERVIEWER: What do you think about
these two possibilities?
CLIENT: If I had my choice, I would prefer to
just cut down. I’d like to drink some -
times.
INTERVIEWER: Drinking is important to you. Amplified reflection.
CLIENT: Not important, really. It’s just that I
enjoy a drink, and I might feel strange
sitting there sipping a soft drink while
everybody else is drinking.
Envisioning.
I
NTERVIEWER: It might be uncomfortable for
you; you’d feel out of place.
CLIENT: Yes. That’s not too serious, I guess.
I’d just rather not give it up if I don’t
have to.
I
NTERVIEWER: But if it were clear to you that
you had to quit altogether, then you
could.
Supporting self-efficacy.
C
LIENT: Sure. If I knew I had to.
INTERVIEWER: How can you find out? The counselor continues to
leave solutions and deci -
sion making to the client.
CLIENT: I guess I try something and see if it
works.
INTERVIEWER: How much help would you
want?
CLIENT: What kind of help?
INTERVIEWER: I mean help from other peo -
ple—support, counseling, ideas, that sort
of thing. How much would you try it on
your own, and how much would it help
to have some support?
C
LIENT: I don’t know. I’ve never tried. I like
to handle things myself, and I think I
Case Example 155
could do it, but maybe it would help to
talk to somebody else about it, too.
INTERVIEWER: So you might be open to some
support if you decide to change your
drinking.
C
LIENT: I think so, yes.
INTERVIEWER: What do you think you will do? Key question.
CLIENT: You’re the expert. What can I do? A reasonable request, but
beware the expert trap.
INTERVIEWER: I can tell you some things that
other people have tried successfully, but
you’re the expert on you. All I can do is
give you ideas. Maybe some of them will
make sense to you; maybe none of them
will. You’re the one who has to decide
what to do. Do you want some ideas?
Introducing the “menu”
concept.
Emphasizing personal
control.
Requesting permission to
give advice.
C
LIENT: Sure.
INTERVIEWER: First of all, there’s your deci-
sion about cutting down versus quitting.
Some people do succeed in getting their
drinking reduced to a point that it no
longer causes them problems. Others find
it’s necessary or easier to abstain. You’re
not sure which way to go.
C
LIENT: No. What do you think?
INTERVIEWER: This has to be your decision; I
can’t make it for you, but I can tell you
what I think.
Emphasizing personal
control, and renewing
permission.
C
LIENT: Please. I don’t have to do it just be -
cause you say it.
INTERVIEWER: OK. I guess if I were in your
place, I think I’d be concerned about
things getting worse, including the health
effects the doctor talked about. The sur -
est way to reverse those problems and
get them back toward normal is a period
of total abstinence, if you can handle it. Personal challenge.
C
LIENT: Oh, I can handle it all right. How
long do you think I ought to go on the
wagon?
156 PRACTICE
INTERVIEWER: That’s hard to say. At least
long enough for your body to get back
to normal. I’d say that 3 months would
be a good start. It might be a good idea
to repeat some of these tests after that to
see how you are doing.
C
LIENT: And if I keep drinking, I won’t get
better?
INTERVIEWER: I can’t say for sure. You could
take your chances. But I do think that
the surest and quickest way to repair this
damage would be to take a vacation
from alcohol. That’s my opinion. I don’t
know how that sounds to you.
C
LIENT: Then when I am healthy again, I can
start drinking again if I want to?
INTERVIEWER: The fact is that you can start
drinking any time you want to. Nobody
can stop you. It’s not a question of
whether you can. The real question is
what would happen. As I told you, some
people are careful with their drinking
and they manage. The danger, of course,
is falling back into old habits and start-
ing to drink in a way that endangers
your health and your family again. But
you don’t need to make that decision
now. You can decide that after you’ve
had your vacation. You might even find
that you like not drinking!
Emphasizing personal
control.
Delaying a decision.
C
LIENT: But for now I have to quit. A hint of externalizing the
decision.
INTERVIEWER: You asked me what I think. I
didn’t tell you that you have to, only
that it’s what I think would be best.
What you do is up to you. What do you
think you’ll do?
The counselor avoids tak -
ing responsibility for the
change side of the client’s
ambivalence, and reem -
phasizes personal control.
C
LIENT: That seems like the safest thing to
do.
INTERVIEWER: Then let me ask you this:
What still stands in the way of your
quitting? If you have decided to let go of
Case Example 157
alcohol, at least for a period of time,
what might make that hard?
CLIENT: My friends. A lot of the time I spend
with them is drinking, and I don’t know
how I would handle that.
I
NTERVIEWER: What could you do?
CLIENT: Maybe I spend more time with my
friends who don’t drink, or stay away
from the bars and see them when they’re
not drinking.
I
NTERVIEWER: Can you manage that? Personal challenge.
CLIENT: I think so, yes.
INTERVIEWER: What else would be hard?
CLIENT: I like to drink. But I guess that’s not
a big problem. I just have to remind my-
self that quitting is important.
I
NTERVIEWER: Let me ask you this: What do
you think might happen if you don’t
change your drinking? What would be
happening 5 or 10 years down the line if
you keep on drinking as you have been?
The counselor assumes
that there is continuing
ambivalence, and uses this
opportunity to reinforce
motivation by looking
ahead.
C
LIENT: I guess all of those things we talked
about could get worse—my liver, my
memory. And I think my family would
have a hard time —I don’t like to think
about losing them. Maybe even lose my
job if it got bad enough. It’s not very
pleasant to think about.
I
NTERVIEWER: How do you feel about drink -
ing right this minute?
CLIENT: It doesn’t seem very appealing.
INTERVIEWER: One more thing. Usually
there’s a bigger picture than just drink -
ing. How else would you like for things
to be different? What other changes you
would like to see?
C
LIENT: I’d like to get along better with my
wife.
INTERVIEWER: So it might be good for the
158 PRACTICE
two of you to talk to somebody together,
to work on your relationship.Would
both of you be willing to do that?
C
LIENT: I think so.
Commentary. At this point, the counselor reviews with the person a
range of options available to help him in carrying out his plan. The client ex -
pressed a preference to “do it on my own,” but shows some interest in coming
back for follow-up sessions with his wife. The counselor proceeds with a plan
summary.
I
NTERVIEWER: Let me make sure I under -
stand what you want to do, then. You’ve
decided that what you want is to take a
break from alcohol for a period of at
least 3 months, and you’re going to go
home and explain it to your wife. You
think it would be a good idea for the
two of you to come back together and to
be able to check in with me on how
you’re doing. You like the idea of being
able to accomplish this on your own, so
for now you don’t want to try other
kinds of support. You did, say, though,
that if it doesn’t work out and you take
up drinking again in the next 3 months,
then we would talk about some addi-
tional support. You’re going to come
back next Thursday with your wife, so
we can go over this plan with her, and
then we’ll decide what to do from there.
Is that what you want to do?
C
LIENT: Yes, I guess so.
INTERVIEWER: You sound a little reluctant
still, and I guess that’s understandable.
This is a big change for you. What is
there about this plan that you’re nervous
about? Have I missed something?
Reflecting the ambivalence.
C
LIENT: I’m not really “nervous” about it.
No, it’s OK. I was just thinking about
some of the good times I have had.
I
NTERVIEWER: And it’s hard because you’re
weighing those against your health and
Case Example 159
your family and the good times to come.
It’s hard to let go.
Reflection (continuing the
paragraph).
CLIENT: But it’s what I have to do.
INTERVIEWER: No, you don’t have to. It hap -
pens only if it’s what you choose to do,
if you want it enough. Is this what you
want?
Emphasizing personal
control.
C
LIENT: Yes. It is.
INTERVIEWER: Then I’ll see you and your
wife on Thursday.
This is just one example of how motivational interviewing flows in prac -
tice. There are many different approaches through which the basic principles
of motivational interviewing can be pursued. This case is illustrative of some
of the choice points that arise, and how a skilled counselor might proceed.
The challenge for your creativity is in applying the general principles with
each individual person.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45
1. For more detail on how to combine motivational interviewing and assessment feed-
back, see Miller, Zweben, DiClemente, and Rychtarik (1992).
160 PRACTICE
CHAPTER 12
/G45/G74/G68/G69/G63/G61/G6C /G43/G6F/G6E/G73/G69/G64/G65/G72/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73
I have not the right to want to change another if I am not open to
be changed.
—M ARTIN BUBER
/G45/G54/G48/G49/G43/G41/G4C /G49/G54/G43/G48/G45/G53 /G49/G4E /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47
Yes, “itches.” These are issues gone awry. Ethical issues often have to do with
the use of influence, and in this way they apply not only to all forms of coun -
seling and psychotherapy but also to nearly all spheres of human interaction.
Ethical concerns are quite central when one is coercing people to do what they
don’t (or otherwise wouldn’t) want to do.
Somehow such issues are particularly salient with motivational interview-
ing. Although we place strong emphasis on principles of respect, benevolence,
and autonomy, the issue of undue influence (manipulation) invariably arises
in discussions and training. It arises in part because motivational interviewing
is about changing what a person wants. The individual’s wishes are normally
one standard against which ethical practice is judged, but what about methods
that seek to alter the person’s wishes themselves?
It is not an uncommon situation, of course. Virtually all of marketing and
advertising are directly focused on causing people to want certain things, most
of which they do not really need. Religions, schools, and “motivational speak-
ers” are partially about the business of instilling certain values, causing people
to prefer and choose one option over another. There are many who want you
161
to want what they have to offer, and who will do what they can to increase its
perceived importance in your eyes.
Counselors and psychotherapists sometimes regard what they do to be
value-free, or at least directed toward the client’s values rather than their own.
Intentionally altering what people want and value can therefore be an ethi -
cally itchy area. It raises interesting questions, discomforts, and concerns.
There is nothing wrong with that. In fact, we worry if someone practices
motivational interviewing without feeling ethical itches or if he or she sees
such concerns as nonissues. Just as addictive behaviors provide a particularly
clear lens through which to study processes of human volition and change, so
motivational interviewing seems to bring into clearer focus ethical issues of in-
fluence in counseling.
/G41/G73/G70/G69/G72/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73 /G6F/G66 /G74/G68/G65 /G43/G6C/G69/G65/G6E/G74
A primary consideration is what the client wants and hopes for from counsel -
ing. Sometimes this is clear, or at least implicit from the context. A person
asking for help from an accountant or a consumer credit counseling service
most likely wants to get some financial affairs in order. A person walking
through the door of the “Center on Alcoholism, Substance Abuse, and Addic-
tions” is not left wondering what topics may be discussed in consultation.
Even in what seem like rather focused specialist settings, however, what
clients want from treatment and what they use it for can be quite diverse.
1 On
a 17-item questionnaire regarding “What I want from treatment,” 2 clients
seeking help from an alcohol dependence treatment program evidenced wide
variation in their hopes; furthermore, better treatment outcomes (on drinking
measures) at follow-up were associated with the extent to which they reported
(at the end of treatment) that they had received those services which they had
indicated, at intake, that they wanted. Said more simply: When people get
what they want from treatment, they are more likely to show positive change.
Although much discussion is focused on clients’ change goals for them -
selves, it is also the case that people want and ask for particular things from
health professionals. A common frustration of physicians is patients who
come asking for or demanding certain medical services that the doctor does
not regard as warranted: the drug-seeking patient who wants analgesics or
sleeping medication, or the mother who is convinced that her sick child needs
antibiotics. It is thus appropriate to ask clients not only what they want but,
more specifically, “What do you want from me?”
/G41/G73/G70/G69/G72/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73 /G6F/G66 /G74/G68/G65 /G43/G6F/G75/G6E/G73/G65/G6C/G6F/G72/G3A /G43/G6F/G6D/G70/G61/G73/G73/G69/G6F/G6E/G2C /G4F/G70/G69/G6E/G69/G6F/G6E/G2C
/G61/G6E/G64/G49/G6E/G76/G65/G73/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74
Clients are not the only people with aspirations. Start with the prototypic case
for which motivational interviewing was designed. The client stands at a
crossroads, looking down at least two different paths and ambivalent about
162 PRACTICE
which to take. We will consider here some different kinds of aspirations that a
counselor might have regarding a client.
To say that the counselor in a given case is indifferent to which path the
client chooses could have at least three different meanings. First, it could mean
that the counselor simply has no compassion for the client and doesn’t care
about the outcome. The counselor might anticipate very different outcomes,
depending on which path is taken, but be uninterested in what the specific cli-
ent chooses to do. We will assume for purposes of discussion that this is not
the meaning, and we will take it for granted that the counselor is genuinely in-
terested in the client’s welfare. If a counselor comes to the place, through
burnout or otherwise, where this kind of indifference is present and counsel -
ing becomes a rote or intellectual exercise, it is time to find another line of
work.
Second, it might mean that the counselor is compassionate and has the
client’s best interests at heart but really has no opinion as to which would be
the better course for the client to take. In this case—which is called equipoise
in Chapter 7—the counselor has no professional advice to give. From the
counselor’s perspective, the two paths appear likely to lead to similar out-
comes for the client. The counselor may still be helpful to the person in the
process of making the choice, as illustrated in the description of nondirective
motivational interviewing at the end of Chapter 7.
Third, it might mean that the counselor has no particular investment, no
vested interest, in the person’s choice of paths. The outcomes for the coun-
selor are similar, no matter which path the client chooses. The counselor may
be of the opinion that very different outcomes will result for the client from
choosing one path versus another and may compassionately wish the best out-
comes for the client but be disinterested from the perspective of any personal
loss or gain.
For purposes of the present discussion, we refer to these three forms of in-
terest as compassion, opinion, and investment. Any one of them can be pres -
ent without the others.
Compassion is loving, selfless concern for the person’s welfare. A com -
passionate person has the other’s best interests at heart. It is what Erich
Fromm described in his classic, The Art of Loving .
3
Opinion is a judgment as to which choice serves the client’s best interests.
The judgment is, one hopes, well-informed and professional, although opin -
ions about the relative merits of choices can have many origins. Clients often
ask for a professional opinion and may even seek a second opinion. The ques-
tion here is: What does the counselor anticipate that the outcomes would be
for the client in resolving the ambivalence in one direction versus another?
Investment involves differential gain or loss to the counselor, depending
on which choice the client makes. The interest may be material. Salespeople,
for example, are invested in outcome because they gain or lose a sale (and as -
sociated profit), depending on whether a customer decides to buy. A recruiter
for the armed forces can advise potential recruits on the advantages of enlist -
Ethical Considerations 163
ing but also has a tangible interest in their decision in that the recruiter’s job
performance evaluation is based in part on the rate of enlistment. An intake
worker in a for-profit treatment program is likely to have a similarly vested in-
terest in persuading potential clients to enter treatment.
For others, the investment is more symbolic. A counselor who is recover -
ing from the same problem being presented by a client may overidentify with
the person (particularly early in the counselor’s recovery process) and zeal -
ously promote particular choices. Professionals who equate client outcomes
with their personal worth and competence are likely to be overinvested in
choices that their clients make. By virtue of deeply held values, there may be
particular outcomes that counselors hope for when working in planned par -
enthood centers, marital and domestic abuse counseling centers, or prenatal
care clinics that serve women who are using alcohol and other drugs.
Investment can also arise by virtue of relationship. Family members are not
disinterested parties; a client’s choices and outcomes may affect them directly in
many ways. Psychotherapists ordinarily avoid the entanglements of treating
people with whom they have some other personal or professional relationship.
We find these three types of counselor interest in client outcomes—com-
passion, opinion, and investment—to be quite helpful in sorting out some of
the ethical dilemmas that one encounters in relation to motivational inter-
viewing. These dilemmas are by no means unique to motivational interview-
ing; they are important for any helping professional to ponder.
/G4D/G65/G65/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G6F/G66 /G41/G73/G70/G69/G72/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73
Needless to say, clients’ and counselors’ aspirations do not always match.
Consonance is greatest when both are working toward the same goals. When
aspirations are dissonant, however, there arises the question of how to set
goals and agenda for counseling.
It is here that ethical principles of benevolence and autonomy can come
into conflict. Most counselors believe in the client’s right to make choices and
to at least influence, if not set, the goals of counseling. What a client initially
wants from the counselor and counseling, however, may be discrepant with
the counselor’s opinion as to what is in the best interests of the client. A few
examples will suffice:
A doctor is concerned about a patient’s high blood pressure and wants to
prescribe medication; the patient does not want to take medication and
prefers to try managing blood pressure with diet and exercise.
A couple seek counseling for marital conflict. The counselor’s personal
faith is inconsistent with divorce, and he also places strong value on mari-
tal fidelity. One partner privately confides an ongoing extramarital affair
and a desire to continue it while seeing whether marital therapy “works
out.” It is the counselor’s opinion that this is not in the best interest of
either partner or their relationship.
164 PRACTICE
A person convicted of driving while intoxicated (DWI) is referred to
treatment and wants to pursue a goal of controlled drinking; the coun -
selor believes, given the severity of alcohol dependence, that this goal is
not only unrealistic but dangerous for the client, and wishes for the client
to abstain totally from alcohol.
A client’s aspirations can conflict not only with the counselor’s profes -
sional opinion as to what is in the client’s best interest, but also with issues of
counselor investment. This is apparent in the last two scenarios above. The
DWI counselor, for example, may not only believe that abstinence is in the cli-
ent’s best interest but may be concerned about the program’s legal liability if
the client were to pursue a controlled drinking goal and then injure or kill
someone in a subsequent DWI incident. Here are a few other examples of con-
flict between client aspirations and counselor investment:
A woman who seeks consultation about hormone replacement therapy
turns out to be more eager to discuss her marital problems. The nurse
doesn’t want to get involved in marital counseling and needs to get on
with this consultation to attend to the queue of other patients in the wait-
ing room.
A counselor in private practice has a low caseload at present, wants more
clients, and is interviewing a person who needs to be treated for obses-
sive–compulsive disorder. Although the counselor has had some experi-
ence in this area and believes she could provide reasonably competent
treatment, she knows a colleague with excellent training and experience
specifically in the treatment of this disorder. The client, however, ex-
presses reluctance to be referred once again to another professional and
says he likes this counselor.
A patient is concerned about persistent pain and wants the doctor to or -
der a series of expensive tests to rule out what are possible but somewhat
unlikely disorders. The doctor is employed by a managed care organiza -
tion in which physicians receive salary bonuses for maintaining low utili -
zation of expensive tests.
The last two examples also illustrate a still more complex issue in which
the counselor’s personal investment may directly conflict not only with the cli-
ent’s wishes but also with the counselor’s own sense of what is in the best in-
terest of the client.
/G50/G6F/G77/G65/G72 /G61/G6E/G64/G49/G74/G73 /G55/G73/G65
Now let us add one more complexity, before we examine how motivational
interviewing interacts with these ethical dilemmas. There is variability, from
one counseling context to another, in the degree of power that the counselor
holds to influence client behavior and outcomes. At the low extreme, a coun -
selor has just met the client and is offering only consultation with regard to
Ethical Considerations 165
the client’s problems. There is always a power differential in counseling, of
course, and the counselor will presumably be able to exert some influence
over the client’s behavior; that is assumed in the role. Nevertheless, the com -
plications of power do not exceed those inherent in all counseling. At the
other extreme, consider a counselor who works with offenders on parole and
probation and who has the power at any time to revoke that status and order
incarceration.
The presence of special influence in the counseling relationship further
complicates the overall ethical picture. The counselor now may have not only
an opinion as to what is best for the client, and a personal stake in the client’s
choices and outcomes, but also coercive power to act on such opinion and in -
vestment. A counselor who holds such power must further choose whether to
use it to persuade the client to move in a desired direction.
/G45/G54/G48/G49/G43/G41/G4C /G43/G4F/G4D/G50/G4C/G45/G58/G49/G54/G59 /G41/G4E/G44
/G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47
How do these complexities interact with the particular nature of motivational
interviewing? If our conception of the method is correct, it has the potential,
within limits, to influence a person’s willingness, confidence, and readiness to
change in one way or another. Thus one concern is raised by the potential that
the method can be effective in altering motivation and volition, as well as re-
lated behavior. This is not of particular concern when the client’s aspirations
are consonant with those of the counselor. When there is dissonance between
counselor and client aspirations, however, ethical consideration should be
given to any methods that are effective in changing client aspirations to more
closely match those of the counselor. This issue is further complicated when
the counselor’s “client” (the one desiring change) is not the person who is
seated in the consultation room but is another party—such as a court system,
parent, or school—asking for change in the person.
When a client’s aspirations differ from those of the counselor, it is also
the case that interventions designed to alter motivation for change are done
without the person’s permission, at least to some extent. One can point to
contextual factors that may mitigate this concern somewhat. A person volun -
tarily seeking counseling at an addiction treatment program may profess no
desire to change his or her use of drug A (although motivation might be high
to stop using drug B), but will not be surprised that a counselor in this context
may seek to enhance the person’s motivation to stop drug A as well. Those be-
ing seen at a religiously based counseling service may expect, or even desire,
that the counselor advocates values that conflict with their current behavior
and aspirations. Nevertheless, one cannot entirely dodge the point that in
seeking to alter what it is that a person desires, one is in some sense doing so
without the person’s direct assent or request.
This issue of assent is related to a further concern, which is that a method
166 PRACTICE
like motivational interviewing may succeed in altering what someone desires
without the person being aware of the process and how it works. Subliminal
advertising in movie theaters is banned on this basis, although advertising
more generally is designed to enhance motivation without needing the per -
son’s direct consent or awareness of the underlying psychological processes.
In sum, three potential ethical concerns about motivational interventions
are (1) that they may work, (2) that they may work without the person’s di -
rect assent, and (3) that they may work without the person’s awareness.
4 We
regard these as legitimate issues for ethical consideration, and in the following
section we offer some guidelines for the use of motivational interviewing, in
particular, in relation to these complexities.
Before moving on to these guidelines, however, some discussion of the is-
sue of coerciveness in motivational interviewing is needed. This is related to
the question implied by the ability of motivational interviewing within limits
to alter one’s being ready, willing, and able to act in a particular way. What
are those limits? For example, can a client be caused, through motivational in-
terviewing, to behave in a manner directly contradictory to the person’s intrin-
sic core values? We believe that the answer to this question is no, in part be-
cause of our understanding of how the method works. To the extent that we
are correct in asserting that developing internal discrepancy is a key process in
motivational interviewing, the question arises: Discrepancy with what? The
answer must be the person’s own goals and values. We believe that unless a
current “problem” behavior is in conflict with something that the person val-
ues more highly, there is no basis for motivational interviewing to work. The
focus is on intrinsic motivation for change. It is irrelevant whether the client’s
behavior is discrepant with someone else’s values, unless, of course, it is some-
one highly regarded and valued by the client, in which case intrinsic value dis-
crepancy is again operating. That being the case, motivational interviewing
will not induce behavior change unless the client perceives that such change
serves a higher intrinsic value and is thereby in his or her own best interest.
This protective condition of consistency with intrinsic values is not pres -
ent for coercive methods. People can sometimes be coerced to behave in ways
that violate values they hold dear. This is one intention behind torture and
brainwashing, and it is also why institutional review boards exist to protect
research participants from coercive conditions such as enticingly high pay -
ment to be exposed to risk. Within the realm of counseling, a method known
as “constructive coercion” uses the contingent power of an employer to moti-
vate employees into treatment they might otherwise refuse.
5 “The interven-
tion” propounded by the Johnson Institute 6 typically involves a planned and
rehearsed surprise group confrontation by family members (and sometimes
others such as friends or employers) of a person perceived to have a problem
(usually with alcohol or other drugs). In addition to expressing compassionate
concern, members of the group may also announce negative consequences
that will ensue if the person does not comply with the group’s aspiration,
which is often for the person to enter a private treatment program. Such inter-
Ethical Considerations 167
ventions are clearly undertaken without the person’s knowledge or desire,
with the ethical principle of benevolence being given greater importance than
autonomy, at least temporarily.
It is our assertion that motivational interviewing, by virtue of its reliance
on discrepancy with intrinsic values, cannot work in violation of a person’s
autonomy. It may cause a person to want to do something, but for the reason
that the anticipated change is ultimately consistent with important intrinsic
goals and values. In this way, it differs from coercive strategies, which are ex -
plicitly designed to override what a person wants.
Within this context, we can now address the ethical relationship between
motivational interviewing and aspirations of the counselor and client. From
the preceding discussion we identify three conditions under which the use of
motivational interviewing warrants special care. The more combinations of
these complicating conditions that are present in a given case, the more cau -
tion is required, and under certain conditions we believe that the use of moti -
vational interviewing is ethically inappropriate. We specifically do not limit
this discussion to the counselor–client relationship, because applications of
motivational interviewing are being considered in other contexts. Conse-
quently in this discourse we refer only to the “interviewer” and the “person,”
wherein the interviewer might be a counselor, salesperson, physician, police
officer, parent, employer, or other interested party. The three ethical complex-
ities are as follows:
1. When the person’s aspirations are dissonant with the interviewer’s
opinion as to what is in the person’s best interest
2. When the interviewer has a personal investment in which direction the
person takes
3. When the nature of the relationship includes coercive power of the in -
terviewer to influence the direction the person takes
Dissonance of aspirations is not uncommon in motivational interviewing.
Although things are simplest when aspirations are consonant, there are many
circumstances in which motivational interviewing is ethically appropriate, de -
spite initially dissonant aspirations. The ethical principle of benevolence is
preeminent here, but it does rely on the assumption that there is independent
objective value in the interviewer’s judgment as to what is in the person’s best
interest.
Things become considerably more cloudy when the interviewer has a per-
sonal stake in what the person does. Under this condition, the independent
objective value of the interviewer’s opinion begins to come into question be -
cause of conflict of interest. The greater the interviewer’s investment in a par-
ticular action or outcome for a specific person, the more serious the concern.
A special case occurs when the interviewer’s investment is contrary to what is
in the person’s best interest (as judged by the interviewer’s opinion, or by a
reasonable observer). This is one case in which we unreservedly advise that
168 PRACTICE
motivational interviewing is ethically inappropriate. We do so despite our be -
lief that motivational interviewing does not violate the principle of autonomy.
If, for example, either of two alternatives could be judged to be in the person’s
interest and consistent with the person’s values, but one of them serves the in-
terviewer’s interest whereas the other does not, we believe it is inappropriate
to use motivational interviewing to tip the balance in the direction of a resolu-
tion consistent with the interviewer’s investment.
Ethical complexities are further increased when the interviewer has
power to coerce or enforce contingencies on the person’s behavior. Of course,
the interviewer can decide not to use such power, but there is reason for ethi -
cal concern because the potential for use of such power can itself be coercive
when aspirations are dissonant. We therefore assert that motivational inter -
viewing warrants particular caution when the interviewer holds special influ -
ence (beyond an ordinary professional relationship) over the person’s behav -
ior and outcomes. We address those precautions in the guidelines and case
examples that follow.
Finally, when both coercive power and personal investment are present,
we regard the use of motivational interviewing to be inappropriate. Examples
include an employer interviewing a prospective employee and a detective in-
terviewing a suspect (although in both of these situations, good reflective lis-
tening skills alone can be very appropriately used).
We summarize these points in Box 12.1, illustrating from left to right the
increasing degrees of ethical complexity and contraindication to the use of
motivational interviewing. There are, of course, other combinations than
those shown.
/G53/G4F/G4D/G45 /G47/G55/G49/G44/G45/G4C/G49/G4E/G45/G53 /G46._/G4F/G52 /G45/G54/G48/G49/G43/G41/G4C /G50/G52/G41/G43/G54/G49/G43/G45
We conclude by offering a few guidelines that follow from the preceding dis -
cussion. The broader guidelines of ethical professional practice also apply, of
course, and when you feel an ethical itch, pay attention to it and explore it. (If
you don’t feel any ethical itches when doing motivational interviewing,
worry!) We have focused in these guidelines on issues that are particularly
salient in motivational interviewing. With each, we also offer what we hope
are illustrative case examples. Although we think primarily of the counselor–
client context in offering these guidelines, they do apply to the use of this clini-
cal method more generally.
Guideline 1: When you sense dissonance in the relationship or an area of
ethical discomfort, clarify the person’s aspirations and your own.
Example 1 . A young woman came to see me (Rollnick), distressed by
panic attacks that were leaving her more and more fearful and restricted. Mo-
tivational commitment is a significant issue in treating panic attacks and ago -
Ethical Considerations 169
raphobia, and I have had much experience and some encouraging success in
this area. We began behavioral treatment of the panic attacks right away and
also developed a list of agenda items that included smoking cessation and shy-
ness, both of which turned out to be tied in with her panic attacks. Each ses -
sion, she seemed to have a new concern to discuss. In one she revealed that she
suffered from anorexia and that she used smoking to curb her appetite. Dur -
ing the next session she described being attracted to a woman coworker and
wanted to explore sexual identity issues. That issue was gone the following
week, and we discussed her shyness around men. I felt growing discomfort
that we were wandering around in the desert, and that I wouldn’t be of much
help to her unless we focused on her main concern, but what was it? Clearly
she enjoyed coming to see me and might be generating new concerns in order
to continue. My own aspiration was still to help her with the panic attacks,
because she had presented that as a quite disabling concern, but her own goals
for counseling had become unclear to me.
Ethical Considerations 170
BOX 12.1. Ethical Complexity and Motivational Interviewing
Ethical complexity Very
low
Very
high
Do you have a clear opinion as
to which direction is in the person’s
best interest?
No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Are your aspirations (both opinion
and investment) consonant with
the person’s aspirations?
NA Yes No No No No No
Do you have a personal investment
in which direction the person takes?
No No No No Yes Yes Yes
Is your personal investment in
conflict with what is in the person’s
best interest?
NA NA NA NA No Yes Yes
Do you have power to influence
which direction the person takes?
No No No Yes No No Yes
Is motivational interviewing
appropriate?
Yes Yes With
care
With
care
With
care
No No
Note. Grey boxes denote, within rows, conditions of greater ethical complexity; black boxes denote, within col-
umns, combinations of conditions under which the authors regard the use of motivational interviewing to be
ethically questionable.
I decided to express my dilemma directly. “I’m a bit confused here,” I
said. “I had the impression that you were particularly concerned about your
panic attacks, with which I would be glad to help you, but is that what you
want? I feel like we’re losing the thread, so I need to understand what it is that
you want from counseling now.” We agreed, through a process of motiva -
tional interviewing and agenda setting, to focus on two issues of particular
concern to her, one of which was her panic attacks. We set specific goals, and
over the next few sessions she made excellent progress in managing her fear of
fear, so that her panic attacks subsided.
Guideline 2: When your opinion as to what is in the person’s best interests is
dissonant with what the person wants, reconsider and negotiate your
agenda, making clear your own concerns and aspirations for the person.
Example 2a. A middle-aged woman came to see me (Rollnick) with con -
cerns about problematic gambling. She had been spending large amounts of
time in gambling establishments and losing substantial sums of money. Her
request was to be given strategies for managing her gambling problem. When
I asked her, as a simple device, for an importance rating, she said 9, and her
confidence rating was 3, quite consistent with her request for behavior change
strategies. Yet I felt an itch; something bothered me, and it was my hunch that
the solution to her problem lay not in teaching her skills to manage her gam-
bling but in exploring the motivation for her gambling.
Consequently I asked her permission to discuss how we would spend our
time, and I explained my hunch. I agreed to spend time toward the end of our
first session giving her some concrete behavioral strategies, and I hoped she
would be willing to spend some time exploring the reasons for her gambling.
She agreed.
“So why are you at a 9 on the importance scale, and not a 2?” I asked.
“My husband,” she said; “he’s threatened to leave me because of my gam -
bling.” It turned out that 9 was her husband’s rating of importance, and her
own interest in stopping gambling was at 2. It emerged that this woman, who
had been the manager of a large store, was terribly bored with her life as a
housewife, and gambling filled her time and eased her boredom and loneli -
ness. “So,” I summarized halfway through our session, “your husband has
threatened to divorce you because of your gambling. Your life feels quite
empty to you, and you’re bored silly with it. You feel lonely, and going to the
casino helps to fill your time. What you’d like from me is to give you some
self-management strategies to control your gambling.” She burst into tears.
We spent the rest of that session and the next discussing ways in which
she could have more meaning and activity in her life, to address her boredom
and loneliness directly rather than through gambling. By the second session,
she was unconcerned about changing her gambling, saying that it would sort
itself out, and she thanked me for helping her. “I’ve got what I need,” she
said. I set up a 6-month follow-up visit with her, at which time she had imple-
Ethical Considerations 171
mented a number of important changes in her life, and the gambling problem
had resolved.
Example 2b. He was a cartoonist who had to come up with a new idea
every day for his newspaper strip. He had used various forms of meditation to
stimulate his creativity, but lately he had been troubled during meditation by
intrusive and distressing visual images of the face of a man with whom he had
had significant conflict. Whereas he normally could clear his mind and allow
creative ideas to arise, he found himself unable to stop this intrusive image,
and it was seriously hindering his work. “I think hypnosis might help me,” he
said.
Although I (Miller) had been trained in clinical hypnosis, I was uncom -
fortable with his idea because the outcome literature on obsessive–intrusive
thoughts showed little efficacy for hypnosis and pointed instead toward cogni-
tive–behavioral management methods. I explained this to him, and he agreed
to try what I had in mind. Several sessions later, the intrusion problem was
still getting worse, despite his faithful practice of the skills I had been teaching
him. So we renegotiated, and I agreed to try hypnosis with him in that session.
I hypnotized him just once. The obsessive imagery vanished, and he was
not troubled by it again.
It taught me something about listening to what clients want.
Guideline 3: The greater your personal investment in a particular client out-
come, the more inappropriate it is to use the method of motivational inter-
viewing. It is clearly inappropriate when your personal investment may be
dissonant with what is in the client’s best interests.
Example 3a. I (Miller) was sitting in on a transcontinental flight, a situa -
tion in which I ordinarily keep to myself and certainly don’t talk to the person
next to me about what I do for a living. This woman was particularly persis -
tent, however, and I learned that her job was to sell private jet aircraft to exec-
utives, most of whom didn’t really need them. She explained that the key is to
convince them that a private jet offers much greater prestige and convenience
than using commercial flights, and that owning one was therefore in their best
interests. I became engaged, and asked her in some detail about her methods
for motivating and closing sales. In the course of our conversation, some of
my own interests emerged, and I explained a few parallels between the meth -
ods she was describing and the approach I was using to help people decide to
make changes in their health behavior. Then she became engaged and wanted
to know in great detail all about motivational interviewing. Suddenly I was
feeling not just ethical itches but smoke alarms, and I politely shut myself up
in my laptop. I also did not purchase an aircraft.
Example 3b. We (Miller) were running a bit behind in recruitment into a
clinical trial. Patients who might benefit from the treatments we were testing
172 PRACTICE
were declining to participate for a variety of reasons. “How about if we try
motivational interviewing?” someone suggested. While one might have argued
that participating in this particular clinical trial was in the patients’ best inter-
est (all experimental groups included an active treatment that could reason -
ably be expected to yield benefit), there is no way to untangle this judgment
from the investigator’s clear investment in recruitment into the study. We
therefore regard it as unethical to use motivational interviewing to enhance
consent to participate in research.
Example 3c. An attorney contacted me (Rollnick), representing a woman
whose leg had been paralyzed in an automobile accident. Could I, as a psy -
chologist, speak to her about how this injury had affected her life? Spe -
cifically, the attorney asked me to persuade her, via motivational interviewing,
that some ambiguous areas in her life had actually been impaired by the acci -
dental injury (for example, not being employed, not having a second child),
even though the woman herself currently saw no relationship between these
facts and her injury. The outcome would affect the amount of damages to be
requested in a civil lawsuit against the other driver. In this case, the strong in-
vestment in a particular outcome was not my own, but her attorney’s, who
stood to benefit financially from a larger award, an investment that, in my
opinion, did not necessarily serve the woman’s best interests. I refused.
Guideline 4: The more your role includes coercive power to influence the per-
son’s behavior and outcomes, the more caution is warranted in the use of
motivational interviewing. When coercive power is combined with a per-
sonal investment in the person’s behavior and outcomes, the use of motiva-
tional interviewing is inappropriate.
Example 4a. An attorney contacted me (Rollnick) to ask how she could
learn motivational interviewing to help her clients resolve ambivalence around
issues on which she was representing them. Often, she indicated, it was not a
particular decision that was needed, as much as a clear resolution so that legal
matters could proceed. “Often my clients go back and forth on important is -
sues about which they feel ambivalent, and use up large amounts of my time
for which I have to bill them, just because they’re not clear what they want. If
I could help them decide what they want, it would benefit us all.” We trained
her, with the additional advice that it would be inappropriate for her to use
this method in interviewing clients of opposing counsel, where her investment
would typically be contrary to the interviewee’s interests.
Example 4b. During a workshop on motivational interviewing that we
(Miller) offered for probation officers, there was much discussion of how this
method would mesh with the legal power they held over their clients. Our ad-
vice was to be straightforward about their own aspirations for clients, and
specifically to explain the purpose of this type of counseling. For example:
Ethical Considerations 173
“I have two different roles here, and it is sometimes tricky for me to put
them together. One of them is as a representative of the court, to ensure
that you keep the conditions of probation that the judge set for you, and I
have to honor that role. The other is to be your counselor, to help you
make changes in your life that we agree would be beneficial. There are
also likely to be some areas we’ll discover, where I am hoping to see a
change that you’re not sure you want to make. What I hope is that by
talking together here every week, we can resolve some of those differ -
ences and are able to find areas of change we can agree on. I’m sure I’ll be
asking you to consider some changes that right now don’t sound very
good to you, and that’s normal. We’ll keep exploring those issues during
our time together, and see if we can come to some agreement. How does
that sound to you?”
We offer one more example of a very common problem to which motiva-
tional interviewing has been applied: medication compliance. While we don’t
resonate to the power relationship implied in the term “compliance,” it is nev-
ertheless a common and important problem. It is a useful example, because
changes in investment and power have important ethical implications for the
appropriateness of motivational interviewing in addressing this problem.
Example 5a. A man is being treated for newly diagnosed schizophrenia,
and the psychiatrist is explaining to him how the prescribed medication works
and how important it is to take it regularly. Having conveyed this informa-
tion, the psychiatrist talks with him, using the style of motivational interview-
ing, about the advantages and disadvantages of taking the medication as pre-
scribed.
Our opinion: The application is entirely appropriate.
Example 5b. The same man has been seen in crisis units several times,
each time shortly after he discontinued taking his medication. Consequently,
he receives regular home visits from a community nurse. The nurse has some
investment in his medication adherence for several reasons. When he does not
take it, she is likely to be called in the middle of the night to deal with crises.
She must also do extra paperwork and reporting, and she must involve several
other health professionals if he discontinues taking his medicine. If he is
rehospitalized, it also reflects badly on her performance. Nevertheless, her in -
vestment is judged to be consistent with the best interests of the patient, de -
spite his own ambivalence, and she does not have any significant coercive
power over the patient.
Our opinion: It is appropriate for her to use motivational interviewing to
encourage the patient to take his medication regularly.
Example 5c. The same man has been admitted involuntarily to a forensic
unit in the hospital after a psychotic episode during which he committed sev -
174 PRACTICE
eral minor crimes and jeopardized his own life in a confrontation with police.
All beds in the unit are full, and there is a substantial waiting list, with pres -
sure from the courts to admit those who are waiting. He has been in the unit
for 3 weeks and is stabilized as an inpatient. The principal obstacle to dis -
charge is his continuing reluctance to take his medication. A social worker
trained in motivational interviewing is asked by the physician in charge of the
unit to persuade him to agree to take his medicine, so that he can be dis -
charged to make room for another patient.
Our opinion: We regard this to be an unethical application of motiva -
tional interviewing because of the simultaneous presence of decisional power
and substantial investment in a particular outcome. It is irrelevant whether the
staff’s investment in an empty bed is judged to be consistent or inconsistent
with the patient’s best interests, because the simultaneous presence of power
and investment is itself sufficient ethical contraindication for the use of moti -
vational interviewing.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45/G53
1. Yates (1984).
2. Brown and Miller (1993); Miller (1999a).
3. Fromm (1956).
4. For a more detailed discussion of these three issues in motivational interviewing, see
Miller (1994).
5. Smart (1974); Trice and Beyer (1983).
6. Johnson (1986).
Ethical Considerations 175
This page intentionally left blank 
PART III
/G4C/G65/G61/G72/G6E/G69/G6E/G67 /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C
/G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
This page intentionally left blank 
CHAPTER 13
/G52/G65/G66/G6C/G65/G63/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73 /G6F/G6E /G4C/G65/G61/G72/G6E/G69/G6E/G67
There is no such thing as teaching; there is only learning.
—M ONTY ROBERTS
How do people learn the interpersonal style of motivational interviewing?
What makes a counselor more effective in enhancing people’s motivation for
change? Are skillful motivational interviewers born or made? What experi-
ences are most helpful in learning motivational interviewing?
These are questions that both fascinate and concern us. Over the years, as
interest in motivational interviewing has grown, the focus of our own time
and effort has shifted—first from treating clients to teaching health profes -
sionals and conducting research about the method, and then to training train-
ers and studying how best to help people learn motivational interviewing.
In this chapter we offer some reflections on the process of learning moti -
vational interviewing, in hopes that these will be useful to readers who want
to strengthen their own counseling skills in this area. In the first edition, this
chapter presented a series of exercises for teaching motivational interviewing.
This time we have shifted our focus from teaching to learning, believing that
fundamentally they are different terms for the same process. In some lan -
guages, in fact, “to teach” and “to learn” are the same verb. We realize in ret-
rospect that the life of Carl Rogers reflects a similar transition, from a focus
on technique and training to an exploration of the phenomenological pro -
cesses of learning and change.
To begin, we point out that neither of us learned motivational interview -
ing through traditional training. There were no books, no training videotapes,
179
no workshops or courses or supervisors to show us how to do it. No one, in
fact, was doing it, at least not formally (if, indeed, one ever does “formal”
motivational interviewing). Within our chosen specialty field, addictive behav-
iors, treatment was by and large rather confrontational. The doctor or coun -
selor was the acknowledged expert, whose task it was to educate, persuade,
cajole, confront, or coerce clients into giving up their favorite habits. There
was much emphasis on conditioning, medicating, punishing, training, and hu-
miliating clients into compliance with a program’s goals. There had been few
studies of client-centered counseling, an approach largely dismissed as ineffec-
tive in treating addictions.
Our clients were our teachers, and our students were our trainers. Bliss -
fully ignorant of then-prevalent specialist methods for treating addictions, we
started out talking with people who had addiction problems much as we
would with any other client. We asked them open questions, curious to learn
how their experience had led them into such seemingly self-destructive pat -
terns. We were interested in what they wanted in life, what they valued, what
was important and less important to them. We listened a lot, and found the
process stimulating, enjoyable, fascinating, often moving. We perceived that
these were interesting and resourceful people who had chosen one path but
could also choose others. We were puzzled, then, how they had come to make
the choices they had made, how they understood their current situation, and
where they saw their lives going. Over time, our clients taught us how to help
them and others like them.
Now we receive regular requests to come teach others how to do motiva-
tional interviewing, so many that we could not begin to respond, and so we
started in 1993 to train trainers. We much enjoy training others, but there has
always been something disquieting about the process. Eventually we realized
what was bothering us: a traditional training format is analogous to the very
same expert model that we seek to avoid in our counseling. An expert pro -
vides the answers to relatively passive recipients, often without even under -
standing the questions that brought people to training in the first place. That
is why Part III of this book now emphasizes learning instead of teaching.
/G43/G4C/G49/G45/G4E/G54/G53 /G41/G53 /G54/G45/G41/G43/G48/G45/G52/G53
A first point, then, is that the very same teachers from whom we learned moti-
vational interviewing are also available to you. One of the reasons it is possi -
ble to keep on learning and improving one’s skills in motivational interview -
ing is that immediate expert feedback is continuously available. It is available
from those you serve.
Accurate feedback is what is needed to acquire and increase any kind of
skill. Accuracy in archery is continually shaped by seeing how close arrows fall
to the target. It is difficult to learn to play golf in the dark. The reason answers
are in the back of math exercise workbooks is so that in practicing one can have
immediate corrective feedback about the accuracy of problem solving.
180 LEARNING MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
The same information is available to you in learning motivational inter -
viewing. Once you learn what to watch for in your clients, you have an excel-
lent source of immediate corrective feedback. The reason for this is that what
people say during motivational interviewing is a reasonably good predictor of
behavior change. The goal is to reinforce change talk and decrease resistance,
both of which involve increased commitment to change. The more this hap -
pens—the more the client’s level of commitment language increases during an
interview—the greater the chances that behavior change will occur. Change
talk is a beacon toward which to steer. Resistance is a signal that you may be
veering off course a bit.
We first noticed this in regard to learning reflective listening, the founda -
tional skill upon which motivational interviewing develops. When the coun -
selor offers an effective reflective listening statement, the person keeps talking,
even when the counselor’s guess about meaning was wrong. When the coun -
selor instead offers a roadblock response, the person stops, or backs up, or
heads off in a different direction. The person’s response thus provides immedi-
ate feedback about one’s listening skills.
Furthermore, client responses also give immediate information about the
accuracy of reflection. First of all, each reflection tends to be answered with a
direct or implicit “Yes” or “No” from the person. That is, the person tells you
whether or not you got it right. There is no penalty for missing here. If it was a
good but not accurate reflection, the person keeps talking and corrects the bits
you missed. Once you realize that clients are your teachers, and you attend to
their responses as skill-relevant feedback, every person offers an opportunity
to further shape and refine your reflective listening skills.
The same is true of motivational interviewing more generally. Once you
learn to differentiate the signals of change talk and resistance statements from
the background of client speech, you have the cues you need both to work
more effectively with each person and to learn from each person (see Chapter
5). Regardless of the level of readiness at which a person begins a session, you
know you’re on the right track when your manner enhances client commit -
ment language (increased change talk and decreased resistance). The ultimate
criterion, of course, is whether client behavior changes, but clinicians seldom
get reliable feedback of long-term behavior change. Furthermore, such feed -
back is too delayed and nonspecific to be very useful in shaping more effective
practice. Because it is linked to behavioral outcomes, the minute-to-minute
immediate feedback of client responses during sessions is a more useful guide,
and it is continually available at no additional cost.
/G55/G53/G49/G4E/G47 /G59/G4F/G55/G52 /G44/G49/G53/G53/G4F/G4E/G41/G4E/G43/G45 /G44/G45/G54/G45/G43/G54/G4F/G52
In practicing motivational interviewing, it is helpful to pay attention not only
to your client’s reactions but also to your own. The consonance–dissonance
dimension is palpable. As the counseling process begins to slide into disso -
nance, both client and counselor can sense it. It may not be consciously regis -
Reflections on Learning 181
tered as dissonance in the relationship, but there is an inner experience you
can learn to use as a marker. For some counselors it is an “uh oh” thought.
For others it is more a physical or emotional sensation. Attend to your own
internal responses to dissonance and learn to notice them as markers.
A further step in self-consciousness is to become aware of how you react,
in overt behavior, when you sense dissonance. Some practitioners abruptly
change the subject, steering away from conflictual material. We find this to be
particularly true with clinicians who work in settings (such as managed health
care) where time for consultation is short and needs to be task-focused. In
such settings, dissonance can signal a potential time-consuming interaction,
from which busy practitioners may simply veer away. There are, of course,
other reasons for conflict avoidance, as well.
Other counselors respond differently. American addiction counselors, for
example, used to be trained to regard the signals of dissonance as manifesta -
tions of robust client defense mechanisms that were pathognomonic of the dis-
ease of addiction. The response advocated in many training programs was ag-
gressive confrontation to “break down the client’s defenses” and “overcome
denial.” For counselors with this mental set, client resistance behavior is likely
to elicit offensive tactics that are intended to counteract denial. From the per-
spective offered in this volume, of course, this is precisely backward: the coun-
selor is strongly defending the “good” side of the client’s ambivalence, which
elicits his or her further resistance behavior and decreases the likelihood of
change.
Whatever your reflexive response to dissonance, it is wise to monitor
your dissonance detector and consciously choose how you respond. Chapter 9
offers a menu of responses that are designed to diminish dissonance and client
resistance.
/G4F/G54/G48/G45/G52 /G41/G49/G44/G53 /G54/G4F /G4C/G45/G41/G52/G4E/G49/G4E/G47
Several other sources of practice feedback have been helpful to us in learning
and refining our motivational interviewing skills. There is really no substitute
for listening to audiotapes or viewing videotapes of practice. It is much easier
to perceive what is happening on tape (be it one’s own or another’s session)
than in the midst of doing motivational interviewing. It is also possible, with
proper consent, to review tapes with colleagues and discuss the dynamics ob -
served. This further affords the opportunity, unavailable in real time, to stop
the tape, rewind, and review what has happened.
It can also be quite instructive to ask clients for their own perspectives on
what is happening. One recent learning experience came from smokers who
volunteered to help in developing new ideas to be used in training doctors.
1
They were told that the goal was not to give them counseling but to experi -
ment with different ways of talking to them and to learn how they responded.
They were interviewed using a one-way mirror and a video camera. The prac-
182 LEARNING MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
titioners swapped places whenever necessary, trying out new and old ideas,
and then discussing with the smokers afterward what they found useful and
why. Our learning took place on two levels. We discovered from the smokers
how to ask simple questions that elicited change statements in brief consulta -
tions. At a deeper level, we advanced our understanding of the consultation
process as a direct result of these encounters. We were using a simple readi -
ness ruler on paper, and we wondered why so many were placing themselves
on the central “unsure” part of the line. To find out, we asked them: “Why
here (pointing to the center of the line) and not there (the ‘not ready’ end of
the line)?” Besides finding that this question elicited change talk, we were led
to the twin concepts of importance and confidence as critical ingredients of
readiness for change. These learning experiences subsequently formed the
heart of a text on behavior change counseling.
2
We have also developed various systems for coding motivational inter -
viewing session tapes, allowing for an even finer-grained analysis. A group of
motivational interviewing colleagues, for example, developed a detailed cod -
ing system to study the extent to which counselors acquire motivational inter-
viewing skillfulness over the course of training. The system involves three sep-
arate analyses.3 The first is a set of global practice ratings of counselor style,
client response, and the quality of interaction. The second and most demand-
ing analysis requires the classification of each counselor response (e.g., open
question, closed question, reflection, advice, giving information) and client ut-
terance (e.g., change talk, resistance) using a system of mutually exclusive
behavior categories. The third pass simply records client and counselor talk
time and provides the percentage of talk time occupied by each. We had antic-
ipated that the coding of tapes with this Motivational Interviewing Skill Code
(MISC) system would be rather tedious, but, in fact, highly experienced moti-
vational interviewing clinicians and less experienced coders alike found it to
be quite engaging and fascinating. It provides an inside analysis of the dynam-
ics of motivational interviewing in a way that simply listening to sessions can-
not.
We coded sessions not only for trainees before and after a training work-
shop but also for senior clinicians who were highly experienced in motiva -
tional interviewing. This gave us an idea of the amount of change to expect
from a workshop alone (an issue discussed in Chapter 14), as well as some
ideal norms to shoot for in training, based on model sessions. Without going
into the details of coding, we arrived at the following general practice guide -
lines:
• Talk less than your client does.
• Offer two to three reflections for every question that you ask.
• Ask twice as many open questions as closed questions.
• When you listen empathically, more than half of the reflections you of-
fer should be deeper, more complex reflections (paraphrase) rather
than simpler repetition or rephrasing of what the client offered.
Reflections on Learning 183
/G53/G55/G4D/G4D/G41/G52/G59
One substantial advantage in learning motivational interviewing is the extent
to which clients provide ongoing and immediate corrective feedback once the
essential perspectives and basic skills have been established. After you know
what to look for from clients, they become your teachers. Correctly applied
methods for eliciting change talk will elicit change talk. Missteps elicit and in-
crease resistance. Well-done reflective listening results in the person continu -
ing to explore openly; roadblocks divert the process of self-exploration. Most
reflective listening statements lead to immediate feedback on the correctness
of the reflection along with further elaboration, which over time further hones
the accuracy of your reflections. A well-timed transition into Phase 2 leads to
a commitment to change; a premature press for commitment yields back-ped -
aling.
The overall point is to pay attention to your clients, with eyes and ears
open to the fact that what they say (and how they say it) is not simply arising
from within them but is in large measure a dynamic response to your own
counseling behavior. Our own clients have been our guides, and it is from
them that we learned motivational interviewing. There are no better teachers.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45/G53
1. Rollnick, Butler, and Stott (1997).
2. Rollnick, Mason, and Butler (1999).
3. Miller and Mount (2001).
184 LEARNING MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
CHAPTER 14
/G46._/G61/G63/G69/G6C/G69/G74/G61/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G4C/G65/G61/G72/G6E/G69/G6E/G67
Learning is nothing but discovery that something is possible. To
teach means to show a person that something is possible.
—F RITZ PERLS, Gestalt Therapy Verbatim
To facilitate in others the kind of quality learning experiences that are de-
scribed in Chapter 13 is the subject of this chapter. The scenario is a familiar
one to both recipients and facilitators of training: a group of expectant people
gather, and the learning begins! Yet afterward, in everyday practice, is any -
thing done differently? Often, perhaps, very little really changes.
At other times, though, one hears a report from a counselor like this:
“Things seem different in my day to day work. I do less talking, and it’s really
satisfying to see reflective listening working. The whole business seems quieter
and less hurried, yet we make good progress, and the client talks away about
changes and challenges. This is definitely improving my practice.”
This chapter is for those who want to facilitate the learning of motiva -
tional interviewing by others. It centers on the following question: How do
people learn motivational interviewing when they are given a structured op -
portunity to do so? If we learned it by gradual transformation, as we suspect
most others do as well, how can this learning be harnessed and encouraged in
others? This chapter does not identify recommended content of a course,
workshop, or program but addresses the broader issues and principles that
have a critical effect on how learning experiences can be structured. A first
step is to view this not as something acquired at an event like a workshop but
as an ongoing process, in which counselors might struggle over a period of
185
months or years, using different learning opportunities to reflect about, refor -
mulate, and refine their clinical practice.
Motivational interviewing involves the integration of a complex set of
clinical skills and poses special challenges for facilitators and supervisors. It is
not an approach that can be acquired merely by reading, listening to lectures,
or watching demonstration videotapes—or, indeed, by attending a single
workshop. For novices, it requires learning a set of integrated therapeutic
skills and the development of judgment about when and how to use them. For
experienced clinicians, it may also involve unlearning familiar styles and hab -
its in dealing with clients.
/G53/G4F/G4D/G45 /G47/G55/G49/G44/G49/G4E/G47 /G50/G52/G49/G4E/G43/G49/G50/G4C/G45/G53
Teaching motivational interviewing is like doing it. When facilitation is going
well, it often has to do with the facilitator’s attitude and spirit—a respect for
and curiosity about the learning needs and perspectives of others. Together,
facilitator and learners become engaged in a process that has a collaborative,
exploratory feeling.
The principles outlined in this chapter are merely some that we have
learned in the course of everyday practice in helping others learn motivational
interviewing. If things are not going quite right in facilitation, it is tempting to
blame the learners for being resistant or to search for some teaching technique
to fix the problem, but we have learned instead to check on whether we might
be violating the principles of facilitation that we now describe.
/G50/G72/G61/G63/G74/G69/G63/G65 /G57/G68/G61/G74 /G59/G6F/G75 /G50/G72/G65/G61/G63/G68
Certainly, it is common sense that to facilitate the learning of motivational in-
terviewing in others, you ought to have a high level of skillfulness in the style
yourself. This means having had substantial experience in applying motiva -
tional interviewing with a range of clients, preferably with supervision and
feedback. The facilitator should be ready, willing, and able, when asked, to sit
down and skillfully show how it’s done.
The very same qualities that make an effective motivational counselor are
also helpful in facilitating learning in others. This requires respect for individ -
ual differences, tolerance for disagreement and ambivalence, patience with
gradual approximations, and a genuine caring for and interest in the people
you serve. The facilitator communicates enthusiasm and commitment in
teaching this approach but takes no offense at those who disagree and prefer
other approaches. Motivational interviewing is not for everyone, and some
counselors find that it does not fit their own style and skills. Good facilitation,
like good counseling, respects personal choice, with the attitude of “Take
what you want and leave the rest.” The skills and qualities of motivational in-
terviewing can be demonstrated by the very manner in which you deal with
186 LEARNING MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
your trainees. There is a certain integrity to showing, in your own training
manner, the very style you wish to impart.
/G4C/G69/G73/G74/G65/G6E /G74/G6F /G74/G68/G65 /G4C/G65/G61/G72/G6E/G65/G72/G73
Learning to listen is a challenge on both sides of the educational process. It is
important to listen to the experiences, concerns, and expectations of those you
are serving—a guideline that can be hard to follow when you have your work -
shop all planned out. It can mean, for example, abandoning a carefully
worked-out plan midway through a training event, taking on board some con-
structive criticism and allowing people to have quite a big say about how they
would like to proceed.
One good approach that can prevent some painful experiences is for the
facilitator to do some listening in advance about the specific needs, hopes, and
desires of those who are to learn. Groups of learners, like clients, come in
many varieties. We have had the pleasure of working with groups who have
been studying, practicing, and discussing motivational interviewing and ea -
gerly await a further opportunity to learn. We have also walked into work-
shops where the participants had been told, “You’re going to learn motiva-
tional interviewing and do it whether you like it or not.” These are quite
different starting points. Often there are particular examples and situations
that are common to the learners’ workplace, and these should be incorporated
into the learning process in order to enhance its relevance.
/G42/G65/G77/G61/G72/G65 /G74/G68/G65 /G45/G78/G70/G65/G72/G74 /G54/G72/G61/G70
Clinicians who wish to “get a feel” for a new topic often attend a one-session
or one-day workshop and listen across a crowded room to an expert’s presen-
tation of the subject. Few would regard this as an exercise in acquisition of
skills. Many nevertheless leave satisfied. They return to their working lives,
perhaps thinking “I already do that.” If a situation jogs their memory they
might try out a new response, or at least think a little differently about some
of the surrounding issues. Motivational interviewing, cognitive-behavioral
therapy and countless other therapeutic methods have been introduced to peo-
ple in this way. They learn about the method, not how to do it.
Although there can be value in an expert-driven, top-down presentation
of key concepts and skills, it is difficult to miss the parallel between exhorting
motivation in clients and advising clinicians to consider changes to their every-
day routines. Tell them, as the expert, that they need to change and why, and
how they should go about it, and the result is reasonably predictable: disen -
gagement, resistance, and lack of enduring change in practice. The art of facil-
itating learning is to find the right balance between inviting new approaches
to familiar problems and drawing personally relevant solutions from trainees.
Being told what to do by an expert is no more persuasive and inviting to a cli-
nician than it is to a client.
Facilitating Learning 187
/G41/G76/G6F/G69/G64 /G74/G68/G65 /G54/G65/G63/G68/G6E/G69/G63/G61/G6C /G54/G77/G69/G74/G63/G68
There is no greater comfort to an expert than delivering technical expertise.
Make it neat, clean, logical, straightforward, step-by-step. The learning of moti-
vational interviewing, however, is not just a technical matter. Counselors need
not only to feelable to change and develop their competency in a new approach
but also feel willing and ready to do so—they must feel that it is important and
helpful to them and that their concerns about its relevance or realism are under-
stood. Complex ethical, professional, cultural, and clinical issues often arise
when learning about motivational interviewing. Responding constructively to
such broader concerns can be just as important as focusing on more technical
matters. Alternatively, learners will become frustrated if the experience bogs
down into contemplation and the method itself is not conveyed. A training pro-
gram is usually best balanced by a healthy mixture of the two.
/G47/G65/G74 /G43/G6C/G6F/G73/G65 /G74/G6F /G74/G68/G65 /G4C/G65/G61/G72/G6E/G65/G72/G73/G92 /G45/G76/G65/G72/G79/G64/G61/G79 /G45/G78/G70/G65/G72/G69/G65/G6E/G63/G65/G73
The goal of facilitation is to get close to the heart of the counselors’ everyday
experience, to have an effect on their repetitive routines and more occasional
triumphs and disasters. In this respect, facilitating learning in counselors can
be easier than pursuing the same goal with clients. A facilitator can come right
alongside and discuss experiences soon after they occur. A window can be
opened into the counselor’s everyday world, through audiotapes or video-
tapes. One can structure periods of quiet reflection, observe learners in real-
life or simulated encounters, offer suggestions (with permission, of course),
encourage rehearsal, and so on. In short, one can enter into the counselor’s
context. To ignore this tremendous advantage is a bit like teaching people to
play tennis or golf while sitting in a classroom. To use it constructively re -
quires a keen eye for learning opportunities.
/G41/G64/G61/G70/G74 /G74/G6F /G49/G6E/G64/G69/G76/G69/G64/G75/G61/G6C /G4C/G65/G61/G72/G6E/G69/G6E/G67 /G50/G72/G65/G66/G65/G72/G65/G6E/G63/G65/G73
People have varied preferences for what and how they learn at any given point
in time. This seemingly banal observation can be very difficult to respect when
working with a group of learners. The tendency is to provide the same oppor-
tunities for all, for purely practical reasons. For example, imagine that one
person is very ready to discuss the value of listening, while another would like
supervised practice, a third wants to watch you do it, and a fourth is con -
vinced she already knows all this. To ignore these differing aspirations would
be unfortunate, yet one often seems obliged to do just this in training.
It is possible, however, particularly if one is working with a cofacilitator,
to provide more variety for participants. Those who already feel proficient can
be asked to serve as models or coaches in small-group practice. Those who
want to observe can be engaged in this role within practice groups. In one cor-
ner of the room, a cotrainer may offer a demonstration, while others who pre-
188 LEARNING MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
fer to practice do so. We once improvised a number of options for a group of
primary care professionals with diverse learning needs, so that they effectively
moved in sequence through a series of learning “stations.” At one point in
time, while two of them were observing each others’ videos, a third was dis -
cussing the impact of her interviewing style with a simulated client; two others
were going through new approaches with one of the facilitators, another was
in supervision with the second facilitator, and one decided that he needed
some time out from learning! It is not always possible to be so flexible with
the range of learning opportunities provided, but to bear this in mind as a
principle of good practice is certainly worthwhile.
/G4B/G65/G65/G70 /G49/G74 /G53/G69/G6D/G70/G6C/G65
Our colleague Steve Berg-Smith has worked as a facilitator for many years,
and was once asked, “What is the most useful thing you have learned?” His
answer was a single word: “Simplicity.” It can be useful to consider the dis -
tinction between foreground and background when presenting people with
new material. If the initial (foreground) presentation is kept simple, people
can then look into the more complex background material at a pace, and to a
level of detail, that suits their needs.
Like others who facilitate the learning of this approach, we constantly
search for ways to convey the fundamental spirit, principles, and skills of mo-
tivational interviewing in simple language that is suited to the learners’ con-
text. In working with physicians we seldom are given sufficient time to teach
skillful reflective listening, but we find that we can often convey the essence by
asking them to offer “simple summaries” of what their patients say to them in
a particular context. Learner-appropriate analogies such as “dancing versus
wrestling” may quickly convey an aspect of the spirit of this approach. The
acronym OARS (Chapter 6) can be a helpful mnemonic for the four micro -
skills that form the client-centered foundation of motivational interviewing.
Again, there is a gentle balance between creative simplicity and oversimplifica-
tion.
/G53/G4F/G4D/G45 /G50/G52/G41/G43/G54/G49/G43/G41/G4C /G41/G53/G50/G45/G43/G54/G53 /G4F/G46._ /G46._/G41/G43/G49/G4C/G49/G54/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E
To keep these principles in mind might seem quite difficult, there being so
much to think about in a short space of time. One’s first inclination is often to
get concrete! To serve this learning need, we reflect here on some practicalities
of facilitation.
/G57/G68/G61/G74 /G54/G6F/G70/G69/G63/G73 /G53/G68/G6F/G75/G6C/G64 /G42/G65 /G43/G6F/G76/G65/G72/G65/G64/G3F
The first practical issue is one of the most common raised by facilitators, and
also one that we do not answer in this book: What should I include in my
Facilitating Learning 189
training? The answer is almost entirely context-dependent. This context in -
cludes the experience of the facilitator, the setting in which the learners work,
their experiences and aspirations, their clients’ problems, the time available,
and so on. Trainers have developed a wealth of resources, some of which can
be found on the www.motivationalinterview.org website and in the first edi -
tion of this book. Creative facilitation involves understanding the needs of the
learners and creating learning opportunities to meet them.
In this sense, thinking about content is not always a fruitful starting
point. Other questions beckon, which arise from the context of the recipients:
What do they want? What experiences have they had that make motivational
interviewing seem important or unimportant? How do they currently cope
with these challenges? Often, once such questions are answered, the topics to
be covered fall into place.
/G57/G68/G61/G74 /G61/G62/G6F/G75/G74 /G4C/G69/G73/G74/G65/G6E/G69/G6E/G67 /G53/G6B/G69/G6C/G6C/G73/G3F
Empathic listening is a fundamental foundational skill without which motiva-
tional interviewing cannot be practiced. The essential spirit of this approach
also involves an interest in and a willingness to listen to a person’s inner
world. It is perhaps the facilitator’s most important task, therefore, to foster
an interest in this topic, along with the willingness and patience to develop
real skillfulness in reflective listening.
One mistake that we have learned not to make is to assume that learn-
ers—including professional psychologists, counselors, pastors, social workers,
and such—are already proficient in reflective listening. Ask a group of these
folks if they are good listeners, and they will tell you that they are, that they
already know how to do client-centered reflection. But sit them down and ask
them to show you good listening, and three or four times out of five (depend -
ing on the group) you’re likely to see mostly roadblocks, mixed with a few
low-level reflections. Skillful reflective listening is a difficult skill to master,
and far more people believe they have it than actually do. As with chess,
empathic skillfulness continues to develop and mature throughout a lifetime
of practice. The message: Don’tbypass listening skills unless you know for a
fact that your learners are already proficient at this level.
Here, then, is a common challenge for facilitators. Without reflective lis -
tening skills, your learners can go no further with motivational interviewing.
It is possible, of course, to teach specific techniques or tools (such as the readi-
ness ruler) through which some of the nature of this approach may be mani -
fested without taking the time to develop clinical skillfulness. If what you are
trying to do is teach the method of motivational interviewing, however, good
reflective listening is fundamental. Yet it is common to encounter learners
who doubt the value of spending time on listening, regarding it to be “just ba-
sic counseling skills that I already know how to use.” A confrontational trap
is set to spring, in which your opening line is: “No, you really don’t know
how to do this, and you need to learn it.”
190 LEARNING MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
Fortunately, a facilitator of motivational interviewing is likely to have a
good understanding of the dynamics of resistance, as well as facility in re -
solving it. Acknowledge that learners will already have established varying
levels of proficiency in this skill. Reflect concerns. Ask participants to de -
scribe, with examples, how reflection works effectively for them, or why
they enjoy it, and discuss how it is a fundamental starting point for ad -
vanced skills in motivational interviewing. Sometimes we construct an imag -
inary ruler on the floor and have people physically line themselves up at
various points along the scale to express their perceived level of proficiency
in reflective listening or their level of interest in improving their skillfulness
in this area; then we briefly interview people at various points on the scale.
These are simply examples to illustrate that the same methods used to re -
spond to resistance in clients can be applied creatively in the process of fa -
cilitating the learning of this approach.
/G48/G6F/G77 /G49/G6D/G70/G6F/G72/G74/G61/G6E/G74 /G41/G72/G65 /G50/G72/G61/G63/G74/G69/G63/G65/G2C /G46._/G65/G65/G64/G62/G61/G63/G6B/G2C /G61/G6E/G64 /G52/G6F/G6C/G65 /G50/G6C/G61/G79/G3F
A key in acquiring the necessary skills for motivational interviewing (and, in-
deed, for almost any communication or other complex skill) is practice with
feedback. Role play is often considered to be the central device for allowing
people to practice, receive feedback, and so on. Facilitators have designed a
wide range of creative exercises to ensure that this is a stimulating experience
for people. Standardized patient–actors are now widely used in teaching com-
munication skills in health care training institutions.
But the reception of role play by learners and healthcare practitioners
does not always match the enthusiasm among trainers. Indeed, the reaction
can border on the contemptuous and may be accompanied by stories of bad
experiences (which are often the outcome of poorly designed exercises). Dis -
comfort and resistance may be encountered around the “contrived” or “artifi-
cial” nature of practice exercises. Ask learners in groups if they want to prac -
tice in role play, and the response will often be unenthusiastic; they prefer the
passive roles of listening and watching demonstrations. If you accede to this
passivity, however, you have an audience instead of a learning experience.
As many facilitators have discovered, it is possible to win over even hard-
ened skeptics with enjoyable and interesting role-play scenarios. If various
roles are available within practice exercises (e.g., speaker or client, listener,
observer, coder), participants can sort themselves into more comfortable roles.
Giving permission or even instruction to experiment with mistakes can ease
the pressure. Offering a demonstration first can also facilitate subsequent
practice.
/G41/G62/G73/G74/G72/G61/G63/G74 /G50/G72/G6F/G63/G65/G73/G73/G65/G73 /G61/G6E/G64 /G45/G76/G65/G72/G79/G64/G61/G79 /G50/G72/G61/G63/G74/G69/G63/G65
Continuing professional education is sometimes thought of as a kind of time-
out from everyday practice—time to step back a bit and reflect on what one is
Facilitating Learning 191
doing and, perhaps, build a more flexible repertoire of clinical skills. Training
is often provided on the principles and processes of a new approach in the ab-
stract, decontextualized from the everyday settings in which they are to be ap-
plied. For example, a facilitator might choose to emphasize generic applica -
tion of certain technical skills, such as particular kinds of reflective listening
statements. Learners’ everyday clinical experience is thus put to one side, leav-
ing integration to the talent of the individual.
A focus on the abstract is quite common in communication training. 1 In
undergraduate and initial graduate training this is quite understandable, as
trainees are often learning skills before entering the world of everyday prac -
tice. Often in teaching motivational interviewing, however, we are working
not with relative beginners but with seasoned practitioners. Does it still make
sense, with experienced clinicians, to set aside everyday experiences to focus
on more general communication principles and techniques?
What if everyday practice were in the foreground rather than the back -
ground? In this case, primary focus would be on the practical problems faced
in a clinical setting, and aspects of a new approach (such as motivational in -
terviewing) would be called forth only as they apply to that setting. A facilita-
tor who places everyday practice in the foreground might draw on real cases,
design exercises to address common challenges in daily practice, make use of
recordings or transcriptions of actual interactions, invite real clients to help
with training, and so on.
Effective facilitation often involves finding a healthy balance between
these two approaches. If the learners’ needs and practice settings are diverse, it
can be more challenging to tailor training to everyday experience. When
working with the staff of a particular program, it may be preferable to place
everyday practice in the foreground. We have had good experience in offering
a “contextualized” approach to on-site training of clinicians, focusing on the
particular challenges of the setting. Communication skills and motivational
interviewing techniques are kept in the background and are brought forward
only when they may help address a specific problem. We have found that ex -
perienced practitioners often prefer this approach to a decontextualized off-
site communication skills seminar.
/G43/G52/G45/G41/G54/G49/G4E/G47 /G4C/G45/G41/G52/G4E/G49/G4E/G47 /G4F/G50/G50/G4F/G52/G54/G55/G4E/G49/G54/G49/G45/G53
Perhaps it is becoming clear why we have not prescribed particular programs,
exercises, or structures for training. The learning of motivational interviewing
is a process, not a curriculum. The content of a program of learning is best de-
signed to match the personal and professional context of the learners. Once
one has an idea of this context, a suitable selection of learning opportunities
can be assembled from a menu of options that include individual and group
supervision, distance and self-guided learning, and more formally constructed
seminars, workshops, and tutorials.
192 LEARNING MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
/G55/G73/G65/G73 /G61/G6E/G64 /G4C/G69/G6D/G69/G74/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73 /G6F/G66 /G57/G6F/G72/G6B/G73/G68/G6F/G70/G73
Although most continuing professional education is delivered via training
workshops, and entire training organizations rely on this format, our experi -
ence and research cause us to question whether this is in fact the best ap -
proach to learning. To be sure, there are times when it is quite beneficial for
people to remove themselves from the stresses of the everyday workplace and
attend an off-site workshop. It can be a time to reflect, meet colleagues, ob -
serve others, and discuss clinical issues, free from daily duties and distractions.
Examining clinical challenges and practicing skills in a set-apart context has
its clear uses. Who, after all, first learned to drive in busy traffic? With skill,
workshop scenarios can be constructed that are very close to everyday prac -
tice.
The disadvantages of this format are worth considering as well, not in or-
der to discard workshops but to encourage the pursuit and development of
additional learning opportunities. The issue of detachment from everyday ex -
periences has already been mentioned. The one-time nature of workshops
does not match well what is known about learning. One of the oldest ques-
tions addressed in the psychology of learning is the value of massed practice
(intensively, all at one time) versus spaced practice (spread out over time).
Across a wide range of content, spaced practice is usually much more effective
in producing behavior change that is maintained, whereas material learned by
massed practice (as in cramming for a final examination) is often quickly for-
gotten. Public self-consciousness is another issue in workshop settings. How
many people will happily risk new adventure in a simulated encounter in the
presence of colleagues and superiors? Finally, in workshops with diverse par-
ticipants, it can be difficult to find topics or learning exercises that suit every-
one because of variations in skill level, learning style, context, and the particu-
lar issues that brought them to training.
/G54/G6F/G77/G61/G72/G64 /G54/G61/G69/G6C/G6F/G72/G65/G64 /G61/G6E/G64 /G4F/G6E/G2D/G53/G69/G74/G65 /G4C/G65/G61/G72/G6E/G69/G6E/G67 /G4F/G70/G70/G6F/G72/G74/G75/G6E/G69/G74/G69/G65/G73
If gardeners, tennis coaches, and master mechanics teach people mostly in real
life settings, under what circumstances should a counselor not be trained in a
similar manner? The answer to this question is unclear, calling for both cre -
ativity and humility in how we encourage learning. Our hunch is that close -
ness to everyday context might have considerable value.
/G53/G69/G6D/G75/G6C/G61/G74/G65/G64 /G43/G6C/G69/G65/G6E/G74/G73
It is standard practice in many healthcare settings to use simulated patients in
some form or another. They are ideally suited to facilitating skill acquisition
in motivational interviewing. Actors can present the same case scenario to
each member of a group, thus providing a common experience to review, or
they can adjust the presentation of a case to suit the needs of an individual. In
Facilitating Learning 193
on-site training, a measure of privacy can be provided by allowing each partic-
ipant to interact with an actor alone, in rotation. Participants can be asked to
complete some reaction notes immediately after an encounter, to be reviewed
with a colleague or in a larger group. Actors can also be trained to provide
specific feedback about motivational interviewing. Furthermore, trained ac -
tors lend a degree of realism to practice exercises and avoid the disadvantages
of clinicians’ role playing with their own colleagues or superiors during train-
ing. Interviews with simulated patients can be audiotaped or videotaped for
later review by the learner, with or without observation by others.
The use of simulated patient-actors offers an assessment of competence to
use motivational interviewing skills. If a learner cannot demonstrate motiva -
tional interviewing skills when asked to do so while knowingly interacting
with a simulated patient, it is highly unlikely that such skills will be manifest
in daily work with actual clients. The ability to demonstrate competent skills
on demand, however, does not guarantee the effective use of those skills in ev-
eryday practice.
/G54/G61/G70/G65/G73 /G61/G6E/G64 /G54/G72/G61/G6E/G73/G63/G72/G69/G70/G74/G73
If the behavior to be influenced by training is a learner’s performance under
normal practice conditions, then what better source of information could
there be than samples of actual practice dialogue? In some settings (such as su-
pervision of newer therapists or in clinical trials), all sessions are recorded for
training or quality-control purposes, with the practitioner not knowing which
tapes will be reviewed. In other settings, only certain interactions or sessions
are recorded. When the learner self-selects which sessions to tape or present,
of course, there may be a bias toward “best behavior.” Still others have as-
sessed real-life practice by having simulated patients present unannounced,
with feedback provided afterward to the practitioner.
Tapes of actual practice (or transcripts of them) can provide a rich re -
source for learning when working with a group, whether culled from real or
simulated clients. Learners can be asked to bring these along for use in any
number of ways: private observation and reflection, discussion with a col -
league, a microanalysis of listening skills, and so on. On-site training can be
centered around practice tapes. For example, if all participants see the same
standardized client a day or two before a seminar, they can be asked to review
their own tape or transcript in private immediately before meeting so that they
can discuss and compare their experiences. This provides a common recent ex-
perience for all participants to examine.
An interesting question is whether the facilitator should provide com -
ments on tapes or transcripts, which is quite a temptation in the face of such
excellent raw data. We have found it usually best to give learners time to ab -
sorb, reflect on, and even write down what they liked and what they would
change about the encounter before anyone else (like a trainer or supervisor)
comments on it. Being given “expert” comments can actually get in the way of
194 LEARNING MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
a much more powerful experience: coming face-to-face, in private, with one’s
own consulting behavior. We have seen counselors’ engagement with the sub-
ject, their curiosity, and their motivation to change enhanced considerably by
this kind of private encounter with their own work. We also find that learners
observing their own work frequently come up with many of the same points
we would have made had we provided the commentary.
If it is feasible to obtain practice tapes or transcripts in advance of train -
ing, this is also an excellent way to understand, as a starting point, the variety
of skills currently being used by counselors. People are often happy for the fa-
cilitator to analyze transcripts of participants and then discuss with the group
the skills observed. Examples of particularly skillful dialogue from colleagues
can be a rich source for learning.
/G50/G65/G65/G72 /G43/G6F/G6E/G73/G75/G6C/G74/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E
A shortcoming of engaging an outside trainer is that the trainer is outside. The
process of learning motivational interviewing does not occur suddenly as the
result of a training event but, rather, over time with practice, feedback, and
encouragement. This is one reason that we have encouraged agencies not to
send just one clinician for training, but to send at least two people from the
same setting or to have a trainer come and work on-site with several staff.
Those who are seeking to learn this approach can then work together in vari-
ous peer consultation or supervision formats, to learn from and encourage
each other by discussing cases, reviewing tapes, and practicing skills. An out-
side trainer can be involved in this process from time to time, perhaps through
further on-site consultation or by reviewing and commenting on practice sam-
ples. Most of the learning, however, happens within the context of learners
working together in peer consultation.
/G45/G56/G41/G4C/G55/G41/G54/G49/G4E/G47 /G54/G52/G41/G49/G4E/G49/G4E/G47
If we seem in this chapter to have discussed training in a somewhat broad,
open-ended manner, it is because the research base for training is much thin -
ner than for how to work with clients. Indeed, we believe that far too little at-
tention has been paid to the processes by which practitioners develop profi -
ciency in counseling and psychotherapy more generally. We would not expect
to produce long-term change our clients’ behavior by having them attend a
one-day didactic. Yet that is the method most often relied on to strengthen
and update clinical practice.
If we are correct in our assumptions about how motivational interview -
ing works, it involves artful skills in reflective listening, attending to subtle
shifts in tension, and selectively eliciting and reinforcing certain kinds of client
speech. It follows that the skillfulness of those who deliver such counseling
would be crucial. A shortcoming pointed out in Chapter 16 is that studies to
Facilitating Learning 195
date have rarely included measures to assess and assure the quality of the mo-
tivational interviewing being tested. Clients’ outcomes can differ substantially,
depending on the skill level of the counselor to whom they were assigned.
With better methods becoming available to measure the acquisition and
quality of motivational interviewing, it is time to evaluate the effectiveness of
training with the same degree of care that is given to evaluating treatment out-
comes. The ultimate impact of this (or any) intervention approach will depend
on the ability of clinicians to learn and apply it in practice. Those who initiate
and provide resources for the training of staff should know the extent to
which their staff have acquired the desired skills, in part to know whether
(and for whom) additional training may be warranted. That, in turn, requires
of us a better understanding of what learning experiences are usually neces -
sary and sufficient to produce competent practice, and what additional experi-
ences to provide when they are not. Research on the effectiveness of training
methods would not only strengthen treatment outcome evaluation but also in-
form trainers how better to meet the needs of the learners they serve.
/G43/G55/G4C/G54/G55/G52/G45 /G43/G48/G41/G4E/G47/G45
Those who treat people with behavioral health problems know that it is often
important to understand and address not only the client but also the social en-
vironment in which he or she lives. The same is true when facilitating learning
of motivational interviewing. Consider these four successful examples:
Probation officers were frustrated that their counseling efforts to help cli-
ents lead safer and less self-destructive lives were being undermined by
the system within which they worked, which tended to generate distrust
between them and their clients. One counselor read about motivational
interviewing and decided to see whether she could develop a more con -
structive tone to her meetings with clients. She attended a 2-day practitio-
ner workshop. For the next few months, she struggled with her supervi -
sor and in everyday practice to integrate the roles of counselor and
probation officer. Nevertheless, she reported making good progress
through the use of what she called “careful listening and selected, pointed
reflective listening statements.” Her training manager took an interest in
her work and encouraged more counselors to attend training. Some of
these colleagues returned to their practice unconvinced that they could
apply this approach in their work, but a small group started a peer super-
vision group and later asked an ex-offender to attend one of their meet -
ings to discuss better ways of helping clients with changing their lifestyles.
The director of a community-based service read about motivational inter-
viewing, went to a practitioner workshop, and began training her staff
through reading material and individual supervision. This led her to at -
tend a training for trainers and to offer more intensive on-site workshops
196 LEARNING MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
for her staff. Over the next 5 years, other members of the counseling team
received training as trainers and began to work with staff from other
agencies. The culture in the service changed accordingly, from a loosely
structured and eclectic counseling service to one in which motivational
interviewing became a shared and basic counseling style, used in combi -
nation with various other approaches such as marital counseling and cog-
nitive-behavioral therapy. Collaborating and encouraging each other, the
team began to offer regular training experiences around the country and
also became a program base for research on motivational interviewing
and other treatment methods.
The staff of a specialist service for adolescents with insulin-dependent di -
abetes had become truly expert in charting the troubled waters of work -
ing with young people. Still, their patients too often did not adhere to the
demanding regimens (such as regular monitoring, diet, and injecting)
needed to manage their serious illness. Review of practice transcripts in -
dicated that the staff knew how to avoid conflict and serious trouble in
their interviews, but they felt stuck in how to make positive progress with
many of their young patients. Three staff members—a doctor, a nurse,
and a psychologist—were encouraged to learn motivational interviewing.
They conducted a small research project on how best to integrate motiva-
tional interviewing into everyday practice in their clinic, based on inter-
views with both staff and patients. They analyzed transcripts of consulta-
tions. Each new patient was designated to a “key worker,” who applied
motivational interviewing from the very first meeting onward. They
found that, over time, their patients were less estranged from the service
and that compliance rates with self-care regimens improved.
A public substance abuse treatment program faced a common problem:
many clients who presented for an intake evaluation never returned.
Some of the counseling staff had obtained on-site training in motivational
interviewing, but they found that the intake system itself made it difficult
to use this approach. Clients began lining up after 7:00
A.M. outside a re-
ception window that opened at 8:00, to sign up for a limited number of
intake interview slots for the day. The rest were told to come back the
following morning (many of whom did not). Furthermore, the standard
intake procedure required the completion of 2 hours of paperwork by at
least three different administrative and medical staff before the client was
scheduled by a secretary to return for an initial session with a counselor,
often 2 to 3 weeks later. Many potential clients left before finishing the
paperwork, and even among those who completed this phase, many
never returned for a first counseling appointment. In turn, counselors
were frustrated with the long delay in being able to see clients and with
the high no-show rate. Over a period of 6 months, the intake system was
redesigned. A more comfortable waiting room was provided, and, instead
of being required to come at one fixed time each morning, clients were of-
fered a larger number of intake appointment or walk-in times throughout
the day. The increased number of appointments was accommodated by
having counselors who had been trained in motivational interviewing
Facilitating Learning 197
provide the intake interviews. The staff considered which paperwork ab -
solutely had to be completed on the first visit, and it turned out to be
about 20 minutes’ worth, which was moved to the end rather than the be-
ginning of the interview. Thus when clients contacted the agency, the first
person they talked to was a clinical counselor who listened to them for
half an hour to understand their problems, learn about their needs, and
enhance motivation for change before completing the needed paperwork.
There was a rapid increase in the number of clients who completed in -
take, they began counseling more quickly, dropouts decreased, and the
waiting list was eliminated. The medical staff felt less harried and became
interested in receiving training in motivational interviewing.
What these four real-life examples have in common is that in each case, what
happened was something much more than skill-training for isolated staff.
Those who learned the method also saw the need for change in the system of
care delivery itself, and they took effective steps to bring about culture change,
in some cases reaching beyond their own agency.
It is all well and good for an individual counselor to learn how to express
empathy, develop discrepancy, roll with resistance, and support self-efficacy.
That counselor may be working within a system in which other people or
components take an approach that counteracts the counselor’s individual ef-
forts, however. The culture may also place practical and interpersonal con-
straints on the counselor that make it difficult even for him or her to practice
motivational interviewing with clients. In such situations, the challenge is sys-
temic: to gradually change the whole culture—office staff, counselors, manag-
ers, the physical environment, access barriers—so that clients are consistently
treated by the system with respect and understanding (autonomy), are listened
to rather than confronted (collaboration), and are encouraged and empow-
ered to use their own resources toward change (evocation).
We began our discussion of motivational interviewing by explaining and
emphasizing the underlying spirit of the method. That facilitative spirit can
characterize not only individuals who practice motivational interviewing but
also the systems within which they work. Wise therapists attend not merely to
the client sitting in the consulting room but to the client’s social environment,
which exerts such important influence in the accomplishment and mainte -
nance of change. Similarly, those who would help others learn motivational
interviewing are wise to address both the skills of the learners and the context
within which those skills are to be applied.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45
1. Rollnick, Kinnersley, and Butler (2002).
198 LEARNING MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
PART IV
/G41/G70/G70/G6C/G69/G63/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73 /G6F/G66
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
This page intentionally left blank 
CHAPTER 15
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
/G61/G6E/G64 /G74/G68/G65 /G53/G74/G61/G67/G65/G73 /G6F/G66 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65
CARLO C. DICLEMENTE and MARY MARDEN VELASQUEZ
/G54/G48/G45 /G54/G52/G41/G4E/G53/G54/G48/G45/G4F/G52/G45/G54/G49/G43/G41/G4C /G4D/G4F/G44/G45/G4C
The notion that behavior change involves a process that occurs in increments
and that involves specific and varied tasks is at the heart of the transtheore -
tical model of intentional human behavior change (TTM; DiClemente &
Prochaska, 1985, 1998; Prochaska & DiClemente, 1983, 1994). This model
offers an integrative framework for understanding the process of behavior
change whether that change involves the initiation, the modification, or the
cessation of a particular behavior. The stages of change represent a key com -
ponent of the TTM and describe a series of stages though which people pass
as they change a behavior. In this model change is viewed as a progression
from an initial precontemplation stage, where the person is not currently con-
sidering change; to contemplation, where the individual undertakes a serious
evaluation of considerations for or against change; and then to preparation,
where planning and commitment are secured. Successful accomplishment of
these initial stage tasks lead to taking action to make the specific behavioral
change; if successful, action leads to the final and fifth stage of change, main -
tenance, in which the person works to maintain and sustain long-term change
(DiClemente & Prochaska, 1998; Prochaska, DiClemente, & Norcross,
201
1992). These stages appear to be applicable to the larger process of behavior
change, whether that change occurs with or without the help of a therapist, an
intervention, or a treatment program.
Research has isolated the stages of change across a range of health risk
and health protective behaviors. Application of these stages and support for
the varied aspects of the process of change represented by these stages have
been demonstrated in many behavior changes from cessation of smoking, al -
cohol, and drugs to mammography screening, dietary modification, gambling,
exercise adoption, and condom use and pregnancy prevention (Carney &
Kivlahan, 1995; DiClemente & Hughes, 1990; DiClemente & Prochaska,
1998; DiClemente, Story, & Murray, 2000; Glanz et al., 1994; Grimley,
Riley, Bellis, & Prochaska, 1993; Isenhart, 1994; Marcus, Rossi, Selby,
Niaura, & Abrams, 1992; Weinstein, Rothman, & Sutton, 1998; Werch &
DiClemente, 1994; Willoughby & Edens, 1996). Thus, although the behavior
change targets differ, the structure of the change process appears to be the
same. Individuals move from being unaware or unwilling to do anything
about the problem to considering the possibility of change, then to becoming
determined and prepared to make the change, and finally to taking action and
sustaining or maintaining that change over time.
/G47/G52/G4F/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G55/G50 /G54/G4F/G47/G45/G54/G48/G45/G52
TTM, in particular the stages of change aspect of the model, has played an in-
tegral role in the development of motivational interviewing and brief interven-
tions using a motivational approach (DiClemente, 1999a; Miller & Rollnick,
1991; Rollnick, Mason, & Butler, 1999). The TTM view of behavior change
as a series of gradual steps that involve multiple tasks and require different
coping activities rather than a single dimension—or an “all or none” pro -
cess—has led to a significant change in the way behavioral health profession -
als conceptualize health behavior change (DiClemente, 1999b; Joseph, Bres -
lin, & Skinner, 1999; Shaffer, 1992; Weinstein et al., 1998). However,
moving through the stages of change requires effort and energy for thinking,
planning, and doing. Motivation is what provides the impetus for the focus,
effort, and energy needed to move through the entire process of change
(DiClemente, 1999a; Rollnick et al., 1999; Simpson & Joe, 1993). Thus, mo -
tivational interviewing can be used to assist individuals to accomplish the vari-
ous tasks required to transition from the precontemplation stage through the
maintenance stage. Although a client’s motivation to begin thinking about
changing a particular behavior differs somewhat from the motivation to sus -
tain the effort and energy and maintain a behavior change, motivation is
needed from the beginning to the end of the process of change (CSAT Treat -
ment Improvement Protocol No. 35).
The most obvious connection between motivational interviewing and the
stages of change is that motivational interviewing is an excellent counseling
style to use with clients who are in the early stages. Precontemplators do not
202 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
want to be lectured to or given “action” techniques when they are not ready
to change. Likewise, contemplators, who are considering the possibility of
making a change but are not quite ready to make a commitment, are resistant
to more traditional approaches that encourage (or try to force) them to make
changes for which they are not yet ready. Through the use of motivational in-
terviewing strategies, clinicians facilitate clients in examining their own partic-
ular situations, considering the pros and cons of changing and making
decisions about change. This is done in a nonthreatening and supportive man-
ner that encourages the client to take responsibility for his or her own situa -
tion. The motivational interviewing philosophy, approach, and methods are
uniquely suited to addressing the tasks and emotional reactions of individuals
who are moving through the first two stages of change.
Clinicians have also found motivational interviewing to be a very effec -
tive style to use with clients in the later stages as they prepare for change, take
action, and maintain the change over time. Miller and Rollnick (1991) have
called this Phase 2 of motivational interviewing: at this point, the client has
made a decision to change. In this phase, the clinician’s job changes from one
of motivating the client to one of advising and “coaching” as the client devel-
ops a workable change plan, anticipates barriers to change, and identifies po-
tential support systems. Although most change strategies in this phase (the
preparation, action, and maintenance stages) are more action-oriented, clients
are still more responsive, and ultimately more successful, when the role of
continued motivation is not forgotten and they are treated in the empathic,
caring style inherent in motivational interviewing. For clients in the action and
maintenance stages, motivational interviewing approaches can help increase
self-efficacy and reinforce their accomplishments, both of which are important
in sustaining long-term change.
As evidenced by the way researchers and clinicians around the world
have embraced the two models, it is apparent that motivational interviewing
and the stages of change are a “natural fit.” Recognizing the parallels and po-
tential synergy of these ways of understanding and treating problem behav -
iors, professionals have used these models in many diverse areas of behavior
change to develop client-centered, personalized, motivational interventions
that are sensitive to the process and processes of change (Connors, Donovan,
& DiClemente, 2001; DiClemente, Marinilli, Singh, & Bellino, 2001; Miller,
Zweben, DiClemente, & Rychtarik, 1992; Prochaska, DiClemente, Velicer, &
Rossi, 1993; Velasquez, Maurer, Crouch, & DiClemente, 2001; Velicer et al.,
1993). We describe in some detail how motivational interviewing approaches
can be linked to each of the stages of change from the transtheoretical model.
/G54/G41/G49/G4C/G4F/G52/G49/G4E/G47 /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G45/G4E/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G53 /G54/G4F /G43/G4C/G49/G45/G4E/G54/G53/G92 /G52/G45/G41/G44/G49/G4E/G45/G53/G53
/G54/G4F /G43/G48/G41/G4E/G47/G45
Individuals can come to the attention of healthcare providers when they are in
any one of the stages of change. Sometimes they are there to seek help in nego-
Motivational Interviewing and the Stages of Change 203
tiating successful passage through the action stage change. At other times they
are unwilling to change but are “mandated” to treatment, either by the legal
system or by concerned family members, friends, or employers. Often clients
arrive with problems or conditions in which there may be multiple behaviors
that need changing (DiClemente, Carbonari, & Velasquez, 1992; Prochaska
& DiClemente, 1984). Drug abusers with psychiatric disorders, diabetics in
health care clinics, and drug-dependent, cigarette-smoking pregnant women
are often in different stages of change, depending on which behavior is the fo-
cus of attention. For example, a patient who arrives for a clinic visit for hyper-
tension may be in one stage of change for stress-reduction strategies, another
stage for adopting regular exercise, and yet another for adherence to anti-
hypertension medication. In each of these situations, the challenge to the clini-
cian is first to understand where the client is in the change cycle and then to
offer the appropriate assistance. In this chapter, we describe each stage of
change and offer suggestions about overall motivational interviewing style
and specific motivational techniques that may be appropriate for each particu-
lar stage. While the target behavior, the setting, and the availability of time
will influence the choice of strategies, this chapter offers guidance on how best
to integrate the use of motivational interviewing and knowledge of the client’s
individual stage of readiness to change throughout the entire change process.
/G46._/G41/G43/G49/G4C/G49/G54/G41/G54/G49/G4E/G47 /G43/G48/G41/G4E/G47/G45 /G49/G4E /G50/G52/G45/G43/G4F/G4E/G54/G45/G4D/G50/G4C/G41/G54/G4F/G52/G53
Precontemplation is the earliest stage of change. People in precontemplation
are either unaware of problem behavior or are unwilling or discouraged when
it comes to changing it. They engage in little activity that could shift their view
of problem behavior and can be rather defensive about the targeted problem
behavior. Precontemplators are not convinced that the negative aspects of the
current or problem behavior outweigh the positive.
In many areas, particularly the addictive behaviors, precontemplators of -
ten have been labeled “resistant.” As clinicians our challenge is to learn why
our client may be resistant to change and to use strategies that diffuse that re -
sistance in a positive way. The stages of change help us think about client re -
sistance as a state that can be influenced. Rather than feeling discouraged
when we encounter client resistance, we realize that the client is in an early
stage of change, and we try to learn more about his or her reason for being in
that state. Through talking to thousands of precontemplators through the
years, we have realized that there are many reasons for someone to be in the
precontemplation stage. It can be helpful to think about precontemplators’ re-
sistance to change in what can best be summarized as the four R’s: reluctance,
rebellion, resignation, and rationalization. Each of these patterns of thinking,
feeling, and reasoning helps keep precontemplators not ready to change. Al -
though most precontemplators use a combination of these patterns, we will
describe each pattern as a distinct type.
204 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
Reluctant precontemplators are those who, through lack of knowledge or
perhaps inertia, do not want to consider change. For these clients, the infor -
mation or the effect of their problem behavior has not become fully conscious.
Rather than being actively resistant, they are actually more passively reluctant
to change. It may be that they are fearful of change, or perhaps they are
comfortable where they are and don’t want to risk the potential discomfort of
change. For these clients, careful listening and providing feedback in a sensi -
tive, empathic manner can be very helpful. Motivating this type of pre -
contemplator often takes time, as it did with Harvey, a client Dr. DiClemente
saw in his practice:
Harvey was a very successful businessman who had been promoted to se-
nior vice president from a direct sales position in an advertising company.
However, he found that managing others was much more difficult than
doing the job himself, because of his problems in being direct with others.
During the evaluation visits, we discussed many issues related to the job,
the politics of the company, and his personal limitations. I listened care -
fully and reflected back to Harvey what I heard him describing about his
job situations. Using the motivational interviewing strategies of reflective
listening, summarizing, and affirmation, I encouraged Harvey to explore
his situation. He soon began to see patterns to his behavior. He expressed
surprise when he came to the conclusion that he had difficulty being di-
rect when it involved criticism of another. Harvey saw himself as an
open, “no-nonsense” person. Eventually Harvey chose to resign his man-
agement position rather than work on changing his interpersonal style.
He was reluctant to change at that particular time. Although I might have
been tempted to encourage him to change, I acknowledged that some
precontemplators are OK right where they are for the time being. Once
the “seeds” have been planted, precontemplators often need time to let
them germinate. I also knew that through our sessions Harvey had begun
to consider change. I suspected that he would eventually come to his own
decision to make a change. One year later, Harvey returned asking for a
referral to work on interpersonal issues. It seemed that the job change
had relieved the immediate stress, but he had recently entered a romantic
relationship where the problems we had discussed became quite appar -
ent. He returned stating, “You know those problems we discussed last
year? I am ready to tackle them now.”
Sometimes the reluctant client will progress rapidly once he or she verbal-
izes the reluctance, feels listened to, and begins to feel the tension between the
reluctance to change and the possibility of a different future. At other times,
the change may take longer, as in Harvey’s case. By allowing clients the free -
dom to make their own decisions, clinicians facilitate a situation where the
possibility of change can be explored in a nonthreatening manner.
Unlike reluctant precontemplators, rebellious precontemplators often
have a great deal of knowledge about the problem behavior. In fact, they often
have a heavy investment in the behavior. They are also invested in making
Motivational Interviewing and the Stages of Change 205
their own decisions. They do not like being told what to do! The rebellion
may be a residue of prolonged adolescence or the result of insecurity and
fears. No matter what the source, the rebellious precontemplator will appear
hostile and resistant to change. It is easy to recognize a rebellious pre -
contemplator; they often argue with the clinician, demonstrate either verbally
or nonverbally that they don’t want to be there, and provide a host of reasons
that they are not going to change. Motivational interviewing provides a way
of allowing rebellious precontemplators the freedom to express their strong
feelings about change while at the same time directing their energy in a posi -
tive direction. For example, when a counselor agrees with the rebellious
precontemplator that no one can force them to change, and in fact the coun -
selor wouldn’t dream of trying, it often diffuses the strength of their argu -
ment.
Providing a menu of options seems to be the best strategy for working
with the rebellious precontemplator. Encouraging clients to think about the
choices available, including small incremental changes instead of complete
and abrupt abstinence, for example, often opens the door to the possibility of
change. Keep in mind that the rebellious precontemplator has a lot of energy
invested in the problem behavior. The real challenge is helping the client shift
some of that energy into contemplating change rather than using it to resist or
rebel. Once a rebellious precontemplator decides to change, the energy often
shifts to a positive energy of determination to succeed.
Lack of energy and investment, by contrast, is the hallmark of the re-
signed precontemplator . These clients have given up on the possibility of
change and seem overwhelmed by the problem. For example, many smoking
clients begin by saying how many other attempts they have made to quit. They
feel hopelessly addicted to cigarettes and out of control. They see the habit as
controlling them, not their own capacity. Often these individuals will tell us
that the only way to deal with the smoking problem is to stop young people
from starting to smoke in the first place. The clear message is that it is too late
for them. One recent study examined a variant of resignation called cessation
hopelessness in a sample of smokers in the precontemplation stage. Those
precontemplators who were high in a measure of cessation hopelessness had
levels of temptation to smoke that were very high and exceeded their confi -
dence to abstain by a greater amount that those who were lower on this mea -
sure (Walker Daniels, 1998).
Instilling hope and exploring barriers to change are the most productive
strategies for these resigned precontemplators. It is important to help these cli-
ents see that relapse is common and not to be viewed as a failure. Many peo -
ple go through the stages several times before maintaining a change, and each
change attempt is a learning opportunity. It is important for all clients to real-
ize that behavior change is difficult, but it is not impossible. Often, the key to
working with the resigned precontemplator is to build confidence a bit at a
time by assisting them in making the decision to begin with a small change
and affirming each success they have, however small. Keep in mind that re -
206 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
search shows that the clinician’s belief in the client’s ability to change is a
strong predictor of outcome. Success builds on success, and with each small
change the resigned precontemplator builds self-efficacy about making bigger
changes.
While the resigned precontemplator often feels that they have none of the
answers to their problems, the rationalizing precontemplator often appears to
have all the answers. These clients are not considering change because they of-
ten think they have figured out the odds of personal risk or believe that their
behavior is the result of another’s problem, not theirs. It is easy to identify the
rationalizing client in a session: it is when the clinician begins to feel as though
he or she is in a debate, or a session of “point counterpoint.” Although it may
feel like rebellion, the resistance of the rationalizing client lies much more in
their thinking than in their emotions. Prime examples are smokers who are
convinced that they are really not at much risk because they started smoking
after 21 years of age; are only smoking 15 cigarettes a day; have only smoked
for 10 years; or have a 90-year-old grandfather who smokes. The same study
that examined cessation hopelessness also evaluated a characteristic labeled
“harm minimization” among precontemplating smokers. Those smokers who
had higher scores on the harm minimization scale demonstrated significantly
lower levels of cognitive processes of change, like consciousness raising and
self-reevaluation (Walker Daniels, 1998). Minimizing the harm reduces con-
templation activities.
Often the rationalizing precontemplator will want to discuss their ratio-
nale. The problem is that the discussion typically only serves to strengthen
their side of the argument! Empathy and reflective listening seem to work best
with this type of client. Starting with a decisional balance exercise in which
the client is asked to tell the “good things” about the behavior is an ideal
strategy for the rationalizing precontemplator. They quickly realize that you
are not going to argue with them, and that you will actually acknowledge that
they have some compelling reasons for their behavior. Once they have talked
about the pros of their behavior, clients are often more open to considering
that there are also “not so good” things. The skilled motivational interviewing
clinician gently reflects both the pros and cons of change and encourages the
client to elaborate. Double-sided reflections can be used to reflect any ambiva-
lence about change, and summarizing both sides of the behavior may help the
rationalizing precontemplator recognize that some of their rationale may be
flawed. A note of caution: it can be very tempting to use the decisional bal -
ance “cons” as ammunition in which we use the clients’ own words to remind
them of all the negative things about their behavior and to argue for change.
This defeats the purpose of the exercise. Motivational interviewing is effective
in large part because it avoids argumentation and allows the client to hear and
assimilate his or her own “change statements” (see Chapter 7). Again, it may
be best to summarize the decisional balance and then ask where this leaves the
client in terms of thinking about the behavior. The clinician who trusts the
process and lets clients come to their own conclusions and change in their own
Motivational Interviewing and the Stages of Change 207
time is often surprised at how frequently this exercise motivates rationalizing
precontemplators to reexamine, and change, their behavior.
Before leaving the land of the precontemplator, it is important to mention
that there is a myth among clinicians that in dealing with serious health-re -
lated, addictive, or other problems, more is always better. We often hear it
said that motivational interviewing is a good technique to use in some cases,
but when a person is really at risk (like a pregnant smoker or a drug-addicted
client) more must be done. Clinicians often believe that more education, more
intense treatment, or more confrontation will necessarily produce more
change. Nowhere is this less true than with precontemplators. More intensity
will often produce fewer results with this group (Heather, Rollnick, & Bell,
1993; Miller, Benefield, & Tonigan, 1993). So it is particularly important to
use careful motivational strategies rather than to mount high-intensity pro -
grams or efforts that will be ignored by those uninterested in changing the
particular problem behavior. It is just as erroneous, however, to believe that
precontemplators don’t ever change and there is nothing we can do. They can
be coaxed, encouraged, informed, and advised. We cannot make precontem -
plators change, but we can help motivate them to move to contemplation.
/G43/G4F/G4E/G54/G45/G4D/G50/G4C/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G3A /G41 /G52/G49/G53/G4B/G96/G52/G45/G57/G41/G52/G44 /G41/G4E/G41/G4C/G59/G53/G49/G53
In the contemplation stage of change, a person acknowledges that he or she
has a problem and begins to think seriously about solving it. Contemplators
struggle to understand their problem, to see its causes, and to think about pos-
sible solutions. Contemplators may be far from actually making a commit-
ment to action, however. For example, a contemplator might gather a lot of
information about treatment programs but not actually enroll. That is often
the nature of contemplation. The individual knows where he or she wants to
be and maybe even how to get there, but he or she is not quite ready to make a
commitment. Although many contemplators move on to the action stage, it is
possible to spend many months or years in contemplation (Carbonari,
DiClemente, & Sewell, 1999). The clinician’s goal when working with a con-
templator is to help the client “tip the balance” in favor of change.
Contemplation is often a very paradoxical stage of change. The fact that
the client is willing to consider the problem and the possibility of change of -
fers hope for change. Contemplation is the stage when clients are quite open
to information about the behavior and to exploring decisional balance consid-
erations. It is also the stage where clients experience the most ambivalence. As
clinicians, it is important that we be comfortable with and that we recognize
ambivalence as a vital part of the contemplation stage of change. We should
also realize that contemplation does not mean commitment.
Clinicians often make the mistake of thinking that a person who is con -
templating change is ready to make a commitment; this is not the case. A good
example of this confusion is in workplace smoking cessation programs. When
surveys are taken in the workplace, large numbers of smokers (up to 70% or
208 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
even 80%) express interest in quitting. So programs are developed and of -
fered. Typically, these programs are very poorly attended and are lucky to at -
tract 3% to 5% of the smokers. Clearly, thinking about quitting does not
equal commitment to quit. Most smokers wish to change or wish that they
could stop smoking. Many are considering change in the near future. When
confronted by a choice to sign up for a specific cessation program on a specific
date, however, they find many reasons why right now is not the right time.
What are missing in most of these worksite programs are adequate motiva -
tional strategies to assist individuals in moving from contemplation to prepa -
ration and being ready to take action (DiClemente & Scott, 1997).
Some studies have found a relationship between contemplation and
higher levels of depression (Velasquez, Carbonari, & DiClemente, 1999). It
may be that there is a subgroup of contemplators who are in what DiClemente
and Prochaska (1998) have called “chronic contemplation.” They think about
change, often to the point of rumination, but they don’t move beyond the con-
templation stage. When working with contemplators, it is important to assess
how long the person has been considering change and whether they have
made past attempts. The key here is to assist the contemplator in thinking
through the risks of the behavior and potential benefits of change and to instill
hope that change is possible. It is also important for contemplators to receive
accurate information about their behavior and personal feedback about the
effect the behavior is having on their lives. Although one piece of information
will not make the decision for the individual, this type of personally relevant
information or feedback can be extremely persuasive. For example, when we
talk with groups of smokers, we try to give accurate information about the
facts of smoking: for example, there are over 1,000 different gases in cigarette
smoke; smoking contributes not only to lung cancer, but also to heart disease
and chronic obstructive lung disease; tar coats the cilia of the lungs, making
them very inefficient in transferring oxygen. But information alone is not
enough. We also try to make this information personally relevant by asking
about their smoker’s cough, telling them to breathe out the smoke through a
white handkerchief in order to see the residue, or discussing the number of
colds or respiratory problems they are having.
Other examples of feedback that can help contemplators resolve ambiva-
lence are “reports” based on client assessment such as those used in the moti -
vational enhancement therapy treatment in Project MATCH (Miller et al.,
1992). These reports detailed information about the client’s level of drinking,
a comparison between their drinking levels and those of the American popula-
tion (gender-specific norms), family risk factors, and other variables. In
healthcare settings, blood test results, pulmonary functioning tests, and cho -
lesterol level results can provide important feedback to the contemplator. This
information, which is visible and personally relevant, is more powerful in
shifting the decisional balance toward action than all the scare tactics, general
lectures, and nagging in the world (DiClemente et al., 2001; Kreuter, Strecher,
& Glassman, 1999).
In the preceding section, we discussed how the decisional balance exercise
Motivational Interviewing and the Stages of Change 209
can be helpful in assisting the precontemplator to talk about the problem
behavior. It is also very useful in the contemplation stage. In fact, research
shows that for many different behaviors, contemplation is the stage in which
evaluations of the pros and cons of the behavior are more or less equal
(Prochaska et al., 1994). The task for the clinician, then, is to help the client
move from this balanced state to one that is “tipped” in favor of change. Once
this happens, the client is ready to move on to the next stage.
An important strategy with contemplators is to “accentuate the positive.”
Often individuals considering changing a problem behavior will concentrate
on all the negative aspects of the behavior. “I know how bad my drinking is
for me,” they say. In fact, they can often produce a litany of reasons why what
they are doing is bad for them. Clinician and client are often baffled by the
fact that even with all these negatives, change does not occur. The reality is
that if the behavior were not in some way beneficial to the client, he or she
would not be doing it. Until a client acknowledges the “good things” about
the behavior, they cannot prepare to combat temptation once they make an
attempt to change. The decisional balance helps facilitate this process. Once
the client has evaluated the benefits of the behavior, they move to focusing on
the “not so good things.” The clinician listens for change statements here,
which include expressions of concern, problem recognition, optimism about
change, or intent to change. Offering periodic summaries, using double-sided
reflections, and reflecting and affirming self-motivational statements are ways
to help the client get the most from the decisional balance exercise.
Careful listening, summarizing, feedback, double-sided reflections, affir-
mation, and increasing self-efficacy are powerful facilitators of change when
working with contemplators. Overcoming the ambivalence and shifting the
decisional balance can take time and requires great patience and persistence
on the part of the motivational interviewer.
/G44/G45/G56/G45/G4C/G4F/G50/G49/G4E/G47 /G41 /G50/G4C/G41/G4E /G41/G4E/G44 /G50/G52/G45/G50/G41/G52/G49/G4E/G47 /G46._/G4F/G52 /G41/G43/G54/G49/G4F/G4E
In the preparation stage, the person is ready to change in the near future. They
are on the verge of taking action. People in this stage may have tried and failed
to change in the past. Yet, they have often learned valuable lessons from past
change attempts. Individuals in this stage of change need to develop a plan
that will work for them. Then they need to make firm commitments to follow
through on the action option they choose.
The decision to take appropriate steps to stop a problem behavior or to
initiate a positive behavior provides access to the preparation stage. Most peo-
ple in this stage will make a serious attempt at change in the near future. They
appear to be ready for and committed to action. The challenge is to help the
client develop a change plan that is acceptable, accessible, and effective.
Once clients have committed to action, it would seem to be a simple task
to assist them in preparing to move forward. However, commitment to
210 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
change does not necessarily mean that change is automatic, that change meth-
ods used will be efficient, or that the attempt will be successful in the long
term. Being prepared for action does not mean that all ambivalence is re -
solved. In fact, the decision-making process continues throughout the prepara-
tion stage.
The first task for the clinician working with the client in preparation is to
assess the strength of the client’s commitment to change. This is often difficult
to assess simply from verbal self-report. Sometimes clients who are adamant
about being ready to change are trying to convince themselves as much as they
are trying to convince the clinician. For example, Dr. Velasquez recently
worked with a woman who was about to be released from a county jail. This
client had a history of substance abuse and expressed a strong desire to stay
abstinent upon release. She enthusiastically recited all the reasons she was go -
ing to change and vowed never to use drugs or alcohol again. Upon discussing
the client’s plans for change, however, it became clear that she had not given
much thought to how she planned to accomplish her goal. In fact, her plans
were to return to a relationship with a drug-abusing boyfriend. She had no
plans for a job or for filling her free time, and she had not thought about fur-
ther treatment or how to avoid her substance-abusing friends. In other words,
this client said she was ready and determined to make a change, but she
lacked the plans for doing so. The task here was to use motivational inter-
viewing to assist the client in making a solid realistic assessment of the diffi-
culties she might encounter upon release, a plan for each of these contingen-
cies, and a way to know when she might need additional help.
Using a motivational interviewing approach, the clinician helps the client
think creatively about how to develop the most effective plan. Considering the
client’s personal life circumstances and drawing on their past experience with
change, the clinician guides the client in developing change strategies. Pres -
enting a menu of possible options from which the client can choose is often
helpful. The clinician can also draw on his or her own experience with past
clients, gently suggesting strategies that have worked for other people. While
respecting the client’s choices, the clinician can also gently warn against
change plan strategies that seem inappropriate or ineffective. While the clini -
cian’s tasks are different in this phase, they are no less challenging. A solid,
workable change plan is not easy to develop; it takes careful listening, reflec -
tion, and incisive intervention on the part of the clinician, as well as the cli -
ent’s careful thought and determination.
/G41/G43/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G3A /G49/G4D/G50/G4C/G45/G4D/G45/G4E/G54/G49/G4E/G47 /G54/G48/G45 /G50/G4C/G41/G4E
In the action stage of change people most overtly modify their behavior. They
stop smoking, remove all the desserts from the house, pour the last beer down
the drain, or enter a treatment program. In short, they make the move and im-
plement the plan for which they have been preparing. Action is the most obvi-
Motivational Interviewing and the Stages of Change 211
ously busy period and the one that requires the greatest commitment of time
and energy. Changes made during the action stage are more visible to others
than those made during the other stages and therefore receive the greatest rec-
ognition. The danger is that many people, including professional therapists,
can erroneously equate action with change, overlooking not only the critical
work that prepares people for successful action but the equally important (and
often more challenging) efforts to maintain the changes following action.
What do people in action need from a clinician? They have often made a
plan and have begun to implement it before we even see them. Often, making
an appointment has coincided with other changes they have made. Clients in
the action stage have various reasons for consulting a clinician. This might be
to make a public commitment to action, to get some external confirmation of
the plan, to seek support, to gain greater self-efficacy, or sometimes to create
external monitors of their activity. Working with clients in the action stage
can be rather easy and quite rewarding for clinicians. In fact, clients at this
stage represent many of our “miracle cures” that see us for one session, make
significant and long-lasting changes, and tell everyone what great therapists
we are! It is important, however, not to assume that once a person has
reached the action stage, it is an easy downhill ride. Clients in action may still
have some conflicting feelings about the change. They may miss their old life-
styles in some ways and be struggling to fit into this new behavior. Careful lis-
tening and affirming clients that they are doing the right thing are important
in this stage. It is also important to check with the client to see if he or she has
discovered any parts of the change plan that need revision. Some clients in ac-
tion will discover their change plans need to be revised, and the clinician can
be of assistance in this process. Clients also need affirmation for what they
have accomplished and assurance that they can continue to make the desired
changes.
No matter how much a person wants to change, and regardless of their
willingness to take action, if they do not have adequate self-efficacy, they are
not likely to experience long-term success. Motivational interviewing can help
build clients’ self-efficacy as they take action. By focusing on their successful
activity, reaffirming their decisions, and helping clients make intrinsic attribu-
tions of success, clinicians can bolster clients’ self-efficacy evaluations.
/G4D/G41/G49/G4E/G54/G45/G4E/G41/G4E/G43/G45/G2C /G52/G45/G4C/G41/G50/G53/G45/G2C /G41/G4E/G44 /G52/G45/G43/G59/G43/G4C/G49/G4E/G47
Maintenance is the final stage in the process of change. Sustaining behavior
change can be difficult. In the maintenance stage, the person works to consoli-
date the gains attained during the action stage and struggles to prevent re -
lapse. Although traditional therapy views maintenance as a static stage, the
transtheoretical model sees it as a critically important continuation that can
last from as little as more than 6 months to as long as a lifetime. Motivation
to consolidate the change is needed. Without a strong commitment to mainte-
212 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
nance, there will surely be relapse. Often change is not completely established
even after 6 months or so of action. This is particularly true if the environ -
ment is filled with cues that can trigger the problem behavior. We all know of
cases where an individual who has stopped drinking relapses just when every-
one thinks the problem is finally resolved. It is important to help individuals in
this stage practice an active and intelligent maintenance of the changes they
have made (CSAT, 1999).
The TTM model recognizes that relapse is possible (even likely) when
moving through the stages of change. People often “recycle” through the
stages many different times before reaching success; thus, a “slip” should not
be considered an utter failure but, rather, a step back. Many people progress
from contemplation through preparation to action and then maintenance, but
many will relapse. After a relapse, individuals often regress to an earlier stage
and then begin progressing through the stages yet again. Frequently, people
who do relapse have a better chance of success during the next cycle. They
have often learned new ways to deal with old behaviors, and they now have a
history of partial successes to build on.
Relapse can occur for many different reasons. Individuals may experience
a particularly strong, unexpected urge or temptation to return to the problem
behavior and fail to cope with it successfully. Sometimes relaxing their guard
or testing themselves begins the slide back to the former behavior pattern. Of-
ten the complete personal cost of the change is not realized until later, and
commitment or self-efficacy erodes. Most often relapse does not occur auto-
matically but takes place gradually after an initial slip occurs.
During what Saul Shiffman (1982) calls these “relapse crises,” clients
may turn to a therapist or other health care provider for help. Either they have
slipped and are early into relapse or they are scared and shaken by their desire
to go back to smoking or drinking or drugs. They come to the clinician with a
weakened self-efficacy and a fear that the old habit may be stronger than they
are. They seek reassurance and some way to make sense of the relapse crisis. It
is important to help these clients see the crisis as an opportunity to learn
rather than a failure. Understanding the cycle of change in a learning context
can assist both the clinician and the client. Effective use of the motivational in-
terviewing approach and strategies can help motivate the individual to renew
or recommence the journey through the early stages once again, to problem
solve the failed plan in order to create a more effective one, and to initiate an-
other change attempt.
/G43/G55/G52/G52/G45/G4E/G54 /G53/G54/G41/G54/G55/G53 /G41/G4E/G44 /G46._/G55/G54/G55/G52/G45 /G43/G48/G41/G4C/G4C/G45/G4E/G47/G45/G53
It should be quite apparent by now that motivational interviewing strategies
can be knit together rather seamlessly with the stages of change model. The
philosophical underpinnings of motivational interviewing are consonant with
respect to the client’s process of change. Motivational interviewing assumes,
Motivational Interviewing and the Stages of Change 213
as does TTM, that change is the responsibility of the individual and occurs in
the entire life space of the individual and not simply in the context of any spe-
cific intervention. However, identifying a client’s status in terms of the stages
of change can be very helpful in deciding which motivational strategies to use
and when to use them. Motivational interviewing approaches are appropriate
for clients in each of the stages of change. The content and strategies will vary,
but the objective remains the same (CSAT, 1999; DiClemente, 1999a). Clients
often need help to negotiate the passage from one stage to the next in the pro-
cess of change. The ultimate goal is to help the individual make efficient and
effective changes in his or her life, with the assumption being that these
changes will be life enhancing and become reinforcing in their own right. At
some point, these behaviors will become sustained over time and integrated
into his or her lifestyle so that the individual can exit the cycle of change
(DiClemente, in press; DiClemente & Prochaska, 1998). Motivational and
other types of interventions punctuate and promote the process of change, but
that process always extends well beyond any specific intervention.
Although the change processes delineated in the TTM and motivational
interviewing approaches are quite compatible and have been integrated, there
are continued challenges for understanding and intervening in this process
that should be explored. These include understanding how motivational inter-
viewing approaches affect specific client processes of change, applicability of
TTM and motivational interviewing cross culturally, and the issue of brief
versus more extensive interventions.
In addition to the stages of change, TTM has identified a number of pro-
cesses of change that have been implicated in movement from one stage to the
next and in successful change (Carbonari & DiClemente, 2000; DiClemente
& Prochaska, 1998; Prochaska & DiClemente, 1984; Prochaska, Velicer,
DiClemente, Guadagnoli, & Rossi, 1991). Cognitive and experiential pro -
cesses of change appear to be more important in the earlier stages of change,
and behavioral processes appear to be more important in the later stages
(Perz, DiClemente, & Carbonari, 1996). It is assumed that motivational inter-
viewing approaches influence cognitive and experiential processes like con -
sciousness raising, self-reevaluation, environmental reevaluation, and the like
with clients in early stages of change. Alternatively, as clients move forward in
the process, motivational interviewing influences efficacy and the behavioral
processes of change. These assumptions need to be explored (Joseph et al.,
1999). The data from Project MATCH indicate that motivational enhance -
ment therapy (Miller et al., 1992) was as effective as more extensive
treatments for the most part (Project MATCH Research Group, 1997b).
However, an analysis of the process of change indicated that this treatment
did not have a differential effect on process activity, compared to other treat -
ments (DiClemente, Carbonari, Zweben, Morrel, & Lee, 2001). It may be too
difficult to capture processes of change and critical transitions in large-scale
treatment trials. Experimental trials are needed to examine specifically how
214 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
various motivational interviewing strategies and approaches affect the differ -
ent processes of change that have been identified in TTM.
The stages of change have been examined with a number of different be -
haviors and in a variety of populations in various countries around the world.
Motivational interviewing has also been translated into different languages
and thus transported into cultures beyond the confines of the United States,
Great Britain, and Australia where it was developed. Initial data and reports
of application from various parts of the world support the contention that the
same basic process of change occurs cross culturally. Contemplation, prepara-
tion, action, and maintenance tasks appear to present similar challenges in ad-
diction treatment, for example, in both Western and Eastern cultures. If this is
true, the challenge is to understand how to facilitate movement through the
stages among various ethnically and culturally diverse populations (Suris,
Trapp, DiClemente, & Cousins, 1998). It is clear that the types of consider -
ations, value systems, action strategies, and support systems differ in diverse
populations as individuals move from one stage to another. This may mean
that the structure of the process of change remains the same, but the content
of decisional considerations, the nature of commitment, and the specific strat-
egies in action and maintenance plans would differ. The challenges lie in mea-
suring the stages of change (Carey, Purnine, Maisto, & Carey, 1999) and in
understanding which strategies of the motivational interviewing approach can
be used cross culturally to promote stage transitions and which need signifi-
cant adaptation by practitioners in the different cultures in order to be sensi-
tive to their needs, as well as the needs of clients.
Finally, motivational strategies have most often been used in the context
of brief or briefer interventions. The process of change as conceptualized in
TTM can take a significant amount of time, even years, for an individual to
change one single target behavior. When multiple behaviors in various areas
of life functioning are involved, the task becomes even more complicated
(DiClemente, 1994, 1999b; DiClemente & Prochaska, 1998). How should
motivational approaches and strategies be synchronized with the process of
change? Are additional types of strategies (cognitive-behavioral interventions)
needed in addition to the motivational interviewing intervention for some cli -
ents or some types of problems? Some clinical approaches are beginning to use
a motivational intervention first and then to switch to a more intensive cogni-
tive-behavioral intervention, as is being evaluated in a large clinical trial of al-
coholism treatment called Project COMBINE sponsored by the National Insti-
tute on Alcohol and Alcoholism. Other programs are using motivational
enhancement as a pretreatment before using more intensive approaches (see
Chapter 20). Other approaches have integrated stages into more traditional
treatments (Connors et al., 2001) or combined motivational interviewing ap -
proaches and processes of change-based strategies into group therapy sessions
(Velasquez et al., 2001). How to integrate motivational interviewing strategies
with more intensive interventions and whether this combination of ap -
Motivational Interviewing and the Stages of Change 215
proaches is needed for any or all clients are questions that demand additional
research.
Although there are continuing questions and challenges related to under -
standing the interplay between TTM and motivational interviewing, one thing
is clear. Health and addiction researchers and clinicians have seen both of
these perspectives as helpful. Many have begun to use TTM to broaden their
view of the process of change and to extend the scope of potential interven -
tions from precontemplation to maintenance issues. At the same time, they
have adopted motivational approaches to intervention to address the critical
issue of motivation that most often had been left completely in the domain of
the client. Only understanding more fully and intervening more effectively in
the process of change will realize the promise of TTM and motivational inter-
viewing.
216 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
CHAPTER 16
/G54/G68/G65 /G45/G66/G66/G69/G63/G61/G63/G79 /G6F/G66 /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C
/G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G61/G6E/G64 /G49/G74/G73 /G41/G64/G61/G70/G74/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73
/G57/G68/G61/G74 /G57 /G65 /G4B/G6E/G6F/G77 /G53/G6F /G46._/G61/G72
BRIAN L. BURKE, HAL ARKOWITZ, and CHRISTOPHER DUNN
From a single drop of water, a logician could infer the
possibility of an Atlantic or a Niagara without having seen or
heard of one or the other. So all life is a great chain, the nature of
which is known whenever we are shown a single link of it. Like
all other arts, the Science of Deduction and Analysis is one which
can only be acquired by long and patient study, nor is life long
enough to allow any mortal to attain the highest possible
perfection in it.
—S HERLOCK HOLMES, in Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, A Study in Scarlet
When the first edition of this book was published in 1991, there was good
reason to believe that the authors had put their hands on a promising ap -
proach for helping people change their addictive and other troubling behav -
iors. Yet, at that time, only a handful of studies had been done to evaluate the
efficacy of approaches related to motivational interviewing. The past decade,
however, has yielded mounting empirical research on these approaches for a
wide variety of clinical problems. This chapter will critically review the
217
domain, focusing on controlled trials of individually delivered interventions
that incorporate the basic principles of motivational interviewing.
/G57/G48/G41/G54 /G49/G53 /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47/G3F
In this book, Miller and Rollnick define motivational interviewing as a “cli -
ent-centered, directive method for enhancing intrinsic motivation to change by
exploring and resolving ambivalence ” (Chapter 3). They further describe mo-
tivational interviewing as “a way of being with people” and a set of clinical
methods that can be taught and learned. Motivational interviewing involves
the application of four basic principles:
• Expressing empathy
• Developing discrepancy
• Rolling with resistance
• Supporting self-efficacy
Clinically, approaches related to motivational interviewing can be em-
ployed in a variety of ways. These interventions can be the primary treatment
or a prelude to another type of treatment in an effort to enhance the client’s
responsiveness to that treatment. These approaches can also be adapted to
combine or integrate with other treatment components or even with entire
treatments.
In the research literature, the most widely used approach related to moti-
vational interviewing is one in which the client (usually alcohol- or drug-
addicted) is given feedback based on individual results from standardized
assessment measures, often the Drinker’s Check-Up (DCU; Miller, Sovereign,
& Krege, 1988) or a modification of it. The feedback is delivered in a motiva-
tional interviewing “style,” and discussion of the problem may extend to one
or more sessions that continue to embody the fundamental spirit and methods
of motivational interviewing. We consider this feedback-based approach—
employed in many of the studies reviewed here, including the well-known
Project MATCH (1997b)—to constitute an “adaptation” of motivational in -
terviewing (AMI) because it is defined by the presence of the feedback compo-
nent and not solely by the use of motivational interviewing per se.
1 More
broadly, we also apply the term “AMI” to interventions that incorporate ad -
ditional nonmotivational interviewing techniques while retaining motivational
interviewing principles as the core of treatment, as well as to interventions
that have been specifically adapted for use by nonspecialists (Rollnick,
Heather, & Bell, 1992). It is interesting to note that virtually all of the pub -
lished empirical studies in this area (and therefore in this review) deal with the
efficacy of AMIs, with no studies addressing the efficacy of motivational inter-
viewing in relatively pure form.
218 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
/G57/G48/G41/G54 /G48/G41/G56/G45 /G50/G52/G45/G56/G49/G4F/G55/G53 /G52/G45/G56/G49/G45/G57/G53 /G4F/G46._ /G54/G48/G45
/G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G4C/G49/G54/G45/G52/G41/G54/G55/G52/G45 /G46._/G4F/G55/G4E/G44/G3F
Two previous reviews have been published. Noonan and Moyers (1997) re -
viewed the 11 clinical trials of AMIs available at that time—nine with problem
drinkers and two with drug abusers. The authors concluded that nine of these
studies supported the efficacy of AMIs for a variety of addictive behaviors.
More recently, Dunn, DeRoo, and Rivara (2001) performed a systematic
review of 29 randomized trials of brief interventions claiming to use the prin -
ciples and techniques of motivational interviewing (or what we have called
AMIs) to change behavior in four domains: substance abuse, smoking, HIV
risk reduction, and diet and exercise. Data on methodological features were
tabled, as were calculations of effect sizes and their 95% confidence intervals.
2
Seventeen studies in substance abuse, two in smoking, four in HIV risk reduc-
tion, and six in the area of diet and exercise were reviewed. Overall, 60% of
the studies had at least one significant effect size for the AMI under investiga -
tion. The strongest evidence for efficacy was found in the substance abuse do-
main, where AMIs appeared to work well for problem drinkers and improved
the rate of entry into and retention in intensive substance abuse treatment.
AMI effects did not appear to diminish over time, and the effect sizes for
AMIs as preludes to treatment were roughly equivalent to those for AMIs as
stand-alone interventions.
/G57/G48/G41/G54 /G44/G49/G44 /G57/G45 /G49/G4E/G43/G4C/G55/G44/G45 /G49/G4E /G4F/G55/G52 /G52/G45/G56/G49/G45/G57/G3F
For this review, we searched through the reference sections of both prior re-
views and the motivational interviewing website (www.motivationalinterview.org).
We also conducted a database search (PSYCINFO) using “motivational
interviewing” as a key phrase, and, finally, we sent out an electronic
message to all members of the Motivational Interviewing Network of
Trainers (MINT) asking for any published or in-press articles relevant to our
purposes.
This chapter follows the general guidelines currently employed in reviews
of the efficacy of various psychotherapies (see Kazdin, 1992). For this reason,
studies had to satisfy the following criteria in order to be included in this re -
view:
• The intervention under study consisted primarily of implementing the
motivational interviewing principles just discussed rather than princi -
ples of some other approach (such as cognitive-behavioral therapy).
• The intervention was delivered on an individual (one-on-one) and face-
to-face basis.
3
• The efficacy of the individual, face-to-face AMI component could rea -
The Efficacy of Motivational Interviewing 219
sonably be imputed from the study design (i.e., without being con -
founded with self-help, group, or other formats).
• The study design met our criteria for a controlled clinical trial.
In our definition, a controlled clinical trial must use the following: ran -
dom assignment to groups or an alternate way of equating compared groups
of clients before treatment (e.g., sequential assignment), at least one compari -
son group, a clear description of the sample, adequate measurement targeting
pertinent problem areas, and the collection of follow-up data. Although the
controlled clinical trial has recently come under some criticism (e.g., Borkovec
& Castonguay, 1998), it remains the gold standard for evaluating treatment
outcome (Miller, Andrews, Wilbourne, & Bennett, 1998).
/G57/G48/G41/G54 /G4B/G49/G4E/G44/G53 /G4F/G46._ /G43/G4F/G4E/G54/G52/G4F/G4C/G4C/G45/G44 /G43/G4C/G49/G4E/G49/G43/G41/G4C /G54/G52/G49/G41/G4C/G53
/G48/G41/G56/G45 /G42/G45/G45/G4E /G43/G4F/G4E/G44/G55/G43/G54/G45/G44 /G57/G49/G54/G48 /G41/G4D/G49/G73/G3F
There were a total of 26 studies that met our inclusion criteria. 4 The basic
characteristics of each study, grouped by clinical problem area, are shown in
Tables 16.1a–16.1c. The studies vary widely in terms of settings, sample char-
acteristics, intervention formats, uses of the AMI (e.g., as a prelude to further
services or as a stand-alone treatment), comparison groups employed, inter-
vention quality control, measurement scope, and length of follow-up.
/G48/G4F/G57 /G47/G4F/G4F/G44 /G57/G45/G52/G45 /G54/G48/G45/G53/G45 /G53/G54/G55/G44/G49/G45/G53/G3F/G3A
/G41 /G51/G55/G41/G4E/G54/G49/G54/G41/G54/G49/G56/G45 /G50/G45/G52/G53/G50/G45/G43/G54/G49/G56/G45 /G4F/G4E /G4D/G45/G54/G48/G4F/G44/G4F/G4C/G4F/G47/G59
Prior to embarking on a more qualitative look at AMI clinical trials, we will
provide a quantitative evaluation of the methodology and outcome of these
trials, using a system developed by Miller and colleagues (1995). Two inde -
pendent raters judged the methodological quality of each study on 12 specific
dimensions, with some dimensions (e.g., follow-up rate and length) counting
for more than 1 point, resulting in a maximum possible Methodological Qual-
ity Score (MQS) of 17.
Outcome Logic Scores (OLS) reflecting the strength of support for treat -
ment efficacy were also determined for each study. Study outcomes were rated
as providing positive evidence (+ 1; treatment superior to any alternate treat -
ment without a control group, or equal to a more extensive treatment without
a control group) or strong positive evidence (+ 2; treatment superior to no-
treatment or placebo control), negative evidence (–1; mixed or insignificant
results among comparable treatments) or strong negative evidence (–2; treat -
ment worse than alternatives or equal to no-treatment control) for the AMI
intervention under investigation. MQS and OLS were then multiplied for each
study, which yielded a weighted score for each study reflecting its contribution
220 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
221
TABLE 16.1a. Basic Characteristics of Controlled Clinical Trials of AMIs for Alcohol Problems
Sample characteristics Intervention Use of Intervention Follow-up
Study Setting Size
Gender
(M/F) Severity
type (no.
of sessions)
the
AMI
Comparison
group(s)
Therapist(s)
training
quality
control
Measurement
type/target
interval (%
completion)
1* Psych
hospital
28 21/7 AD AS (1) + MIFB
( 1 )+R T
P RT MI None* BEH/drinking 3 mo (89%)
2* VA
outpatient
SAC
32 30/2 MA AS (1) + MIFB
( 1 )+S O
P AP + SO MI AUD +
COD
BEH/drinking 3 mo (81%)
6 mo (72%)
3 College
campus
60 26/34 CB MIFB (1) S No
treatment
MI SUP BEH/drinking +
BEH/ARP +
PRO/perceived
norms and
expectancies
6 wk (98%)
4 College
campus
348 160/188 CH MIFB (1) At 1
yr: MF +
possible (10%)
MIFB (1)
SN o
treatment
AMI OBS +
SUP +
MAN
BEH/drinking +
BEH/ARP
6m o
12 mo
2 yr (88%)
3 yr (>80%)
4 yr (83%)
5 Trauma
center
762 625/137 SM (83%) MIFB (1) +
SL
SN o
treatment
MI None BEH/drinking +
BEH/ARP
6 mo (74%)
12 mo (53%)
3 yr (on ARP)
6* SAC 42 30/12 SC 1: AS (2 hr
DCU) + MIFB
(1)
2: Same + RL
S 6 wk WL then same
treatment as I
MI None* BEH/drinking 6 wk (93%)
18 mo (76%)
7* SAC 42 24/18 SC AS (2 hr DCU)
+ MIFB (1)
S 1 :A S+C F B
2: 6 wk WL then
same treatment as I
MI AUD +
COD +
OBS +
SUP
BEH/drinking +
PRO/therapist
style
6 wk (100%)
12 mo (83%)
(continued)
222
TABLE 16.1a. (continued)
Sample characteristics Intervention Use of Intervention Follow-up
Study Setting Size
Gender
(M/F) Severity
type (no. of
sessions)
the
AMI
Comparison
group(s)
Therapist(s)
training
quality
control
Measurement
type/target
interval (%
completion)
8 Hospital ER 94 60/34 ARE MIFB (1) +
I P+R L
S 5 min talk + IP + RL MI RS + VID
+ SUP
BEH/drinking +
BEH/ARP + RC
6 mo (89%)
9* Prenatal
clinic
42 0/42 Varied MIFB (1) S IL MI None* BEH/drinking +
RC
I
2 mo (81%)
10* General
hospital
174 174/0 HD MIFB (1) S 1: SBC
2: No treatment
MI AUD +
MAN
SBC
BEH/drinking +
ATI/RC
6 mo (70%)
11a* 5
outpatient
SACs
952 688/264 AD or
AA
MET (4) S 1: CBT
2: TSF
MET or
CBT or
TSF
VID +
COD +
MAN +
SUP
BEH/drinking
+ ARP + PRO/
therapist style
+ ATI/RC and
others
3m o
6m o
9m o
12 mo
15 mo (90%)
3 yr (85%)
11b* 5
outpatient
SACs
774 619/155 AD or
A A+I T
MET (4) S/FU 1: CBT
2: TSF
MET or
CBT or
TSF
VID +
COD +
MAN +
SUP
BEH/drinking
+ ARP + PRO/
therapist style
+ ATI/RC and
others
3m o
6m o
9m o
12 mo
15 mo (90%)
223
TABLE 16.1b. Basic Characteristics of Controlled Clinical Trials of AMIs for Smoking, Drug Addiction, HIV Risk Behavior, and
Psychiatric Treatment Adherence
Sample characteristics Intervention Use of Intervention Follow-up
Study Setting Size
Gender
(M/F) Severity
type (no.
of sessions)
the
AMI
Comparison
group(s)
Therapist(s)
training
quality
control
Measurement
type/target
interval (%
completion)
12 Hospital 40 17/23 Teen
smokers
MIFB (1)
+I P
S BA + IP MI None BEH/smoking
+R C
3 mo (95%)
13* GMP 536 163/373 Adult
smokers
MC (1) S BA MI MAN* BEH/smoking
+ ATI/RC
6 mo (78%)
14 EAP sites 89 73/16 DD MIFB(1) Possible P CFB (1) MI or
CFB
MAN +
S U P+R S
BEH/substance
use + BEH/work
performance
+R C
3 mo (87%)
9 mo (71%)
15 Hospital 23 15/8 DC MIFB (1) +
Partial RT
P SI (1) +
Partial RT
MI None BEH/substance
use + BEH/
treatment
participation
12 weeks
(26%)
16 SAC 192 136/56 IDU MID (5) P RR (5) MI or
RR
AUD +
COD +
RS
BEH/treatment
entry
3m o
17 SAC 122 79/43 HU MIF (2)
+M T
P ED (2) + MT MI MAN BEH/opiate
use + BEH/ORP
+R C
3 mo (75%)
6 mo (60%)
18 SAC 291 224/67 MU MIFB (2) S 1: RPSG (14)
2: No treat
MI SUP + CR BEH/marijuana
use + dependence
BEH/MRP
1 mo (88%)
4 mo (82%)
7 mo (81%)
13 mo (87%)
16 mo (89%)
19 SAC 95 44/51 IDU MIHIV (1) +
S H+S O
Adjunct
to SO
1: MIHIV (1) +
RP (5) + SO
2 :B A+I P+S O
MI MAN +
AUD +
SUP
BEH/HIV risk
behaviors
6 mo (84%)
20 SAC 200 159/41 IDU MIHIV (1) +
RPB
S No treatment MI MAN +
SUP
BEH/HIV-risk
behaviors
3 mo (60%)
6 mo (44%)
21 Hospital 121 77/44 PSY MIU (2) + SP Adjunct
to SP
SP MI SUP BEH/treatment
adherence
First aftercare
appointment
224
TABLE 16.1c. Basic Characteristics of Controlled Clinical Trials of AMIs for Diet, Exercise, and Health Behaviors
Sample characteristics Intervention Use of Intervention Follow-up
Study Setting Size
Gender
(M/F) Severity
type (no.
of sessions)
the
AMI
Comparison
group(s)
Therapist(s)
training
quality
control
Measurement
type/target
interval (%
completion)
22 Hospital di-
etary clinic
121 ~60/61 HL MIM (3) S SD (3) Not
reported
MAN +
AUD + COD
BEH/diet +
PHY/weight +
PHY/blood lipids
+R C
3 mo (80%)
23 GMP 166 ~86/80 HBP 1: HMI (6) + BM
+I P+S O2 :L M I
( 1 )+P M I+B M
+
I P+S O
Adjunct
to SO
SO BM but no
MI training re-
ported
None PHY/weight +
PHY/BP + PHY/
dietary salt and
Fat + BEH/alcohol
and smoking +
BEH/exercise
18 wk (80%)
24 GMP 523 217/306 Varied adult
patients
1: HMI (6) + BF
+I P+R L
2: LMI (1) + BF
+I P+R L
Adjunct
to BF
B F+I P+
RL
MI None BEH/physical ac-
tivity score
12 wk (81%)
1 yr (85%)
25 Outpatient
clinic
22 0/22 Older obese
NIDDM
MISF (3) +
GBT
Adjunct to
GBT
GBT MI None BEH/treatment ad-
herence + PHY/
glucose control
4 mo (73%)
26 Hospital eat-
ing disorders
clinic
125 0/125 BN Adapted
MET (4)
Possible P Adapted CBT
(4)
MET and
CBT
MAN +
SUP
BEH/binging +
BEH/purging +
RC
4 wk (54%)
Notes for Tables 16.1a–16.1c. See references at end of chapter for the list of studies by number.
Studies 11a and 11b are the two different samples of Project MATCH (outpatient and aftercare, respectively). Studies marked with an asterisk (*) involve one of the founders of motiva-
tional interviewing (Miller or Rollnick) as an investigator.
Setting: EAP, employee assistance programs; ER, emergency room; GMP, general medical practice; SAC, substance abuse clinic; VA, Veterans Administration
225
Sample characteristics/Severity: AA, alcohol abuse according to DSM-III-R (DSM, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders); AD, alcohol dependence according to DSM-
III-R; ARE, in emergency room following an alcohol-related event; BN, women with bulimia nervosa according to DSM-IV; CB, college students reporting “binge drinking”; CH, college
students reporting “heavy drinking”; DC, diagnosis of substance abuse or dependence with a comorbid mood or psychotic disorder according to DSM-IV; DD, diagnosis of substance
abuse or dependence (with no comorbidity) according to DSM-III-R; HBP, hypertensive (high blood pressure) patients; HD, heavy drinkers as operatio nalized by > 28 standard drinks/
week; HL, patients with hyperlipidemia (total serum cholesterol > 5.2 mmol/liter); HU, heroin users with no polydrug use; IDU, injecting drug users; IT, inpatient treatment of at least 7
days’ duration for alcohol-related problems; MA, Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test (MAST; Selzer, 1971) score≥ 10 (“clinically severe”); MU, marijuana users with no polydrug use;
NIDDM, non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus patients; PSY, psychiatric inpatients, most (75%) with a mood or psychotic disorder (according toDSM-IV) and a comorbid substance
disorder; SC, self-concerned drinkers answering a study-recruitment advertisement; SM, Short Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test (SMAST; Selzer et al., 1975) score of 3–8 (“interme-
diate”).
Intervention type: AS, Drinker’s Check-Up (DCU; Miller et al., 1988) or similar assessment device that constitutes part of the intervention (i.e., beyond mere baseline assessment com-
mon to all groups); BM, behavior modification techniques; HMI, “high” AMI involving six 45-minute sessions; LMI, “low” AMI involving one 45-minute s ession; MC, motivational
consulting, a brief AMI developed for the study; MET, motivational enhancement therapy, a manualized, four-session AMI (Miller et al., 1992); MF, mailed feedback; MID, AMI for in-
jecting drug users, five 30-minute sessions with no specific feedback component; MIF, AMI for heroin users, a 1-hour session plus a 15-minute follow- up 1 week later (Saunders et al.,
1991); MIFB, feedback delivered in a motivational interviewing style; MIHIV, AMI for HIV risk reduction (Baker & Dixon, 1991); MIM, AMI for medical se ttings (Rollnick et al.,
1992); MISF, AMI with some feedback component; MIU, AMI with feedback on URICA (McConnaughy et al., 1989) results; PMI, AMI over the telephone, five 15 -minute sessions;
RPB, relapse prevention booklet; SH, self-help booklet; SL, summary letter (handwritten) sent 1 month after the intervention; BF, GBT, IP, MT, RL, RT , SO, and SP, see Comparison
group for definitions.
Use of the AMI: Adjunct, AMI used as a supplement to other clinical services; FU, AMI used as a follow-up to residential care; P, AMI used as a prelude or preparation forfurther treat-
ment; S, AMI used as a stand-alone treatment; BF, GBT, SO, and SP, see Comparison group for definitions.
Comparison group: AP, attention-placebo interview, which included some feedback; BA, Brief advice (~5 minutes) to quit smoking or to reduce HIV risk behaviors; BF, bri ef feedback
with normative comparison (regarding exercise levels); CBT, cognitive-behavioral skills therapy (12 sessions); CFB, feedback delivered in a confrontative style; ED, education on opiate-
related information, a 1-hour session plus a 15-minute follow-up; GBT, group behavior therapy, a 16-week weight-control program; I, intervention g roup; IL, informational letter re-
garding risks of drinking during pregnancy; IP, informational pamphlets/bibliotherapy; MT, methadone clinic, standard treatment; RL, resource list (e.g., treatment agencies, leisure cen-
ters); RP, relapse prevention, individual sessions (Marlatt & Gordon, 1985); RPSG, relapse prevention support groups (Stephens et al., 1994); RR, r isk reduction, an intervention
focusing on a hierarchy of safer injecting practices; RT, residential treatment for alcohol addiction; SBC, brief skills-based counseling; SD, sta ndard dietary intervention; SI, standard
preadmission interview and hospital program description; SO, standard outpatient treatment; SP, standard inpatient psychiatric treatment (last ing an average of 14 days); TSF, twelve-
step facilitation therapy (12 sessions); WL, waiting list; AS and MIHIV, see Intervention type for definitions.
Therapist(s) training: AMI, adaptation of motivational interviewing; MI, motivational interviewing; BM and MET, see Intervention type for definitions; CBT, RR, and TSF, see Compar-
ison group for definitions.
Intervention quality control: AUD, sessions audiotaped for quality control; COD, session content coded by independent raters; CR, client rating of sessions; MAN, manualized interven-
tion; OBS, therapist(s) observed by peers/supervisors; RS, rating of sessions performed routinely; SUP, ongoing supervision provided to therapist(s); VID, sessions videotaped for quality
control.
Measurement type/target: ARP, alcohol-related problems; ATI, client attribute measures; BEH, behavioral measures; BP, blood pressure; I, intervention group; MRP, marijua na-related
problems; ORP, opiate-related problems; PHY, physiological measures; PRO, process measures; RC, readiness-for-change measures.
to outcome according to its methodological quality. We then summed the
cross-product points from all of the studies to derive the Cumulative Evidence
Score (CES) for the efficacy of AMIs in each domain, as shown in Tables
16.2a–16.2c. For comparative purposes, Table 16.2d presents a summary of
the evidence for the efficacy of several specific treatments for alcohol prob -
lems (taken from Miller et al., 1998) alongside the evidence for AMIs in this
same domain (from Table 16.2a).
Thus, the cumulative evidence from controlled clinical trials provides
strong support for the efficacy of AMIs in treating alcohol problems (CES =
+222), with 11 of 12 samples showing positive results. In other problem areas,
however, the evidence is less conclusive. Of 10 AMI studies in the domain of
smoking, drug addiction, HIV risk behaviors, and psychiatric treatment ad -
herence, five yielded positive outcomes (OLS), with a total CES of –12. Four
of five clinical trials for diet, exercise, and other health behaviors showed sup-
port for the potential efficacy of AMIs in this realm (CE S = + 62).
When AMIs are compared to other common treatments for alcohol prob-
lems (Table 16.2d), the results are extremely favorable: AMIs have the highest
cumulative evidence total among these different treatment approaches (e.g.,
CES = +222 for AMIs versus +120 for social skills training and +22 for cogni-
tive therapy). The weight of evidence from controlled clinical trials, corrected
for methodological quality, therefore provides good support for the efficacy of
AMIs in the treatment of alcohol problems.
/G44/G4F /G41/G4D/G49/G73 /G57/G4F/G52/G4B/G3F/G3A /G41 /G51/G55/G41/G4C/G49/G54/G41/G54/G49/G56/G45 /G4F/G55/G54/G43/G4F/G4D/G45 /G52/G45/G56/G49/G45/G57
Although we have just summarized a more quantitative approach to evaluat-
ing the efficacy of AMI clinical trials, it is also valuable to consider these stud-
ies from a qualitative perspective. In this way, common themes can be high -
lighted and the most notable studies can be explored in depth in order to give
the reader a palpable sense of the current state of clinical research related to
motivational interviewing.
/G41/G4D/G49/G73 /G66/G6F/G72 /G41/G6C/G63/G6F/G68/G6F/G6C /G50/G72/G6F/G62/G6C/G65/G6D/G73
Nearly half of the studies in this review (11 of 26) have been conducted in the
domain of alcohol problems. Two of these (Bien et al., 1993; Brown & Miller,
1993) used an AMI as a prelude to further clinical treatment, while the other
nine studies used an AMI as a stand-alone treatment.
/G41/G4D/G49/G73 /G61/G73 /G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G50/G72/G65/G6C/G75/G64/G65/G73
Brown and Miller (1993) investigated the efficacy of an AMI as preparation
for entering residential treatment for alcoholism. The AMI group received an
additional (post-baseline) assessment session, followed by a second session in
226 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
which each person received feedback, in an empathic style, on his or her as -
sessment results. Measurement included pretreatment and postdischarge ques-
tionnaires (e.g., the Alcohol Use Inventory [AUI]; Horn, Wanberg, & Foster,
1990; the Brief Drinker Profile [BDP] and the Follow-up Drinker Profile
[FDP]; Miller & Marlatt, 1987). As in many of the studies reviewed here, al -
cohol consumption was converted into standard ethanol content (SEC) units,
with one unit equivalent to one-half ounce of ethanol (Miller, Heather, &
Hall, 1991), while peak weekly blood alcohol concentration (BAC) levels
were projected from self-reported consumption by computer program (Mark -
ham, Miller, & Archiniega, 1993) as a reflection of intoxication levels.
The Efficacy of Motivational Interviewing 227
TABLE 16.2a. Summary of Evidence for the Efficacy of
AMIs for Alcohol Problems
Study MQS OLS CES
1* 10 +2 +20
2* 13 +2 +26
3 9 +2 +18
4 13 +2 +26
5 12 +2 +24
6* 8 –2 –16
7* 14 +2 +28
8 13 +2 +26
9* 9 +2 +18
10* 9 +2 +18
11a* 17 +1 +17
11b* 17 +1 +17
Total CES +222
TABLE 16.2b. Summary of Evidence for the Efficacy of
AMIs for Smoking, Drug Addiction, HIV Risk Behavior,
and Psychiatric Treatment Adherence
Study MQS OLS CES
12 10 –2 –20
13* 10 +1 +10
14 9 –1 –9
15 6 +1 +6
16 10 –1 –10
17 9 +1 +9
18 14 +2 +28
19 12 –2 –24
20 10 –2 –20
21 9 +2 +18
Total CES –12
Three months after discharge, the overall sample showed substantial
improvement on both consumption measures. The AMI clients showed signifi-
cantly more improvement in SEC (but not BAC) relative to the no-treatment
controls. Some 57% of the AMI clients versus 29% of the controls were absti-
nent from drinking 3 months postdischarge.
Bien and colleagues (1993) compared two sessions of an AMI (involving
detailed assessment and feedback, as in Brown and Miller, 1993) to an atten -
tion-placebo condition in which only brief feedback was provided, along with
information about the VA alcohol treatment program. Subsequently, all cli -
ents received the standard outpatient treatment (group therapy based on a
228 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
TABLE 16.2c. Summary of Evidence for the Efficacy of
AMIs for Diet, Exercise, and Health Behaviors
Study MQS OLS CES
22 10 –2 –20
23H 8 +2 +16
23L 8 +2 +16
24H 11 +1 +11
24L 11 +1 +11
25 10 +2 +20
26 8 +1 +8
Total CES
† +62
TABLE 16.2d. Summary of Evidence for the Efficacy of Specific Treatment
Methods for Alcohol Problems
Modality
Average
MQS
No. of
studies with
positive OLS
No. of
studies with
negative OLS
Total CES
AMIs 11.33 11 1 +222
Social skills training A 10.94 11 6 +120
Community
reinforcement approachA
13.25 4 0 +80
GABA agonist
medicationA
12.00 3 0 +72
Cognitive TherapyA 10.26 3 4 +22
Self-help manualA 12.00 2 3 +1
Placebo medicationA 13.00 1 2 –27
Notes for Tables 16.2a–16.2d . See references at end of the chapter for the list of studies by number.
Studies 11a and 11b are the two different samples of Project MATCH (outpatient and aftercare, respectively).
A, adapted from Miller et al. (1998); CES, Cumulative Evidence Score; H, “high” AMI intervention group in
the study; L, “low” AMI intervention group in the study; MQS, Methodological Quality Score; OLS, Outcome
Logic Score. Studies marked with an asterisk (*) involve one of the founders of motivational interviewing
(Miller or Rollnick) as an investigator. †Two studies in this area (23 and 24) contribute a disproportionate
amount of cumulative evidence points to the CES total, since each of these studies employed two distinct AMI
groups (“high” and “low”), which are coded separately for treatment effects (OLS).
twelve-step model) available through the Veterans Administration. At 3-
month follow-up, the AMI group showed significant reductions on a compos-
ite drinking variable relative to the control group, but these differences were
no longer significant at 6-month follow-up, probably due to a combination of
the AMI group relapsing and the control group catching up.
Both of these studies (Bien et al., 1993; Brown & Miller, 1993) recruited
clients in the clinically severe range of alcohol addiction, and both found evi -
dence supporting an AMI as a treatment prelude at 3-month follow-up. Inter-
estingly, the AMI intervention yielded positive outcomes in each study, despite
its use as a prelude to a considerably more confrontative treatment approach.
/G41/G4D/G49/G73 /G61/G73 /G53/G74/G61/G6E/G64/G2D/G41/G6C/G6F/G6E/G65 /G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74/G73 /G43/G6F/G6D/G70/G61/G72/G65/G64 /G74/G6F /G4E/G6F/G2D/G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G43/G6F/G6E/G74/G72/G6F/G6C/G73
A minimum requirement for demonstrating treatment efficacy is to show that
a treatment is more efficacious than the passage of time and reactive effects of
measurement. In the area of alcohol problems, six such studies have been pub-
lished using an AMI as a stand-alone treatment compared to no-treatment
controls (Borsari & Carey, 2000; Gentilello et al., 1999; Heather, Rollnick,
Bell, & Richmond, 1996; Marlatt et al., 1998; Miller et al., 1988; Miller,
Benefield, & Tonigan, 1993). The subject populations have been rather di-
verse, including high-risk (Marlatt et al., 1998) and binge drinkers (Borsari &
Carey, 2000); college students and community samples recruited for drinking
feedback (Miller et al., 1988, 1993); patients in a general hospital identified as
problem drinkers (Heather et al., 1996); and patients who were hospitalized
through the emergency room for alcohol-related accidents (Gentilello et al.,
1999).
Five of these studies (all except Miller et al., 1988) demonstrated clear
differences between AMIs and no-treatment controls on drinking consump -
tion at short-term (6 weeks) and even longer-term (3 years) follow-ups.
Furthermore, while Miller and colleagues (1988) did not report any signifi -
cant differences between the AMI and no-treatment groups at 6-week follow-
up, those receiving the AMI did show significant within-group reductions in
alcohol consumption (SEC) and peak intoxication levels (BAC) through 18
months of follow-up. With some exceptions, these results support the efficacy
of AMIs as stand-alone treatments for alcohol problems. We will highlight
two of these studies that are particularly noteworthy below.
To evaluate the efficacy of an AMI to reduce the harmful consequences of
heavy drinking among college students, Marlatt and colleagues (1998) re -
cruited 506 high-risk college freshmen who were randomly assigned to either
a brief AMI or a no-treatment control. The brief AMI intervention, developed
by the authors for the college population, involved a single session of drink -
ing-related feedback in a motivational interviewing style, as well as education
about alcohol and its effects. After 1 year, those participants whose drinking
was considered to be high-risk were given a second AMI feedback session,
either by telephone or face-to-face.
Standardized measures of drinking rates, alcohol dependence, and alcohol-
The Efficacy of Motivational Interviewing 229
related problems were taken, including ratings by collaterals (i.e., significant
others in the client’s life). While both treatment and no-treatment groups
showed improvements at 2-year follow-up, the treatment clients showed sig -
nificantly greater improvement on both drinking rates and harmful conse -
quences that was maintained at 4-year follow-up (Baer, Kivlahan, Blume,
McKnight, & Marlatt, 2001).
Gentilello and colleagues (1999) studied the effects of an AMI on 762
trauma center patients who screened positive for problematic alcohol con -
sumption, using serum measures and the Short Michigan Alcoholism Screen -
ing Test (SMAST; Selzer, Vinokur, & Van Rooijen, 1975). The intervention
consisted of a single, half-hour feedback session delivered in a motivational
interviewing style, in addition to a handwritten letter mailed 1 month later
that summarized the session. The study employed two main outcome mea -
sures: alcohol consumption and trauma recurrence after hospital discharge.
After 6 months, alcohol intake was significantly reduced in both groups,
with no significant between-group differences. At the 12-month follow-up
point, the AMI group showed significantly lower weekly alcohol intake than
the no-treatment controls. The high attrition (largely due to loss to follow-up)
for alcohol consumption assessment (almost 50% at 12-month follow-up)
must be borne in mind, however, when interpreting these results.
Trauma recidivism was assessed using a statewide database of emergency
department records to detect a return of study patients to the hospital with a
new injury. After up to 3 years of follow-up, there was a 48% reduction in
hospital admissions for new injuries in the AMI group compared to controls,
although this result failed to reach statistical significance.
This study, the first to examine the use of a brief AMI in a trauma cen-
ter, points to the benefits that AMIs may have in the potentially teachable
window after injury. Alcohol consumption was significantly reduced in the
AMI group, and, perhaps most importantly, the AMI treatment showed
potential to have a lasting (3-year) effect on a socially significant outcome
variable—trauma recidivism. While the recidivism measure was crude in the
sense that an in-state hospital readmission does not necessarily imply an
alcohol-related injury, the measure was nevertheless objective and ecologi -
cally valid, which suggests that the inclusion of a single AMI session in
trauma centers may have a major effect on the long-term health and future
injury risk of such patients.
/G41/G4D/G49/G73 /G61/G73 /G53/G74/G61/G6E/G64/G2D/G41/G6C/G6F/G6E/G65 /G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74/G73 /G43/G6F/G6D/G70/G61/G72/G65/G64 /G74/G6F /G41/G6C/G74/G65/G72/G6E/G61/G74/G69/G76/G65 /G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74/G73
In five of the clinical trials involving AMIs for alcohol problems, the AMI was
used as a stand-alone treatment and compared to some other type of treat -
ment. The apparent credibility of these alternative interventions was highly
varied. In two studies, the alternatives were weak, consisting either of a 5-
minute informational interview with pamphlets and a resource list of alcohol-
related services given to participants (Monti, Colby, Barnett, Spirito, &
230 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
Rohsenow, 1999), or a brief informational letter describing the risks of drink-
ing during pregnancy (Handmaker, Miller, & Manicke, 1999). In three other
studies (Heather et al., 1996; Miller et al., 1993; Project MATCH Research
Group, 1997b), the alternative treatments were at least equal in length to the
AMI interventions tested. One of these studies (Miller et al., 1993) employed
a confrontative feedback session of the same duration as the AMI, while an -
other study (Heather et al., 1996) compared one session of an AMI to one
session of a skills-based counseling approach. The strongest comparison of an
AMI to alternative treatments was in Project MATCH (1997b), in which four
sessions of motivational enhancement therapy (MET; Miller, Zweben,
DiClemente, & Rychtarik, 1992) were compared to two empirically sup -
ported, 12-session treatments—cognitive-behavioral skills therapy (CBT;
Kadden et al., 1992) and twelve-step facilitation therapy (TSF; Nowinski,
Baker, & Carroll, 1992).
Not surprisingly, the two studies that compared an AMI to briefer and
seemingly less credible alternatives yielded some positive results for the AMI.
Monti and colleagues (1999) found that, relative to the comparison treatment,
a single 35- to 40-minute session of an AMI delivered in the emergency room
after an alcohol-related event significantly reduced several key alcohol-related
problems, such as drinking and driving, moving violations, and alcohol-
related injuries in the 6 months following the initial emergency room visit.
However, this same study did not find any significant group differences in
actual alcohol use outcomes at 6-month follow-up. Handmaker and col-
leagues (1999) studied pregnant drinkers (mild to heavy) and determined that,
among women with the highest intoxication levels, an AMI significantly low-
ered BAC at 2-month follow-up relative to an informational letter, but SEC
and total days abstinent were not significantly different between the groups.
Overall, then, there appears to be empirical support for the efficacy of AMIs
as stand-alone treatments when compared to either no-treatment controls (as
in the previous section) or to weak alternatives.
When AMIs have been compared to more viable alternative treatments,
however, the AMIs have fared equally well but not better. A study by Miller
and colleagues (1993) failed to detect any significant differences between the
two intervention groups under investigation—feedback delivered in either a
motivational interviewing or a confrontative style—at any follow-up point.
Heather and colleagues (1996) also found no significant differences in out -
come between participants on general hospital wards who received an AMI
and those who instead received a similar quantity of skills-based counseling.
Project MATCH (1997b), the largest psychotherapy outcome study conducted
to date, found no significant differences between the three treatments tested.
Due to its magnitude, scope, and powerful design, Project MATCH
(1997b) will be described in more detail here. The project actually consisted of
two separate samples, one involving 952 clients in five outpatient substance
abuse clinics, and the other involving 774 clients receiving aftercare treatment
following an episode of inpatient or intensive day hospital treatment (i.e., as a
The Efficacy of Motivational Interviewing 231
follow-up to residential care). The overall objective of each study was to de -
termine whether various subgroups of alcohol-dependent clients would re -
spond differently to three manual-guided, individual treatments.
The AMI in this study was motivational enhancement therapy (MET;
Miller et al., 1992), which involved four sessions offered at weeks 1, 2, 6, and
12. The first two sessions consisted of a Drinker’s Check-Up (DCU; Miller et
al., 1988) combining the clinical style of motivational interviewing with struc-
tured personal feedback of the client’s assessment results, leading to an indi -
vidualized change plan. The third and fourth sessions served as check-in visits
to review progress, renew motivation for change, and revise the change plan
as necessary. Cognitive-behavioral skills therapy (CBT; Kadden et al., 1992),
based on social learning theory, views drinking as a problem behavior that is
related to other major difficulties in the client’s life; it emphasizes building
skills to increase the ability to cope with situations that are likely to precipi -
tate relapse. Twelve-step facilitation therapy (TSF; Nowinski et al., 1992) is
grounded in the Alcoholics Anonymous concept of alcoholism as a spiritual
and medical disease, and it attempts to promote abstinence by fostering accep-
tance of this disease in concert with a willingness to work through the tradi-
tional 12 steps to recovery.
Ten client characteristics were selected as primary matching variables, in-
cluding motivational readiness to change (measured by URICA; DiClemente
& Hughes, 1990) and social support for drinking versus abstinence (measured
by the Important People and Activities Instrument; Longabaugh, Wirtz, &
Clifford, 1995), as well as secondary matching variables such as readiness to
change (measured by the Stages of Change Readiness and Treatment Eager-
ness Scale [SOCRATES]; Miller, 1992) and anger (measured by the Anger
Scale; Spielberger, 1988).
The two primary outcome measures, percentage of days abstinent (PDA)
and average number of drinks per drinking day (DDD), were derived from
Form 90 (Miller, 1996a), an interview-based assessment device that uses both
time-line follow-back methodology (Sobell & Sobell, 1992) and drinking pat -
tern estimation procedures from the Comprehensive Drinker Profile (Miller &
Marlatt, 1984). Collateral informants and laboratory tests were employed to
monitor changes in client alcohol consumption and to corroborate the self-
reported drinking measures. Attrition was low in both samples studied, with
data for 85% of clients collected at all follow-up points.
Treatment integrity was clearly safeguarded in this study: All therapists
were carefully trained, treatment sessions were monitored by videotape, and
therapist behaviors were evaluated by independent raters who were unaware
of treatment assignment. In this way, the authors were able to determine that
treatment adherence and discriminability among treatments were high, expo -
sure to non-study treatments was minimal, and treatments were comparable
with respect to nonspecific dimensions such as working alliance and therapist
skill.
At follow-ups conducted from 3 months to 3 years after the first therapy
232 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
session, participants in all treatment groups showed significant improvements
on all drinking measures, with no consistent differences between the groups.
There was weak support for the hypothesis that treatment efficacy would be
enhanced by matching clients with certain attributes to particular treatment
modalities. These matching results from Project MATCH are discussed in fur-
ther detail later in this chapter.
Project MATCH employed a comprehensive set of outcome measures to
assess depression, drinking consequences, percentage of days of paid work,
and other life variables that may be affected by alcohol consumption. All of
these measures showed improvement in both samples (outpatient and after -
care), with no significant differences between treatment groups. At 15-month
follow-up, 43% of clients in the aftercare sample showed substantial improve-
ment (i.e., a reduction in both drinking and related problems), while 52% of
the outpatient sample attained this criterion. In both samples, about 35% to
40% of clients did not show any noticeable improvement. In the outpatient
sample, for which MET, CBT, and TSF were the only treatments provided,
30% of the clients were abstinent from alcohol at the 3-year follow-up point,
while those who did drink were nevertheless abstinent two-thirds of the time
in the 90 days before the 3-year interview.
Project MATCH did not have a no-treatment control group, since its pri-
mary intention was to investigate treatment matching rather than to test com-
parative efficacy. Although this limits conclusions about how well the treat-
ments worked on an absolute basis, it remains noteworthy that AMI produced
positive outcomes on drinking and related variables with a clinically severe
population. Furthermore, AMI performed as well as CBT and TSF, two em-
pirically supported and substantially longer treatment approaches.
/G41/G4D/G49/G73 /G66/G6F/G72 /G41/G6C/G63/G6F/G68/G6F/G6C /G50/G72/G6F/G62/G6C/G65/G6D/G73/G3A/G44/G69/G73/G63/G75/G73/G73/G69/G6F/G6E
There is cause for optimism regarding the value of AMIs in the treatment of
alcohol problems. In general, AMIs have yielded noticeable effects in this do -
main with relatively small interventions (often no more than a session or two).
Furthermore, the positive results of the AMI interventions are sometimes seen
as soon 6 weeks posttreatment (e.g., Borsari & Carey, 2000; Miller et al.,
1993) and are detectable in follow-ups of up to 4 years (Marlatt et al., 1998).
Moreover, most of these studies have been methodologically rigorous. Al-
most all of the studies (except Brown & Miller, 1993, and Heather et al.,
1996) used true randomization as a means of equating groups of clients before
treatment. The dependent measures were focused and precise, targeting perti -
nent areas of outcome (i.e., alcohol consumption) directly, while some studies
also employed secondary outcome measures of auxiliary drinking behaviors
and drinking-related consequences. In all of these studies except for Monti
and colleagues (1999), Borsari and Carey (2000), and Gentilello and col -
leagues (1999), the main dependent variables were collateralized so that self-
report drinking data could be corroborated, with collateral and self-report
The Efficacy of Motivational Interviewing 233
measures generally showing high correlations (e.g., correlations exceeding .90
in Brown & Miller, 1993). Furthermore, the majority of alcohol consumption
measures used in the studies were derived from self-report questionnaires that
have shown good reliability and validity in previous research (e.g., Form 90,
Tonigan et al., 1997; AUI, Skinner & Allen, 1983), as well as consistency with
laboratory-derived, biological consumption markers (e.g., O’Farrell & Maisto,
1987; Project MATCH, 1997b). Finally, with but one exception (Gentilello et
al., 1999), there has been little subject attrition.
In addition to being a sound design aspect, the measurement of collaterals
constitutes a key element of these AMI studies: If important others are notic -
ing the client’s change in alcohol consumption, then this is likely to be a mean-
ingful change. Moreover, clinical significance is bolstered by the frequent find-
ings that reduction in consumption is associated with other key behavior
changes like decreased hospital visits for alcohol-related trauma (Gentilello et
al., 1999; Monti et al., 1999), reduced moving violations (Monti et al., 1999),
less absence from work (Project MATCH, 1997b), and improved social func -
tioning (Marlatt et al., 1998). These results show promise for AMIs as an in -
tervention with broad-based effects that can precipitate widespread life
changes beyond the target problem (Miller, Hedrick, & Taylor, 1983).
Taken together, these studies provide evidence for the clinical utility of
AMIs with problem drinkers in a variety of settings—hospitals (Brown &
Miller, 1993; Gentilello et al., 1999; Heather et al., 1996; Monti et al., 1999),
outpatient clinics (Handmaker et al., 1999; Miller et al., 1993; Project
MATCH, 1997b), and even college campuses (Borsari & Carey, 2000;
Marlatt et al., 1998)—as well as with both men and women. While selection
criteria have varied across studies, most have employed participants who were
having serious life problems relating to their alcohol use.
One major shortcoming in most of these studies bears further scrutiny.
While the dependent variables are clearly specified in almost all studies, the in-
dependent variables—the AMI treatments under investigation—are often
vague and imprecise. Treatment fidelity, or how fairly and faithfully a treat -
ment is represented (Kazdin, 1992), is difficult to ascertain because of the pau-
city of adequate treatment manuals for the AMIs. With the exception of Pro -
ject MATCH (1997b) and Marlatt and colleagues (1998), the vast majority of
studies simply referred to the first edition of this book (Miller & Rollnick,
1991) as the AMI intervention under study. However, as the authors of this
book point out, learning motivational interviewing is not merely a matter of
reading about it (see Chapter 13 in this volume).
Furthermore, treatment integrity, or whether the therapeutic procedures
were carried out as intended (Kazdin, 1992), was rarely assessed in these stud-
ies. In most cases, training procedures were not carefully described, while in -
tegrity checks to measure the implementation of treatment—including video -
taping, ongoing supervision, and coding of actual therapist behaviors—were
entirely absent from several studies (Brown & Miller, 1993; Gentilello et al.,
1999; Handmaker et al., 1999; Miller et al., 1988). Finally, the issue of treat -
234 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
ment credibility (whether therapists and clients found the intervention believ -
able) was alluded to only occasionally (e.g., Bien et al., 1993) and was never
systematically addressed in any study. Thus, while all of the studies included
in this review appeared to have ample treatment fidelity (i.e., the four basic el-
ements of motivational interviewing) in theory, it is impossible to ascertain
whether these principles were in fact translated into treatment integrity in clin-
ical practice.
/G41/G4D/G49/G73 /G66/G6F/G72 /G43/G69/G67/G61/G72/G65/G74/G74/G65 /G53/G6D/G6F/G6B/G69/G6E/G67
To date, only two controlled clinical trials of AMIs for smoking have been
published. Colby and colleagues (1998) compared 5 minutes of advice to quit
smoking to a 30-minute AMI for adolescent smokers. Although the results at
3-month follow-up favored the AMI on all measures, none of the comparisons
were significant.
Butler and colleagues (1999) studied adult smokers drawn from general
medical practices.
5 Similar to Colby and colleagues (1998), the comparison
group received brief authoritarian style advice to quit smoking. While both in-
terventions (AMI and advice) were precisely described and manualized (Roll-
nick et al., 1992), no integrity checks were performed to ensure that the treat-
ment was in fact delivered according to the manual. At 6-months follow-up,
the AMI group showed significantly greater improvements than the advice
group in four of the eight outcome variables, including decreased smoking in
the previous 24 hours, increased delay in time to first cigarette of the day, in-
creased attempts to quit lasting a week or more during the follow-up period,
and movement to a more advanced stage of change. However, there were no
significant differences between groups on measures that would more power-
fully affect the clients’ health, such as abstinence rates in the previous month,
reduction in the number of cigarettes smoked, and overall quit attempts. On
the whole, only 4% of the participants in the study actually quit smoking.
Due to the paucity of studies on AMIs for smoking and the relatively
small effects obtained therein, empirical support for the efficacy of AMIs in
this area is lacking at the present time and awaits further study.
/G41/G4D/G49/G73 /G66/G6F/G72 /G4F/G74/G68/G65/G72 /G44/G72/G75/G67/G73 /G6F/G66 /G41/G62/G75/G73/G65
Five studies have been published on the efficacy of AMIs for other drugs of
abuse (Booth, Kwiatkowski, Iguchi, Pinto, & John, 1998; Martino, Carroll,
O’Malley, & Rounsaville, 2000; Saunders, Wilkinson, & Philips, 1995;
Schneider, Casey, & Kohn, 2000; Stephens, Roffman, & Curtin, 2000). Four
of these studies (all but Stephens et al., 2000) investigated the utility of an
AMI as a prelude to further treatment. Key dependent variables in these four
studies included treatment participation (Martino et al., 2000), treatment en -
try (Booth et al., 1998; Schneider et al., 2000), or intention to seek treatment
(Saunders et al., 1995). All four studies used comparison treatments of the
The Efficacy of Motivational Interviewing 235
same length as the AMI being tested. Two of these alternative treatments ap -
peared to be quite viable (Booth et al., 1998; Schneider et al., 2000), whereas
the other two did not (Martino et al., 2000; Saunders et al., 1995). Two of
these studies (Saunders et al., 1995; Schneider et al., 2000) employed a spe -
cific treatment manual, while two (Booth et al., 1998; Schneider et al., 2000)
included extensive intervention quality control such as ongoing treatment in -
tegrity checks.
The two studies that compared AMIs to viable alternative treatments
(Booth et al., 1998; Schneider et al., 2000) showed quite positive outcomes for
the AMI, although there were no significant between-group differences in ei -
ther study. Schneider et al. (2000) gave substance abusers feedback about
their drug use that was delivered in either a motivational interviewing (AMI)
or a confrontative style (CI). More than half of the clients subsequently sought
additional treatment. In addition, both groups showed significant and equiva-
lent improvements on all substance use measures, with 21% of AMI and 19%
of CI clients abstinent after 9 months, as well as significant reductions in the
adverse effects of alcohol or drugs on work performance.
Booth and colleagues (1998) studied the effects of an AMI on street-
recruited, multiple-injecting drug users. The AMI consisted of five 30-minute
counseling sessions focused on the resolution of ambivalence, increasing dis-
crepancy between goals and present drug use, a pro-con drug worksheet, and
a specific suggestion of treatment entry as one of a menu of viable options.
6
The comparison group received a similar duration of risk reduction (RR), an
intervention that emphasized a hierarchy of safer injecting practices. The main
dependent variable was whether clients entered treatment, which was opera-
tionally defined as completing the intake procedure for the substance abuse
clinic involved in the study. After 3 months, a substantial percentage of clients
in both groups entered treatment, but there was no significant difference be -
tween conditions: 40% of the AMI and 43% of the RR clients entered treat -
ment.
Two problems with this study must be considered. First, because this
study included intervention quality checks (e.g., 40% of sessions were
audiotaped and content-coded by independent raters), the authors were able
to discover that the AMI was not being properly delivered.
7 Second, treatment
entry, the main outcome measure in this study, was not adequately assessed: It
consisted only of ascertaining whether a participant filled out an intake form
at a single substance abuse clinic, without taking into account actual follow-
through or applications to other treatment clinics.
Both studies that compared AMIs to less credible alternative treatments
(Martino et al., 2000; Saunders et al., 1995) produced some positive results
for the AMIs. Martino and colleagues (2000) gave a single session of an AMI
to dually-diagnosed clients who were seeking admission to a partial hospital
treatment plan, while control participants received a standard preadmission
interview of similar duration. Twelve weeks after discharge from the hospital
program, the AMI group was superior to the controls on several measures
236 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
(less tardiness and early departures throughout the hospital treatment pro -
gram), but not on measures that reflected actual drug use.
Saunders and colleagues (1995) recruited heroin-dependent drug users
who were attending a methadone clinic and provided them with either an
AMI or education. Both interventions consisted of one session with a brief fol-
low-up or review session 1 week later. The AMI was adapted by the authors
as described in the first edition of this book (Saunders et al., 1991) and in -
cluded a one-page “decision matrix” regarding the consequences of opiate
use.
8 The control condition was an education-based interview in which clients
were given drug-related information and referrals in each session. At 6-month
follow-up, only two outcome variables attained between-group significance:
Compared to controls, the AMI group showed both a decrease in opiate-
related problems and greater treatment compliance.
/G41/G4D/G49 /G61/G73 /G61 /G53/G74/G61/G6E/G64/G2D/G41/G6C/G6F/G6E/G65 /G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74
Only one study investigated an AMI as a stand-alone treatment for substance
abuse (Stephens et al., 2000). In this study, adult marijuana users were as-
signed either to a delayed treatment control group or to one of the following
treatment conditions: two individual sessions of an AMI (which also included
cognitive-behavioral strategies) or 14 cognitive-behavioral group therapy ses-
sions based on the relapse prevention model (Stephens, Roffman, & Simpson,
1994). While there were no significant differences between the two interven-
tion groups at any follow-up, both groups showed significantly reduced mari-
juana use and dependence, fewer marijuana-related problems, and increased
abstinence relative to controls (37% versus only 9% for controls). Further,
participants in the AMI group were using marijuana less than half as many
days at the 16-month follow-up point as they were before treatment. Overall,
this well-designed study suggests that a brief course of an AMI may be more
efficacious than no treatment and equally efficacious as extended group ther -
apy for a marijuana-dependent population.
In summary, then, there is evidence for the efficacy of AMIs as a prelude
to further treatment for drug-addicted populations. In this context, AMIs
have been shown to be as efficacious as credible alternatives (Booth et al.,
1998; Schneider et al., 2000) and superior to less viable comparison groups
(Martino et al., 2000; Saunders et al., 1995). As a stand-alone intervention for
marijuana users, one study showed that a relatively brief AMI is as efficacious
as more extensive group therapy and significantly more efficacious than no
treatment (Stephens et al., 2000).
/G41/G4D/G49/G73 /G66/G6F/G72 /G50/G73/G79/G63/G68/G69/G61/G74/G72/G69/G63 /G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G41/G64/G68/G65/G72/G65/G6E/G63/G65 /G69/G6E /G44/G75/G61/G6C/G6C/G79
/G44/G69/G61/G67/G6E/G6F/G73/G65/G64 /G50/G61/G74/G69/G65/G6E/G74/G73
Only two published studies have addressed the question of whether AMIs are
efficacious for dually diagnosed patients—those with concomitant psychiatric
The Efficacy of Motivational Interviewing 237
and substance use disorders. Martino and colleagues (2000), also discussed in
the preceding section, provided some support for the use of an AMI as a pre -
paratory treatment to improve hospital program adherence among psychiatri-
cally ill substance abusers.
Swanson, Pantalon, and Cohen (1999) examined the effects of an AMI
for dually diagnosed inpatients, all of whom received the usual hospital treat -
ment that averaged 14 days. One group received an AMI as an adjunct to
these clinical services, while the remaining group served as a control. The AMI
included a 15-minute session of feedback and discussion on stage of change
scores (as assessed by URICA; DiClemente & Hughes, 1990) at the beginning
of hospitalization. A second AMI session, lasting an hour, was provided a few
days before discharge in order to highlight the patient-stated advantages of
change and treatment adherence.
Before discharge from the hospital, all patients were given a referral to an
outpatient psychiatric clinic. A significantly greater percentage of the AMI pa-
tients than the control patients (47% versus 21%) attended their first after -
care appointment. Taken together with the results of Martino and colleagues
(2000), these findings suggest that the addition of an AMI to an inpatient
treatment program may have beneficial effects on treatment adherence for du-
ally diagnosed patients.
/G41/G4D/G49/G73 /G66/G6F/G72 /G48/G49/G56 /G52/G69/G73/G6B /G42/G65/G68/G61/G76/G69/G6F/G72/G73
Only two studies have been published on AMIs for HIV risk reduction, both
by the same clinical research team. Baker, Heather, Wodak, Dixon, and Holt
(1993) tested an AMI as an adjunct to standard treatment with injecting drug
users enrolled in a methadone program. The AMI provided a single session of
personal risk feedback, along with a motivational interviewing style discus -
sion of high HIV risk behaviors. The comparison treatment included a single
session of an AMI, followed by five sessions of relapse prevention (RP; based
on Marlatt & Gordon, 1985) that focused on the acquisition of different skills
aimed at helping prevent relapse to injecting and unsafe sex. A control group
received only brief advice about HIV risk behaviors and an educational pam -
phlet, while all groups continued to receive the standard methadone program
care.
At 6-month follow-up, there were no significant differences among the
three groups on HIV risk behaviors. The group receiving both the AMI and
RP, however, did show a significant reduction relative to the other two groups
for needle-sharing behaviors in the heaviest risk-taking month. This study in -
cluded several commendable design features, such as the use of collaterals and
objective devices (e.g., urinalysis) to corroborate some of the self-report mea -
sures, and sound quality control procedures (manuals, supervision, and
audiotaping) of the interventions. However, conclusions from this study must
remain tentative because the three groups differed significantly on two key
pretreatment measures.
238 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
Baker, Kochan, Dixon, Heather, and Wodak (1994) recruited 200 inject-
ing drug users who were not currently involved in any form of treatment for
drug dependence. The intervention group received a one-session AMI, along
with a relapse prevention booklet of cognitive-behavioral coping strategies.
There were no significant differences in outcome between this treatment
group and a no-treatment control group, while both groups showed improve -
ments at 6-month follow-up. To date, there is no convincing evidence for the
efficacy of AMIs in reducing HIV risk behaviors.
/G41/G4D/G49/G73 /G66/G6F/G72 /G44/G69/G65/G74/G2C /G45/G78/G65/G72/G63/G69/G73/G65/G2C /G61/G6E/G64 /G4F/G74/G68/G65/G72 /G4C/G69/G66/G65/G73/G74/G79/G6C/G65 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65/G73
Four studies have been published on the use of AMIs for changes in diet, exer-
cise, or other lifestyle habits. One of these (Mhurchu, Margetts. & Speller,
1998) investigated an AMI as a stand-alone intervention, while three (Har -
land et al., 1999; Smith, Heckemeyer, Kratt, & Mason, 1997; Woollard et al.,
1995) tested an AMI as an adjunct to other treatments (usual medical care,
brief feedback, or group therapy). Three studies (Mhurchu et al., 1998; Smith
et al., 1997; Woollard et al., 1995) recruited adults with medical problems—
hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and diabetes, respectively—in an effort to pro-
mote lifestyle changes that could slow the effects of the disease.
Only one of these studies (Mhurchu et al., 1998) used a treatment man-
ual (Rollnick et al., 1992) and took steps to ensure therapist adherence to an
AMI model, although the study failed to specify the motivational interviewing
training obtained by the dietician who conducted the intervention. The other
three studies (Harland et al., 1999; Smith et al., 1997; Woollard et al., 1995)
lacked any type of intervention quality control beyond the initial therapist
training that was reported in two of them (Harland et al., 1999; Smith et al.,
1997).
Mhurchu and colleagues (1998) studied patients with hyperlipidemia. A
dietician met with clients for three sessions, providing either an AMI or a stan-
dard dietary intervention (advice). At 3-month follow-up, both groups showed
significant reductions on a variety of outcome measures—dietary habits, fat
intake, and body/mass index (BMI)—but there were no significant differences
between the two groups. Furthermore, neither intervention led to significant
reductions in serum cholesterol, the main target of the study, although this
could be due to the uncertain link between dietary advice and cholesterol lev -
els rather than a failure of the intervention itself.
Harland and colleagues (1999) recruited middle-aged adults from a
general medical practice to evaluate the efficacy of an AMI for promoting
physical activity. In addition to a no-treatment control, the study also em -
ployed two separate AMI groups—one consisting of six sessions and the
other of a single session—that aimed to increase exercising without prescrib -
ing specific activities. At the 12-week follow-up, both AMI groups showed
significant and equivalent improvements compared to the control group, but
these gains were not sustained through 1 year of follow-up. Several prob -
The Efficacy of Motivational Interviewing 239
lems with this study may limit its conclusions, such as the use of self-report
measurement with no collateral verification, lack of intervention quality
control, and participants in the longer AMI group only appearing for half
of their scheduled sessions.
Two other studies provided support for the efficacy of AMIs for people
with medical problems (Smith et al., 1997; Woollard et al., 1995). Woollard
and colleagues (1995) assigned hypertensive patients under medical care to re-
ceive either six sessions of an AMI or a single session with five follow-up tele-
phone contacts. Both AMI groups also received some behavior modification
(BM) during their sessions, while a control group received the usual medical
care without any AMI or BM. At the 18-week follow-up, both intervention
groups did equally well and better than the control group. Relative to con -
trols, the six-session AMI group showed significant reductions in both weight
and blood pressure, whereas those in the briefer AMI group significantly de -
creased their alcohol and salt intake. However, two other behavioral targets—
physical activity and smoking—were not significantly altered in any group.
This study suffers from a number of limitations, including the absence of in -
tegrity checks and treatment manuals, no pure AMI group (only AMI plus
BM), and inadequate reporting of AMI training. Nevertheless, the effects re-
ported are clinically significant for an important medical target.
Smith and colleagues (1997) produced positive results for an AMI with
older, obese women treated for diabetes. All patients were assigned to a stan-
dard, 16-week behavioral weight-control program, while one group also re-
ceived three sessions of the AMI (which included individualized feedback on
glycemic control, cardiovascular risk factor status, and behavioral perfor-
mance) as an adjunct to the program. Those who received the AMI did signifi-
cantly better than those who did not, as indicated by increased attendance at
group therapy, increased food diary completion, more frequent blood glucose
recording, and better glycemic control. These results suggest that augmenting a
standard behavioral treatment program with an AMI for obese, diabetic women
may significantly enhance treatment adherence and control of the disease.
The evidence for AMIs in the area of diet, exercise, and other lifestyle be-
haviors is mixed. While two studies (Harland et al., 1999; Mhurchu et al.,
1998) found either no or short-lived advantages of AMIs over alternative
treatments for changing diet or exercise levels, two other studies (Smith et al.,
1997; Woollard et al., 1995) found AMIs to be efficacious as an adjunct to
usual medical care or group therapy for improving control of medical illness.
The possibility that AMIs can help alter the course of potentially life-threaten-
ing physical ailments is clearly noteworthy and merits further study.
/G41/G4D/G49/G73 /G66/G6F/G72 /G45/G61/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G44/G69/G73/G6F/G72/G64/G65/G72/G73
Only one controlled clinical trial has investigated the efficacy of AMIs for eat-
ing disorders. In the first phase of their ongoing study, Treasure and col -
leagues (1999) recruited women with bulimia nervosa and assigned them to
240 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
four sessions of either an AMI or cognitive-behavioral therapy. Both interven-
tions were manualized and conducted by trained therapists under close super-
vision, although no specific integrity checks were implemented.
At 4-week follow-up, both groups showed significant but equivalent im -
provements in self-reported bulimic symptoms, including substantial changes
in binge eating and vomiting. While this study is limited by the short follow-
up period and high attrition (46%), it also represents a promising start to in -
corporating AMIs into the treatment of eating disorders, especially given the
fact that more than half of the women achieved a clinically significant im -
provement in just 4 weeks of treatment.
/G43/G6F/G6E/G63/G6C/G75/G73/G69/G6F/G6E/G73 /G52/G65/G67/G61/G72/G64/G69/G6E/G67 /G74/G68/G65 /G45/G66/G66/G69/G63/G61/G63/G79 /G6F/G66 /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
/G61/G6E/G64 /G41/G4D/G49/G73
• There are no studies evaluating the efficacy of “pure” motivational in -
terviewing, as defined by Miller and Rollnick (1991; this volume). Virtually all
of the studies in this review evaluate adaptations of motivational interviewing
(what we have called “AMIs”) that consist of either problem feedback deliv-
ered in a motivational interviewing style or other significant modifications.
For the studies evaluating feedback-based AMIs, we have no clear data exam-
ining whether it is the feedback, the motivational interviewing style, or the
combination that is necessary for positive outcome. Miller and colleagues
(1993) explicitly attempted to tease apart these two components by compar-
ing a feedback intervention delivered in a supportive (motivational interview-
ing) style with one delivered in a confrontative manner. While short-term fol-
low-up data and post hoc analyses favored the motivational interviewing
style, the long-term results showed no significant differences between the two
feedback styles.
• In the areas of alcohol problems and drug addiction, relatively brief
AMIs (one to four sessions) have yielded moderate to large effects and good
maintenance over time. This conclusion is supported by quantitative analysis
(Burke, Arkowitz, & Menchola, 2001; Dunn et al., 2001), methodological
ratings (Table 16.2d), and the qualitative review. As yet there are no data on
lengthier AMI interventions, leaving open the question of whether there is a
“dose effect.” It remains to be determined whether lengthier or more intensive
interventions will lead to even better outcomes.
• In general, AMIs are more efficacious than no treatment, and they are
not significantly different from credible alternative treatments. While not all
of the studies have employed comparison treatments that were credible and
matched to the AMIs in terms of length, those that have done so (e.g., Booth
et al., 1998; Stephens et al., 2000) have found equivalent degrees of change in
the AMIs and alternative treatments. Further, some studies have demonstrated
that relatively brief AMIs perform as well as longer AMIs and more extensive
alternative treatments (Harland et al., 1999; Project MATCH, 1997b).
The Efficacy of Motivational Interviewing 241
• AMIs are efficacious, both as stand-alone treatments and as preludes to
other treatments. In psychotherapy and most of medicine, stand-alone treat -
ments are the rule rather than the exception. To our knowledge, it is rare that
a treatment can be efficacious both as a stand-alone treatment and as a pre -
lude or adjunct treatment that enhances the efficacy of a variety of other treat-
ments. Yet this is exactly what some of the research on AMIs suggests, even
when the treatments with which it is paired are based on models and tech -
niques quite different from those of the AMIs (Bien et al., 1993; Brown &
Miller, 1993).
• While the majority of outcome studies are in the areas of alcohol prob-
lems and drug addiction, there are also studies that support the efficacy of
AMIs for people with hypertension, diabetes, dual diagnoses, and eating dis -
orders. Mixed support has been found for AMIs in the domain of cigarette
smoking, increasing physical activity, and enhancing dietary adherence in pa -
tients with hyperlipidemia. No support has been found for AMIs in the reduc-
tion of HIV risk behaviors.
• Many of the outcomes of AMIs, especially for alcohol problems, not
only have been statistically significant but also appear to be clinically signifi-
cant. Although none of the studies performed statistical evaluations of clinical
significance (Jacobson, Roberts, Berns, & McGlinchey, 1999), there is good
reason to believe that AMIs have had substantial clinical effects. For example,
drug and alcohol abstinence rates at follow-up have often been considerable
(e.g., 37% in Stephens et al., 2000; 57% in Brown & Miller, 1993). In addi-
tion, when one examines those measures that most clearly relate to the clients’
lives (e.g., the degree of reduction in substance intake, decreases in substance-
related problems, ratings by collaterals), it is often the case that the treatment
has had a real effect on the problem behavior (e.g., Project MATCH, 1997b;
Saunders et al., 1995).
• Most of the studies on AMIs are quite strong in external validity. Ex-
ternal validity is the degree to which the results of a study can be generalized
or extended to settings, populations, or problems other than those in the par -
ticular experimental arrangement (Kazdin, 1992). In many cases, participants
were recruited directly from real-life settings (i.e., hospitals and medical prac -
tices), and even when newspaper advertisements were used in recruitment, the
severity of client problems in these studies generally resembles that of people
who might seek treatment outside of a research project. Further, most of the
studies have not employed extensive exclusionary criteria for participants, so
that the subject populations parallel fairly closely those found in actual clini -
cal practice. Moreover, the physical settings in which treatment takes place in
these studies are often the very same clinics that offer these services on a non-
research clinical basis.
• The internal validity of AMI studies has been quite variable and often
weak. Internal validity is the ability of the research design to rule out alterna -
tive explanations of the results. It deals with such issues as the nature and ade-
quacy of control groups, adequacy of the specification of the independent
242 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
variable (i.e., replicability), integrity of the treatment, adequacy of measure -
ment of the dependent variables, and the reduction or elimination of possible
sources of bias. We will consider each of these separately below.
Nature and adequacy of the control groups . As noted earlier in this sec -
tion, studies comparing AMIs to alternative treatments sometimes did
not adequately match the credibility or lengths of the treatments (e.g.,
1 hour of an AMI vs. 5 minutes of advice to change the problem behav-
ior). In fact, none of the studies assessed participants’ expectations or
perceptions of how effective they thought the AMI was in comparison
to the alternative treatment(s). If one treatment can generate more pos-
itive expectancies for change, then differences in expectancies rather
than differences in the efficacy of the procedures can potentially ac -
count for any obtained results.
Adequacy of the specification of the independent variable . The majority
of studies were quite weak in this respect, thereby jeopardizing any
strong conclusions. In many of the studies, neither the credentials of
the treatment providers nor the specific training procedures were ade-
quately described. Further, there was little consistency across studies
regarding the nature of the AMI interventions tested (except for the
common use of problem feedback), resulting in a puzzling heterogene-
ity of the AMI interventions under study.
Integrity of treatment . Very few studies included a careful evaluation of
treatment integrity—that is, whether the treatment providers were ac-
tually administering the AMI as directed and whether this could be de-
tected from their interaction with the client. Further, training proce-
dures were rarely standardized (e.g., guided by a manual).
Adequacy of measurement of the dependent variables . The vast majority
of studies have included reliable, well-validated, and standardized self-
report instruments for the assessment of outcome. In addition, out -
come has been measured in several other modalities, including physio -
logical (e.g., urinalysis) and behavioral (e.g., hospital readmissions)
realms, as well as ratings by collaterals. Such multimodal measurement
constitutes a real strength of most of the AMI studies.
Reduction or elimination of possible sources of bias . Most of the studies
left open the possibility of experimenter bias. Often, the alternative
treatments were conducted by research staff who knew that the hy -
potheses predicted the superiority of the AMI, and it is possible that
these researcher-therapists also had their own biases in favor of the
AMI over the alternatives. It is widely known in the psychotherapy lit -
erature that such “therapist allegiances” (Luborsky et al., 1999) may
bias results unfairly in favor of one intervention over another.
Despite these problems in internal validity, we have confidence that AMIs
are efficacious on two grounds. First is converging evidence: The number of
The Efficacy of Motivational Interviewing 243
positive outcomes for AMIs from different studies, each of which may contain
one or more problems, points inevitably to a consistent and robust effect. Sec-
ond, there are three exemplary studies that have eliminated almost all prob -
lems in internal validity (Miller et al., 1993; Project MATCH, 1997b;
Stephens et al., 2000). These three studies provide good support for the effi -
cacy of AMIs in the domain of alcohol problems and drug addiction.
/G48/G6F/G77 /G61/G6E/G64 /G57/G68/G79 /G44/G6F /G41/G4D/G49/G73 /G57/G6F/G72/G6B/G3F
Although a substantial amount of thought, practice, and research has already
been devoted to motivational interviewing, we are still far from understanding
the precise links between processes and outcomes (Miller, 1996b). While
Miller and Rollnick (Chapter 1, this volume) speculate about possible thera -
peutic mechanisms, pointing to the effects of faith and hope, counselor effects
(e.g., empathy), and change talk, there is a dearth of evidence regarding how
and why interventions related to motivational interviewing might work.
An immediate task for research in this area is to dismantle feedback-
based AMIs into their main components—problem feedback and motivational
interviewing—to determine their relative contributions to outcome. As dis-
cussed in this chapter, we do not yet know whether feedback, motivational in-
terviewing, or the combination is essential to produce a therapeutic effect. In
fact, there is some recent empirical evidence to suggest that the feedback com-
ponent may be more critical than the motivational interviewing component
for college student drinkers (Juárez, 2001). Furthermore, the results of two
studies suggest that problem feedback may be efficacious whether it is deliv-
ered in a motivational interviewing or a confrontative style (Miller et al.,
1993; Schneider et al., 2000).
However, using observational coding of therapist behaviors, Miller and
colleagues (1993) determined that the two feedback conditions—motivational
interviewing and confrontative style—were not substantially different from
one another in actual practice. As a result, post hoc correlations were computed
between in-session therapist and client behaviors and therapeutic outcomes.
Therapist “confrontative” behaviors were directly correlated with client
resistant behaviors in the session, while therapist “supportive” (motivational
interviewing style) behaviors were correlated with positive change-oriented
behaviors from clients. Further, a significant positive correlation was obtained
between a single therapist behavior (“confront,” consisting of challenging,
disagreeing, head-on disputes, incredulity, sarcasm, etc.) and drinking fre -
quency at 1-year follow-up.
There is support for the existence of counselor effects with AMIs. Project
MATCH (1998c) found that therapist differences accounted for 6% to 7% of
the outcome variance, even after controlling for client severity and site effects.
Moreover, exploratory analyses of specific therapist attributes on the Personal
Preference Schedule (Edwards, 1953) revealed that better outcomes were sig -
nificantly associated with higher therapist need for nurturance and lower need
for aggression.
244 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
The positive effects of AMIs as preludes or adjuncts to further clinical
services may be at least partially mediated by increased treatment participa -
tion. For example, Brown and Miller (1993) found that clients who received
the pretreatment AMI intervention were rated as more involved in subsequent
treatment than were the control clients. While several other studies provided
support for the ability of AMIs to improve future or concurrent treatment
participation (Booth et al., 1998; Martino et al., 2000; Smith et al., 1997;
Swanson et al., 1999), none of them (including Brown & Miller, 1993) em -
ployed specific mediation analyses in this respect.
There is little direct evidence thus far to suggest that AMIs actually work
by enhancing motivation or readiness for change. While AMI clients generally
showed an increase in readiness for change after treatment (Handmaker et al.,
1999; Mhurchu et al., 1998; Treasure et al., 1999), the AMI interventions—
with one exception (Butler et al., 1999)—did not appear to differentially
increase readiness for change in comparison to alternative interventions or
controls (Colby et al., 1998; Mhurchu et al., 1998; Saunders et al., 1995;
Schneider et al., 2000; Treasure et al., 1999). Furthermore, none of these stud-
ies performed statistical analyses to determine whether this motivational shift
actually mediated client outcome.
Therefore, research suggests that AMIs may be mediated by counselor ef-
fects (such as an empathic therapeutic style), by providing feedback on assess-
ment results, or by enhancing future treatment participation. Despite these
promising beginnings, we still know precious little abouthow motivational in-
terviewing works.
/G46._/G6F/G72 /G57/G68/G6F/G6D /G44/G6F /G41/G4D/G49/G73 /G57/G6F/G72/G6B/G3F
The possibility that some treatments work better for some people and some
problems is one that has been widely explored in psychotherapy (Shoham &
Rohrbaugh, 1995) and has received attention in the motivational interviewing
literature as well. Several clinical trials of AMIs that have looked for such in -
teractions have largely failed to find them (Marlatt et al., 1998; Monti et al.,
1999; Project MATCH, 1997a, 1997b, 1998c). In Project MATCH, most of
the matching variables did not predict outcome of particular treatments as hy-
pothesized (e.g., stage of change, readiness to change, self-efficacy, or antiso -
cial personality), although two significant matching effects were identified
that predicted outcome at the 3-year follow-up period: TSF was more effica -
cious than AMI for clients whose social networks were highly supportive of
drinking, while the opposite was true for clients whose social support net -
works were low in support for their drinking. This effect reached significance
on only one of the alcohol use measures and did not predict success at 1-year
follow-up. The most stable and robust interaction effect found in Project
MATCH, significant at both 1- and 3-year follow-ups, was that AMI outper -
formed CBT and TSF on both primary drinking outcome measures for clients
high on anger, whereas the converse held true for low-anger clients.
Finally, while two studies provided no support for stage of change as a
The Efficacy of Motivational Interviewing 245
moderator of AMI treatments (Monti et al., 1999; Project MATCH, 1997a,
1997b, 1998c), two other studies found that those who are least ready to
change may derive particular advantage from an AMI over brief advice (Butler
et al., 1999) or skills-based counseling (Heather et al., 1996).
/G54/G48/G45 /G46._/G55/G54/G55/G52/G45 /G4F/G46._ /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C
/G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G52/G45/G53/G45/G41/G52/G43/G48/G3A
/G57/G48/G45/G52/G45 /G44/G4F /G57/G45 /G47/G4F /G46._/G52/G4F/G4D /G48/G45/G52/G45/G3F
As our review indicates, there has been a real imbalance between internal and
external validity in motivational interviewing research thus far. It appears that
researchers have been more interested in evaluating the usefulness of AMIs
with different populations than in constructing rigorous designs to rule out al-
ternative explanations. In our opinion, the most immediate research need is
for studies high on internal validity. Future research could address this by at -
tending to:
• Adequate sample size permitting an appropriate level of statistical
power.
• Appropriate control groups that represent clear alternative explana-
tions and are equivalent to the AMIs tested in all other respects (e.g.,
credibility and length of treatment).
• Careful assessment of treatment fidelity and integrity (see provisional
description of skills in Chapter 18).
• Clear description of the motivational interviewing or AMI procedures
under study.
• Greater uniformity and comparability of AMIs across studies.
There is another important question that has eluded any direct answer in
virtually all of the research that we have reviewed: What is the efficacy of mo-
tivational interviewing (as opposed to AMIs)? As we have repeatedly noted,
there have been no empirical tests of a “pure” form of motivational interview-
ing, as defined by Miller and Rollnick (1991; this volume). The AMI interven-
tions reviewed here have all involved a motivational interviewing “style” but
have also included other elements, such as educational materials, cognitive-
behavioral strategies, and, most commonly, problem feedback. We need to
know to what extent the positive results of AMIs are due to feedback, motiva-
tional interviewing, or the combination. Dismantling studies of this type are
necessary to ascertain the active ingredients in AMIs.
There is a considerable amount of theory and research (e.g., Greenberg,
Elliott, & Lietaer, 1994; Rogers, 1951) to suggest that motivational interview-
ing may be a valuable approach, not just for addictions but for numerous
other psychological disorders such as anxiety and mood disorders. Motiva -
tional interviewing may be seen as an intriguing integration of the principles
246 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
and strategies of Rogers’s (1951) client-centered therapy with more active
cognitive-behavioral strategies presented in a way that enhances self-attribu -
tion for change. The promise of motivational interviewing is partially sup -
ported by the AMI research reviewed in this chapter, but we can only know
the extent to which this promise can be fulfilled when we study the process
and outcome of motivational interviewing for a wider variety of clinical prob-
lems.
/G53/G55/G4D/G4D/G41/G52/G59
Our review has focused on adaptations of motivational interviewing (AMIs),
defined by the presence of feedback or other additional elements—thus far,
there have been no studies of “pure” motivational interviewing. The AMI in -
terventions in the studies reviewed here have been relatively brief interven -
tions of between one and six sessions that have been used both as a prelude or
adjunct to other treatments and as a stand-alone treatment. The research sup-
ports the efficacy of AMIs for alcohol problems and drug addiction, as well as
for people with diabetes, hypertension, dual diagnoses, and bulimia. Mixed
support has been found for AMIs in the domain of cigarette smoking, increas-
ing physical activity, and enhancing dietary adherence in patients with
hyperlipidemia. No support has been found for AMIs in the reduction of HIV
risk behaviors (e.g., needle sharing) in the two studies conducted to date.
In general, AMIs have proven superior to no-treatment control groups
and less credible alternative treatments, and equal to viable comparison treat-
ments. AMIs have often done as well as other viable treatments that were two
or three times longer. AMIs have been quite varied across different studies,
making general conclusions about treatment efficacy difficult. More unifor -
mity in the AMI interventions studied would be helpful. In general, research
has been strong on external validity but relatively weak on internal validity.
The field needs more well-controlled and rigorous trials of AMIs, in addition
to studies that attempt to dismantle AMIs in order to evaluate the relative
contributions of motivational interviewing and problem feedback. Finally, we
need research on “pure” motivational interviewing interventions, as well as
process research that elucidates underlying mechanisms so that we can under-
stand more about how, why, and for whom motivational interviewing may
work.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45/G53
1. This issue of terminology is discussed further in Chapter 18.
2. See Dunn, De Roo, and Rivara (2001) and Burke, Arkowitz, and Menchola (2001).
3. Group AMI interventions are reviewed separately in Chapter 25.
4. Other chapters in this volume may cover outcome studies related to motivational
The Efficacy of Motivational Interviewing 247
interviewing that did not meet our criteria for inclusion here. Thus, it is possible
that these other chapters will draw somewhat different conclusions.
5. This intervention did not include any feedback on previous substance-related as -
sessments. However, it did omit the skilled use of reflective listening, which is cru -
cial to the expression of therapeutic empathy. For that reason, we still consider this
procedure to be an AMI rather than pure motivational interviewing per se.
6. This intervention employed a combination of motivational interviewing strategies
and “role-induction techniques,” so we still consider it an AMI rather than pure
motivational interviewing per se.
7. According to Chapter 20, this treatment, as planned, may not have been faithful to
the principles of motivational interviewing.
8. This intervention was based on an approach to motivational interviewing that “has
departed from that espoused by Miller and Rollnick” (Saunders, Wilkinson, &
Allsop, 1991), and thus we still consider it an AMI rather than pure motivational
interviewing per se.
/G43/G4F/G4E/G54/G52/G4F/G4C/G4C/G45/G44 /G43/G4C/G49/G4E/G49/G43/G41/G4C /G54/G52/G49/G41/G4C/G53 /G4F/G46._ /G41/G4D/G49/G73
1. Brown, J. M., & Miller, W. R. (1993). Impact of motivational interviewing on
participation and outcome in residential alcoholism treatment. Psychology of Ad-
dictive Behaviors, 7 , 211–218.
2. Bien, T. H., Miller, W. R., & Boroughs, J. M. (1993). Motivational interviewing
with alcohol outpatients. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 23 , 347–
356.
3. Borsari, B., & Carey, K. B. (2000). Effects of a brief motivational intervention
with college student drinkers. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
68(4), 728–733.
4. Marlatt, G. A., Baer, J. S., Kivlahan, D. R., Dimeff, L. A., Larimer, M. E.,
Quigley, L. A., Somers, J. M., & Williams, E. (1998). Screening and brief inter -
vention for high-risk college student drinkers: Results from a 2–year follow-up as-
sessment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66 , 604–615.
and
Baer, J. S., Kivlahan, D. R., Blume, A. W., McKnight, P., & Marlatt, G. A. (2001).
Brief intervention for heavy drinking college students: Four-year follow-up and
natural history. American Journal of Public Health, 91 (8), 1310–1316.
5. Gentilello, L. M., Rivara, F. P., Donovan, D. M., Jurkovich, G. J., Daranciang, E.,
Dunn, C. W., Villaveces, A., Copass, M., & Ries, R. (1999). Alcohol interventions
in a trauma center as a means of reducing the risk of injury recurrence. Annals of
Surgery, 230(4), 473–483.
6. Miller, W. R., Sovereign, R. G., & Krege, B. (1988). Motivational interviewing
with problem drinkers: II. The Drinker’s Check-Up as a preventive intervention.
Behavioural Psychotherapy, 16 , 251–268.
7. Miller, W. R., Benefield, R. G., & Tonigan, J. S. (1993). Enhancing motivation for
change in problem drinking: A controlled comparison of two therapist styles.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61 , 455–461.
8. Monti, P. M., Colby, S. M., Barnett, N. P., Spirito, A., & Rohsenow, D. J. (1999).
248 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
Brief intervention for harm reduction with alcohol-positive older adolescents in a
hospital emergency department. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
67(6), 989–994.
9. Handmaker, N. S., Miller, W. R., & Manicke, M. (1999). Findings of a pilot
study of motivational interviewing with pregnant drinkers. Journal of Studies on
Alcohol, 60, 285–287.
10. Heather, N., Rollnick, S., Bell, A., & Richmond, R. (1996). Effects of brief coun -
seling among heavy drinkers identified on general hospital wards. Drug and Alco-
hol Review, 15 , 29–38.
11. Project MATCH Research Group. (1997a). Matching alcoholism treatments to
client heterogeneity: Project MATCH posttreatment drinking outcomes. Journal
of Studies on Alcohol, 58 , 7–29.
and
Project MATCH Research Group. (1998a). Matching alcoholism treatments to
client heterogeneity: Project MATCH three-year drinking outcomes. Alcoholism:
Clinical and Experimental Research, 23 (60), 1300–1311.
12. Colby, S. M., Monti, P. M., Barnett, N. P., Rohsenow, D. J., Weissman, K., Spiri -
to, A., Woolard, R. H., & Lewander,W. J. (1998). Brief motivational interviewing
in a hospital setting for adolescent smoking: A preliminary study. Journal of Con-
sulting and Clinical Psychology, 66 (3), 574–578.
13. Butler, C. C., Rollnick, S., Cohen, D., Russel, I., Bachmann, M., & Stott, N.
(1999). Motivational consulting versus brief advice for smokers in general prac-
tice: A randomised trial. British Journal of General Practice, 49 , 611–616.
14. Schneider, R. J., Casey, J., & Kohn, R. (2000). Motivational versus confronta-
tional interviewing: A comparison of substance abuse assessment practices at em-
ployee assistance programs. Journal of Behavioral Health Services and Research,
27(1), 60–74.
15. Martino, S., Carroll, K. M., O’Malley, S. S., & Rounsaville, B. J. (2000). Motiva-
tional interviewing with psychiatrically ill substance abusing patients. American
Journal on Addictions, 9 , 88–91.
16. Booth, R. E., Kwiatkowski, C., Iguchi, M. Y., Pinto, F., & John, D. (1998). Facili-
tating treatment entry among out-of-treatment injection drug users. Public Health
Reports, 113(Suppl. 1), 116–128.
17. Saunders, B., Wilkinson, C., & Phillips, M. (1995). The impact of a brief motiva -
tional intervention with opiate users attending a methadone programme. Addic-
tion, 90, 415–424.
18. Stephens, R. S., Roffman, R. A., & Curtin, L. (2000). Comparison of extended
versus brief treatments for marijuana use. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy -
chology, 68(5), 898–908.
19. Baker, A., Heather, N., Wodak, A., Dixon, J., & Holt, P. (1993). Evaluation of a
cognitive-behavioural intervention for HIV prevention among injecting drug us -
ers. AIDS, 7, 247–256.
20. Baker, A., Kochan, N., Dixon, J., Heather, N., & Wodak, A. (1994). Controlled
evaluation of a brief intervention for HIV prevention among injecting drug users
not in treatment. AIDS Care, 6 (5), 559–570.
21. Swanson, A. J., Pantalon, M. V., & Cohen, K. R. (1999). Motivational interview -
ing and treatment adherence among dually-diagnosed patients. Journal of Ner -
vous and Mental Disease, 187 (10), 630–635.
The Efficacy of Motivational Interviewing 249
22. Mhurchu, C. N., Margetts, B. M., & Speller, V. (1998). Randomized clinical trial
comparing the effectiveness of two dietary interventions for patients with hyper -
lipidaemia. Clinical Science, 95 (4), 479–487.
23. Woollard, J., Beilin, L., Lord, T., Puddey, I., MacAdam, D., & Rouse, I. (1995). A
controlled trial of nurse counseling on lifestyle change for hypertensives treated in
general practice: Preliminary results. Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology
and Physiology, 23 , 466–468.
24. Harland, J., White, M., Drinkwater, C., Chinn, D., Farr, L., & Howel, D. (1999).
The Newcastle exercise project: A randomized controlled trial of methods to pro -
mote physical activity in primary care. British Medical Journal, 319 , 828–831.
25. Smith, D. E., Heckemeyer, C. M., Kratt, P. P., & Mason, D. A. (1997). Motiva -
tional interviewing to improve adherence to a behavioral weight-control program
for older obese women with NIDDM: A pilot study.Diabetes Care, 20(1), 53–54.
26. Treasure, J. L., Katzman, M., Schmidt, U., Troop, N., Todd, G., & de Silva, P.
(1999). Engagement and outcome in the treatment of bulimia nervosa: First phase
of a sequential design comparing motivation enhancement therapy and cognitive
behavioural therapy. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37 , 405–418.
250 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
CHAPTER 17
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G69/G6E
/G4D/G65/G64/G69/G63/G61/G6C /G61/G6E/G64 /G50/G75/G62/G6C/G69/G63 /G48/G65/G61/G6C/G74/G68 /G53/G65/G74/G74/G69/G6E/G67/G73
KEN RESNICOW, COLLEEN DIIORIO, JOHANNA E. SOET,
BELINDA BORRELLI, DENISE ERNST,J ACKI HECHT, and
ANGELICA K. THEVOS
Whereas much of the initial applied and empirical work in motivational inter-
viewing has centered on addictive behaviors, most notably alcohol use, in re -
cent years, there has been considerable interest on the part of public health
(PH) and medical professionals in utilizing motivational interviewing to ad -
dress other health behaviors and conditions, such as smoking, diet, physical
activity, diabetes control, pain management, screening, sexual behavior, and
medical adherence (Berg-Smith et al., 1999; Colby et al., 1998; Emmons &
Rollnick, 2001; Ershoff et al., 1999; Miller, 1996b; Rakowski et al., 1992;
Resnicow, Jackson, Wang, Dudley, & Baranowski, 2001; Smith, Heckemeyer,
Kratt, & Mason, 1997; Stott, Rollnick, & Pill, 1995; Taplin et al., 2000;
Velasquez et al., 2000).
This chapter will examine medical and public health applications of moti-
vational interviewing. We begin by providing an overview of some conceptual
and pragmatic nuances that are associated with the use of motivational inter -
viewing in these settings and, in particular, application to chronic diseases and
251
nonaddictive behaviors. Then we explore issues related to training PH and
medical personnel in its use. We next describe the application of motivational
interviewing to specific behaviors and health conditions and conclude with a
summary and discussion of future research directions.
/G43/G4F/G4E/G43/G45/G50/G54/G55/G41/G4C /G49/G53/G53/G55/G45/G53/G3A /G41/G50/G50/G4C/G49/G43/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E /G4F/G46._ /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C
/G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G54/G4F /G4E/G4F/G4E/G41/G44/G44/G49/G43/G54/G49/G56/G45 /G41/G4E/G44 /G43/G48/G52/G4F/G4E/G49/G43
/G44/G49/G53/G45/G41/G53/G45 /G42/G45/G48/G41/G56/G49/G4F/G52/G53
Given its roots in addiction counseling, it is important to examine how moti -
vational interviewing may function differently in theory and practice when ap-
plied to nonaddictive behaviors and chronic diseases. For example, an essen -
tial element of motivational interviewing is working through ambivalence
about change (Miller & Rollnick, 1991; Resnicow, DiIorio, et al., 2001;
Rollnick, Butler, & Stott, 1997), and this technique appears to be particularly
effective among individuals who are initially at low readiness to change (But -
ler et al., 1999; Heather, Rollnick, Bell, & Richmond, 1996; Resnicow, Jack-
son, et al., 2001). It can be posited that the nature and magnitude of ambiva-
lence, as well as the reasons for change, differ in kind (not only in degree)
between addictive and nonaddictive behaviors. Modifying behaviors such as
fruit and vegetable intake or physical activity may not entail the intensity of
resistance or convey the depth of psychologic and interpersonal meaning as
does ending alcohol or heroin use. For nonaddictive behaviors, less time
(though not necessarily less skill) may be needed to resolve client ambivalence,
and such encounters may involve a more behavioral than cognitive focus.
Moreover, if the nature and magnitude of ambivalence is substantively differ-
ent for nonaddictive behaviors, and if resolving ambivalence is a major reason
that motivational interviewing is effective, then perhaps motivational inter -
viewing will be less effective in the PH and medical setting. Conversely, there
may be considerable ambivalence, resistance, and denial about health behav -
iors such as medical adherence, obtaining screening and diagnostic tests, in -
creasing exercise, and others, and motivational interviewing may be equally
effective in these settings (Prochaska et al., 1994).
Another difference may lie in the fact that for many addictive behaviors—
for example, cigarette use—the behavior change process often entails a dis -
crete “quit day.” Although target goals and timing are important for changing
behaviors such as eating and physical activity, the pattern of change is often
quite different. The concepts of abstinence and relapse are perhaps less tangi -
ble for some health-promoting behaviors.
Finally, in addiction counseling, the client often has been referred to or
has sought treatment for their condition, whereas in the medical and PH set -
tings, clients may have sought care for another condition or concern, and the
practitioner may raise issues such as smoking, diet, or exercise (see Chapter
18, in this volume). Given that the client may not have initiated the discussion
252 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
of the topic, perhaps there will be less interest or willingness to address such
behaviors within this context. Conversely, some patients may specifically
schedule a periodic checkup with their physician, with the explicit expectation
that their diet, physical activity, substance use, screening history, or other
health behaviors will be addressed. Whether practitioner-initiated motiva -
tional interviewing intervention functions differently than those that are cli -
ent-initiated has not been empirically determined.
/G50/G52/G41/G47/G4D/G41/G54/G49/G43 /G49/G53/G53/G55/G45/G53/G3A /G44/G55/G52/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G2C /G46._/G52/G45/G51/G55/G45/G4E/G43/G59 /G2C
/G41/G4E/G44 /G4D/G4F/G44/G41/G4C/G49/G54/G59 /G4F/G46._ /G43/G4F/G4E/G54/G41/G43/G54
Perhaps the most limiting factor in using motivational interviewing in PH and
medical settings is time. Whereas full-blown motivational interviewing for ad-
diction counseling may involve multiple sessions of considerable duration, in
medical settings (particularly primary care), patient encounters typically range
from 10 to 15 minutes (Emmons & Rollnick, 2001; Goldstein et al., 1998).
Moreover, medical practitioners may have only a single contact with a patient
for a particular health behavior. For example, in a public hospital walk-in
clinic or emergency room, a physician may be able to broach the topic of
behavior change—for example, quitting smoking. However, this physician
may never see that patient again. Similarly, in some managed care systems, pa-
tients are not always linked to specific practitioners (Goldstein et al., 1998).
Even when there is continuity of care, difficulty obtaining reimbursement for
behavioral counseling further limits practitioners’ ability and motivation to
deliver intensive motivational interviewing.
Numerous implications arise from these constraints. First, there is a need
to adapt motivational interviewing into a briefer format that is suitable to lim-
ited client contact. This briefer format (referred to elsewhere as “brief negotia-
tion”) is referred to in this text as an adaptation of motivational interviewing
(AMI; Rollnick & Miller, 1995). Rollnick and others have developed motiva -
tional interviewing–based techniques tailored to brief encounters. One exam -
ple is the 0–10 importance/confidence (i.e., readiness ruler) strategy described
elsewhere in this text, which allows physicians and other health care practitio-
ners to assess motivation and facilitate client or patient movement along the
change continuum (Butler et al., 1999; Rollnick et al., 1997; Rollnick, Mason,
& Butler, 1999). A useful feature of these techniques is their algorithmic na -
ture, which fits well with the general medical framework for decision making.
Brief adaptations of motivational interviewing (see also Chapter 18) are
distinguished from full-blown motivational interviewing in several ways. First,
when there is limited client contact, either in terms of duration or frequency, it
is generally not feasible to employ the full range of motivational interviewing
techniques nor is it possible to build the depth of rapport that may be needed
to maximize therapeutic effect. For example, in medical settings, physicians
may not have sufficient time to fully explore client ambivalence or to engage
Medical and Public Health Settings 253
in extensive reflective listening. In some cases, the goal of brief interventions
may simply to be engage the client to accept a referral or to think about mak -
ing future changes.
The method of delivering motivational interviewing may be different in
medical and PH settings, where they may be part of multicomponent interven-
tions that include education materials, as well as non–motivational interview-
ing individual and group interactions (Glasgow, Whitlock, Eakin, & Licht -
stein, 2000; Resnicow, Coleman-Wallace, et al., 2000; Resnicow, Jackson, et
al., 2001). In addition, motivational interviewing is often delivered via tele -
phone (Berg-Smith et al., 1999; Glasgow et al., 2000; Ludman, Curry, Meyer,
& Taplin, 1999; Resnicow, Coleman-Wallace, et al., 2000; Resnicow et al., in
press; Resnicow, Jackson, et al., 2001; Sims, Smith, Duffy, & Hilton, 1998;
Taplin et al., 2000; Woollard et al., 1995). When motivational interviewing
interventions are conducted by telephone, both counselors and clients operate
with limited nonverbal cues and depth of rapport, and, therefore, the effect of
treatment may be compromised (Soet & Basch, 1997). The efficacy and cost–
benefit ratio of telephone versus in-person intervention merits further study.
/G50/G52/G4F/G46._/G45/G53/G53/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G44/G45/G56/G45/G4C/G4F/G50/G4D/G45/G4E/G54 /G41/G4E/G44 /G54/G52/G41/G49/G4E/G49/G4E/G47 /G49/G53/G53/G55/G45/G53
In the addiction field, motivational interviewing interventions have typically
been delivered by individuals with training in psychology or counseling.
Training such professionals in use of motivational interviewing often repre-
sents only a moderate refinement of skills. Although within PH and medical
settings psychologists and social workers (Ludman et al., 1999; Resnicow et
al., in press; Smith et al., 1997; Velasquez et al., 2000) have been used to
deliver motivational interviewing, more commonly nurses (Doherty, Hall,
James, Roberts, & Simpson, 2000; Velasquez et al., 2000; Woollard et al.,
1995), physicians (Doherty et al., 2000; Rollnick et al., 1997); dietitians
(Berg-Smith et al., 1999; Mhurchu, Margetts, & Speller, 1998; Resnicow,
Coleman-Wallace, et al., 2000; Resnicow, Jackson, et al., 2001), or health ed-
ucators (Harland et al., 1999) have been employed. For these professions,
learning motivational interviewing may represent a total retooling of their ori-
entation. (Emmons & Rollnick, 2001; Rollnick, 1996). Physicians, nurses,
and dietitians have traditionally been trained to provide expert (often unsolic-
ited) advice about the benefits of health behavior change (Goldstein et al.,
1998). These disciplines are heavily based on instructional methods and shar -
ing of information (Glanz, 1979; Rollnick, 1996). Nurses and dietitians some-
times go beyond providing advice by educating patients, in a prescriptive way,
about steps they can take to change health behavior. A challenge for many
healthcare practitioners is adopting the more facilitative and collaborative
spirit of motivational interviewing in place of the more prescriptive, practitio-
ner-centered, and directive techniques that are traditionally employed in medi-
254 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
cal settings. This represents a formidable barrier to training PH and medical
practitioners.
An illustration of the contrast between motivational interviewing and the
traditional patient education or medical model can be captured in how infor -
mation is presented. In the traditional paradigm, the health practitioner often
provides information about the risks of continuing a behavior or the benefits
of change with the intent of persuasion. This may include statements (perhaps
more accurately, appeals) such as “This is very important for your health be -
cause . . ., ” “This behavior poses great risk,” “It is essential that you change
because. . . . ” Implicit in such statements is an evaluative interpretation. In
contrast, within motivational interviewing, information is presented in a more
neutral manner, and the client is asked to do the work of interpretation. A
practitioner may state to a client who does not exercise that “There are some
scientific studies that have found that people who walk 2 miles or more per
week have half the risk of heart disease compared to those who walk less than
1 mile. What do you make of that?” Or, rather than stating that “It is impor -
tant for you to quit smoking because . . ., ” practitioners might be trained to
state that “It is a medical fact that smoking can increase a person’s chances of
having another heart attack, and I have seen this happen to several of my pa-
tients. But what is important to me is what you think about this.” Thus, many
health care practitioners need to be trained to avoid persuasion with “predi-
gested” health messages and instead allow the client to process the informa-
tion, find their own personal relevance, evaluate their own risks and rewards,
and convince themselves to change rather than be convinced by the practitio-
ner (see Chapter 18; Rollnick et al., 1999).
Another challenge facing PH and medical practitioners is the amount of
time available for training in motivational interviewing (Emmons & Rollnick,
2001; Stott et al., 1995; Velasquez et al., 2000). Limited time for training and
follow-up supervision can make it difficult for some health care providers to
“buy into” the philosophy and thus experience the effectiveness of this ap -
proach, as well as to “let go” of the reflex to provide information (Pill, Rees,
Stott, & Rollnick, 1999). For example, Stott and colleagues (1995) trained
practitioners to deliver adaptations of motivational interviewing to address di-
abetic care using a “client-centered” approach whereby the number of train -
ing sessions and strategies for training were negotiated with the practitioners.
While the majority of practices chose two to three training sessions lasting 1–
1.5 hours each, few opted for additional training. Practitioners were willing to
observe role-play demonstrations, yet few were willing to practice these skills.
Velasquez and colleagues (2000) trained several groups of PH nurses, all of
whom participated in the role plays and experiential aspects of the training.
While these nurses reported high levels of satisfaction with the motivational
strategies, many nurses found it difficult to actually implement this style of in-
tervention with their clients because of competing patient care needs, limited
time, and lack of confidence. Finally, on-going supervision in these settings
Medical and Public Health Settings 255
may not be very intensive or rigorous (Borrelli et al., 1998; Pill et al., 1999;
Velasquez et al., 2000).
A key clinical and research question that remains to be determined is the
extent to which such professionals, with limited postgraduate training, can be
“retro-fitted” to become skilled motivational interviewing counselors. Practi -
tioners not primarily schooled in client-centered counseling may be able to
learn the basic techniques of motivational interviewing, but without extensive
training they may be unable to achieve the whole that is greater than the sum
of its parts. Technical skills are necessary but insufficient to achieve the spirit
of motivational interviewing. Whereas such professionals, with a few hours or
days of training, may be able to employ some of the core motivational inter -
viewing skills and strategies (e.g., asking open-ended questions, setting agen -
das, obtaining permission, minimizing unsolicited advice, and basic reflective
listening), mastering deeper level reflection, handling resistant statements or
clients, and applying motivational interviewing across a range of health be -
haviors often requires a degree of training, practice, and supervision that is
not practical in most health care settings. Chapter 16 looks to the future and
discusses some ways of resolving this issue.
While practitioners’ acceptance of a motivational style is important, it is
also essential to consider patients’ perspectives. In studies where nurses incor-
porated a motivational style of counseling, patients reported being highly sat-
isfied with the intervention (Borrelli et al., 1998; Emmons et al., in press).
Similarly, a study of patients’ perceptions of the doctor’s advice to quit smok-
ing demonstrated that the interventions patients found most acceptable were
those that considered the patient’s receptivity, conveyed a respectful tone,
avoided preaching, and showed caring and support of the individual (Butler,
Rollnick, Pill, Maggs-Rapport, & Stott, 1998). The fact that motivational in-
terviewing interventions may result in improved provider–patient relation -
ships and consumer satisfaction is an underdeveloped and potentially power -
ful selling point to providers and health care agencies.
/G44/G49/G45/G54 /G41/G4E/G44 /G50/G48/G59/G53/G49/G43/G41/G4C /G41/G43/G54/G49/G56/G49/G54/G59 /G43/G48/G41/G4E/G47/G45
Nuances associated with changing diet and physical activity patterns relevant
to motivational interviewing include the fact that these behaviors generally in-
volve modification rather than elimination; reshaping rather than abstaining.
Whereas there is generally no “quit day,” there may be concrete behavioral
targets such as eating five servings of fruits and vegetables per day, reaching a
daily caloric or fat-intake limit, or exercising a specific number of days or
minutes per week. In addition, diet and physical activity change may be ele -
ments of multicomponent programs to reduce risk factors such as dyslip -
idemia, diabetes, high blood pressure, obesity, and recurrence of heart disease.
Particularly for secondary prevention, changes in these domains must be long-
term, if not for a lifetime: for example, reducing saturated-fat intake for a
256 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
hyperlipidemic individual. Thus, ambivalence may center around the long-
term burden of change. Motivational interviewing for such individuals could
focus on helping them come to grips with the chronic nature of their condi -
tion, as well as identify ways to reduce what can be perceived as an over -
whelming burden. Moreover, although generally not considered addictive be -
haviors, giving up or reducing the intake of favorite foods or reducing
preferred sedentary behaviors are often perceived as unpleasurable or a sacri -
fice, and such changes can manifest similar to withdrawal. Thus, a key goal
for a motivational interviewing counselor may be to help an individual
reframe their change in positive terms—for example, what is gained versus
what is lost—as well as to conceptualize their change in other than hedonic
terms: for example, the effect on or the reduced anxiety about their disease
risk rather than focusing on the taste of broccoli.
Five controlled outcome studies
1 and one uncontrolled outcome study us-
ing motivational interviewing to modify diet and physical activity behaviors
were identified. (Most of the published controlled studies are also reviewed in
detail in Chapter 16 and are therefore only briefly addressed here.) In addi -
tion, there are numerous ongoing studies in the United States and abroad that
will be completed over the next few years. The outcome studies include four
secondary prevention trials for patients with diabetes, hyperlipidemia, or
hypertension (Berg-Smith et al., 1999; Mhurchu et al., 1998; Smith et al.,
1997; Woollard et al., 1995) and two primary prevention trials in well popu-
lations (Harland et al., 1999; Resnicow, Coleman-Wallace, et al., 2000;
Resnicow, Jackson, et al., 2001) .
The first of the secondary prevention trials was a pilot study conducted
by Smith and colleagues (1997). Twenty-two overweight women with non-
insulin dependent diabetes mellitus were randomized to receive a standard 16-
week group behavioral weight control intervention or the same intervention
with the addition of three individual motivational interviewing sessions. Moti-
vational interviewing sessions were delivered by experienced psychologists.
The motivational interviewing involved one session before group treatment
and two at midtreatment, and it included individualized feedback on glycemic
control. At posttest, women in the motivational interviewing group showed
significantly better glycemic control than the standard intervention group, and
they were more likely to monitor their blood glucose. The motivational inter -
viewing group also showed significantly higher session attendance and they
turned in more diet and activity diaries.
Mhurchu and colleagues (1998) randomized 121 patients with hyperlip -
idemia, which is usually secondary to coronary heart disease. The same dieti -
cian met with them for three sessions, either using motivational interviewing–
based counseling or a standard dietary intervention. At 3-month follow-up,
there were no significant between-group differences for any of the main
outcomes.
Woollard and colleagues (1995) randomly assigned 166 hypertensive pa -
tients in general medical practices to receive either “high” motivational inter -
Medical and Public Health Settings 257
viewing, consisting of six 45-minute sessions every fourth week, or “low” mo-
tivational interviewing, which comprised a single face-to-face session plus five
additional brief telephone sessions. Both groups received their usual GP care,
in addition to an educational manual. A control group was also used that con-
sisted only of the usual GP care. At 18-week follow-up, there were no signifi -
cant differences between the two motivational interviewing groups. However,
both motivational interviewing groups had better outcomes than the controls.
Finally, in the Dietary Intervention Study in Children, children initially
aged 8 to 10 years, who had elevated LDL cholesterol, received three years of
dietary intervention (Berg-Smith et al., 1999). As the cohort moved into ado -
lescence, the investigators elected to add a motivational interviewing interven-
tion to “renew” adherence to the prescribed diet among the original interven -
tion group (there was no control group for this phase). The counselors were
primarily masters’-level health educators and dietitians who received 18 hours
of training. There was one in-person session and one follow-up session either
in person or by telephone. Data from the first 127 youth to complete the two
sessions indicated that the proportion of calories from fat and dietary choles -
terol (assessed by three 24-hour recalls) was significantly reduced at 3-month
follow-up, and overall adherence scores improved. Adolescent satisfaction
with the motivational interviewing intervention was high. A unique element of
this intervention is the exquisite detail provided by the authors regarding the
theoretical basis for the intervention (Berg-Smith et al., 1999).
With regard to primary prevention, Harland and colleagues (1999) re-
cruited 523 general medical practice patients to evaluate the efficacy of moti-
vational interviewing for promoting physical activity. The population was
sedentary but otherwise healthy. The study employed four intervention
groups. Two groups received a single 40-minute motivational interviewing
session, and two groups received six 40-minute motivational interviewing ses-
sions delivered over 12 weeks. Approximately half of the participants in the
motivational interviewing groups also received vouchers for free aerobics
classes. There was also a control group that received no motivational inter -
viewing. A physical activity score was assessed by an exercise questionnaire
that was completed at 12-week and 1-year follow-ups. At the 12-week follow-
up, there was a significant improvement in this score in the four intervention
groups relative to the controls (38% improved vs. 16%) but no significant dif-
ferences between the “high” and “low” motivational interviewing groups. At
1-year follow-up, there were no significant differences in physical activity be -
tween the intervention groups, either combined or separately, relative to the
control group. This was because of a deterioration in effects in the interven -
tion group, as well as a slight improvement among the control group.
Resnicow and colleagues (Resnicow, Coleman-Wallace, et al., 2000;
Resnicow, Jackson, et al., 2001) recently completed the Eat for Life (EFL)
trial, a multicomponent intervention to increase fruit and vegetable consump -
tion among African American adults, delivered through black churches. Fourteen
churches were randomly assigned to three treatment conditions: (1) comparison;
258 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
(2) culturally tailored self-help intervention with one telephone cue; and
(3) self-help intervention, one cue call and three motivational interviewing
counseling calls. Cue calls were intended to increase use of the self-help inter -
vention materials and were not structured as motivational interviewing contacts.
Motivational interviewing counselors, who were either registered dieti -
tians or dietetic interns, participated in three, 2-hour training sessions con -
ducted by the first author (KR) and were observed performing at least two
phone counseling encounters before being certified. They received ongoing su-
pervision from doctoral level staff. The primary outcome, assessed at baseline
and at 1-year follow-up, was fruit and vegetable intake, assessed by food fre -
quency questionnaires (Resnicow, Odom, et al., 2000). Change in fruit and
vegetable intake was significantly greater in the motivational interviewing
group than in the comparison and self-help groups. The net difference be -
tween the motivational interviewing and comparison group was approxi -
mately 1.1 servings of fruits and vegetables per day, whereas the net difference
between the motivational interviewing and the self-help group was approxi -
mately 1.0 serving. Despite these promising results, however, preliminary
analysis of tape-recorded motivational interviewing sessions indicated only
moderate fidelity on the part of the dietitians to the spirit and techniques of
motivational interviewing.
Resnicow and his colleagues are currently conducting another study
based on the Eat for Life trial (Resnicow et al., in press), entitled Healthy
Body, Healthy Spirit. This is a randomized effectiveness trial with three exper-
imental conditions. Group 1 receives standard nutrition and physical activity
intervention materials; Group 2 receives culturally tailored self-help nutrition
and physical activity interventions; Group 3 receives the same intervention as
Group 2, plus four telephone calls with motivational interviewing counseling.
Unlike the Eat for Life trial, where the motivational interviewing intervention
was delivered by dietitians, here the motivational interviewing is being deliv -
ered by masters’-level counseling psychologists, who were originally trained in
the person-centered model of R. R. Carkhuff (1969; Carkhuff, Anthony, Can-
non, Pierce, & Zigon, 1979).
A unique element of the motivational interviewing intervention in the
Healthy Body, Healthy Spirit trial is the use of a values clarification strategy,
based on the work of Miller and C’de Baca (1994). In the original method, the
client was asked to sort a list of approximately 70 values in terms of personal
importance and to select around 5 that are most important. The revised proto-
col uses a modified and shortened set of values or attributes, as shown in
Table 17.1. Clients are asked to briefly discuss why the values or goals se -
lected are important to them, and then they explore what connection, if any,
they see between their current health behavior and their ability to achieve
these goals or live out these values. Alternatively, the counselor may ask how
changing their health behavior may be related to these goals or values. Initial
results using this strategy appear promising. In the process of linking health
behavior to core values, considerable change talk has been elicited.
Medical and Public Health Settings 259
One difference between the Eat for Life and Healthy Body, Healthy Spirit
projects is that in the latter, counselors have referred many clients to project
dietitians for additional nutritional follow-up such as information about dia-
betes and weight control. Thus, although using trained counselors, as opposed
to dietitians, to provide the motivational interviewing may yield an interven-
tion of greater fidelity, the fact that these interventionists do not possess a
great deal of expertise in nutrition or exercise counseling has necessitated con-
siderable additional follow-up.
In sum, the evidence for the efficacy of motivational interviewing in the
area of diet and exercise is mixed, with two studies showing little or no advan-
tage of motivational interviewing over comparison treatments (Harland et al.,
1999; Mhurchu et al., 1998), and four showing positive effects (Berg-Smith et
al., 1999; Resnicow, Jackson, et al., 2001; Smith et al., 1997; Woollard et al.,
1995). Despite the positive effects observed in these four studies, internal
validity is threatened by the fact that the motivational interviewing interven -
tions were additive to other interventions (or the Dietary Intervention Study in
Children did not have a control group). Client contact was not comparable
across conditions, as the comparison groups did not receive any “sham” or
alternative counseling. Finally, in two studies, higher-dose motivational inter -
viewing interventions failed to produce greater treatment effects (Harland et
al., 1999; Woollard et al., 1995). Together, these findings raise questions
about the extent to which treatment effects can be attributed to motivational
interviewing as opposed to attention effects or generic elements of counseling
that are not unique to motivational interviewing (e.g., empathy). In addition,
intervention fidelity generally has not been adequately assessed or controlled
for. Thus, negative or weak results may have been the result of poor interven-
tion delivery, as opposed to ineffective intervention per se (see Chapter 16).
260 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
TABLE 17.1. List of Values, Attributes, and Goals and Rates of Endorsement in
the Healthy Body, Healthy Spirit Project
Value, attribute,
or goal
Rate of
endorsement (%)
Value, attribute,
or goal
Rate of
endorsement (%)
Good parent 49 Attractive 5
Good spouse/partner 38 Disciplined 16
Good community member 13 Responsible 22
Strong 13 In control 10
On top of things 7 Respected at work 8
Competent 8 Athletic 2
Spiritual 55 Not hypocritical 7
Respected at home 4 Energetic 10
Good Christian 46 Considerate 18
Successful 13 Youthful 3
Independent 16
Note. n = 135. Percentages represent the rate of endorsement by participants in the HBHS project to date of
each of the core values.
Key questions that merit examination in this area include the following:
Which professions are most willing and able to effectively deliver motivational
interviewing interventions? For example, are dietitians and exercise profes -
sionals the best candidates, or are such interventions best delivered by individ-
uals with a background in counseling? Which is more important: specific con-
tent knowledge on the part of the practitioner or counseling skill and style?
/G53/G4D/G4F/G4B/G49/G4E/G47 /G43/G45/G53/G53/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E
Motivational issues are important not only in the decision to attempt quitting
but also in maximizing treatment adherence and in minimizing relapse. Moti -
vational interviewing may therefore have a role across the entire spectrum of
smoking control. Although pharmacological treatments and counseling guide-
lines have been shown to be effective in helping motivated smokers quit (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 2000), these treatments are less
helpful for smokers who are less motivated to quit. Those motivated to quit
represent only the minority of smokers (Richmond, Bell, Rollnick, & Heather,
1996; Velicer & DiClemente, 1993) and in routine medical care, health care
practitioners are more likely to encounter smokers who are unmotivated to
quit. Therefore, strategies are needed to help clinicians work with unmoti-
vated and ambivalent smokers.
Standard care usually takes the form of physician advice, which is largely
a prescriptive approach. When repeated over time it may be iatrogenic—actu-
ally undermining quit attempts and increasing patient resistance and attrition
(Butler, Pill, & Stott, 1998). Instead, Butler, Pill, and Stott (1998) suggest that
practitioners take into account the smokers’ receptivity and convey support in
a respectful, nonjudgmental, manner.
There have been several published studies that used adaptations of mo -
tivational interviewing for smoking cessation, primarily in clinical settings
(Butler et al., 1999; Colby et al., 1998; Ershoff et al., 1999; Glasgow et al.,
2000; Lando, 2001; Velasquez et al., 2000). (See Chapter 16 for additional
details.)
Borrelli and colleagues (1998) are currently evaluating both short-term
and long-term (12 months post-treatment) cessation outcomes in older, home-
bound medically ill adults. In this study (Project CARES), home health care
nurses are randomly selected to provide either an adaptation of motivational
interviewing or brief advice to their patients during their routine home care
visits. Nurses in the intervention group are trained to deliver the motivational
interviewing intervention that includes physiologic feedback about patients’
levels of expired carbon monoxide. Physiologic feedback can be a powerful
mechanism to highlight discrepancies between personal risk perception and
current behavior. Feedback may be particularly salient for older smokers be -
cause this group tends to have difficulty connecting their physical symptoms
with their smoking. Intervention nurses also enhance optimism about change
Medical and Public Health Settings 261
by talking with patients about the benefits of quitting and emphasizing that it
is never too late to quit. Preliminary data indicate that the intervention is ac -
ceptable to both patients and to home healthcare nurses (Emmons et al., in
press).
Despite the potential role for motivational interviewing in cessation coun-
seling, outcomes from randomized trials thus far have been mixed. Some of
the studies with negative results, however, do suffer from methodological
problems such as inadequate length of or description of motivational inter -
viewing training, lack of treatment fidelity monitoring procedures (Butler et
al., 1999), and low rates of treatment completion (Glasgow et al., 2000). An -
other reason for the mixed results of motivational interviewing for smoking
cessation is the short-term follow-up (Colby et al., 1998). Since the emphasis
in motivational interviewing is often on the decisional processes for change,
not only change itself, more proximal indicators of future cessation such as
stage of change should be assessed. Some remaining research questions are the
following: Which components of motivational interviewing are critical for
smokers? Is feedback a critical motivational component, and what types of
feedback are most effective? What are the important moderating variables? Is
motivational interviewing more effective with some smokers than with others?
/G4D/G45/G44/G49/G43/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E /G41/G44/G48/G45/G52/G45/G4E/G43/G45
Poor medication adherence is a concern for many, if not most, medications,
across virtually all socioeconomic populations. This topic is also addressed in
detail in Chapter 20. People who accept their health condition, who are able
to incorporate taking medication into their lifestyles, who have more severe
health conditions, and who believe their medication reduces symptoms or dis-
ease risk—all these have higher levels of adherence than those who deny their
illness or attach negative meanings to taking medications (Cramer, Mattson,
Prevey, Scheyer, & Ouellette, 1989; Creer & Levstek, 1997; DiIorio, Faherty,
& Manteuffel, 1994; Shope, 1988; Singh, Squier, Sivek, & Wagener, 1996;
Trostle, 1988; Turner et al., 1998). In addition, people who have health con -
ditions that are intermittent and unpredictable have more problems with ad -
herence. However, beyond these illness and cognitive variables, when asked
why they do not take their medication more regularly, people generally note
that they simply forgot. The usual remedies for forgetfulness include pill
boxes, timers, beepers, calendars, and other planning strategies. Reminder sys-
tems are not effective when failure to adhere relates to side effects of the medi-
cation, ambivalence about the disease or treatment, fear of harm from treat -
ment, negative meanings attached to medicines, representations of the illness
that are inconsistent with medication taking, and stigma.
Moreover, although forgetfulness appears to be a major cause of low ad -
herence, forgetfulness may reflect an underlying ambivalence about the dis -
ease or its treatment. Despite the benefits of taking medication, some individu-
262 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
als may want to avoid the associated inconvenience and side effects, and,
emotionally, individuals may not want to confront the fact that they have an
illness. Motivational interviewing may be effective for individuals whose ad -
herence is related to ambivalence regarding the pros and cons of taking their
medications or who have not come to grips with their condition and all that it
may imply. Giving such individuals an opportunity to express their concerns
may be particularly helpful in resolving their mixed emotions, as well as in
overcoming the more pragmatic barriers they may face.
In several studies Kemp and colleagues have tested the use of an interven-
tion based on motivational interviewing to promote medication adherence
among people with psychosis (Hayward, Chan, Kemp, & Youle, 1995; Kemp,
Hayward, Applewhaite, Everitt, & David, 1996; Kemp, Kirov, Everitt, Hay -
ward, & David, 1998). In a pilot study, they (Hayward et al., 1995) tested
a motiva tional interviewing–based approach to encourage medication adher -
ence among patients who had been prescribed neuroleptic drugs. Twenty-one
patients diagnosed with schizophrenia or affective disorders were randomly
assigned to compliance therapy or nondirective discussion sessions. A thera -
pist trained in motivational interviewing techniques met with each patient for
three 30-minute sessions. Although there were no differences between the
treatment and control groups in attitudes toward medication, insight, or com-
pliance, the changes in the treatment group were in the expected direction. In
a second study, patients in a psychiatric ward were randomly assigned to re-
ceive either compliance therapy based on motivational interviewing principles
or supportive counseling (Kemp et al., 1996). Each group received four to six
sessions of counseling by a research psychiatrist or clinical psychologist who
was trained in techniques of motivational interviewing. Participants who re-
ceived motivational interviewing showed significantly greater improvements
in attitudes to drug treatment, greater insight into their illness, and more com-
pliance with their treatment than did participants in the supportive counseling
group at 6-month follow-up. In a subsequent study, participants who received
four to six sessions of compliance therapy delivered by a trained therapist
demonstrated significantly greater insight, more positive attitudes toward
treatment, and greater observer-rated compliance than did participants who
receive nonspecific counseling. These changes were retained over an 18-month
follow-up period (Kemp et al., 1998).
DiIorio and colleagues (1994) are currently conducting a study using mo-
tivational interviewing to promote adherence to antiretroviral medications
among people diagnosed with HIV. The project, entitled Get Busy Living, is a
randomized trial with one group receiving the usual adherence education and
the other receiving usual nurse education plus one in-person motivational in -
terviewing session followed by four telephone counseling sessions over a 3-
month period. Nurses received three 4-hour training sessions and were evalu -
ated using a “standardized patient” before they began the intervention. As
part of each session, participants are asked to first rate their motivation for
taking each HIV medication (up to four), and then they are asked to rate their
Medical and Public Health Settings 263
confidence in taking each. They also complete the values clarification activity
described earlier to help link their medical adherence and health to other core
values and life goals. Information gained from these assessments is used to re-
veal discrepancies between motivation and behavior and strategies to foster
adherence.
Thus, motivational interviewing appears to have a potentially useful role
in helping individuals improve their medical adherence, in particular by ex -
ploring their pros and cons and by giving voice to underlying fears and anxi -
ety about their illness. There is insufficient empirical evidence to make firm
conclusions regarding when and how motivational interviewing may be best
used in this regard; however, current studies will further elucidate many of
these key issues.
/G48/G49/G56 /G50/G52/G45/G56/G45/G4E/G54/G49/G4F/G4E
Transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is perhaps the
number one public health problem in the world today. The most common
causes of HIV infections are sharing unsterilized needles among drug users
and unprotected sexual intercourse. Absent a cure or vaccine, behavioral ap-
proaches remain paramount. The most effective HIV behavioral interventions
have been based on cognitive-behavioral theories (Kelly, 1995; NIMH Multi-
site HIV Prevention Trial, 1998). However, these interventions assume that
the participants are in the “action phase” and ready for change. Less attention
has been paid to individuals who are not aware of their own risk of infection
or who believe that their behaviors do not place them at risk. Motivational in-
terviewing may have a promising role, and several studies have explored its
application in this regard.
Carey and colleagues (1997) randomly assigned 102 women considered
at risk for HIV infection to a treatment or wait-list control group. The treat -
ment group met in groups of 8 to 13 participants for four 90-minute sessions.
The intervention was delivered by two trained therapists; it included elicita -
tion of self-motivational statements, summarizing concerns regarding HIV
risk, and feedback about behaviors. Participants in the intervention group,
compared to the control participants, demonstrated significant increases in
HIV knowledge and risk awareness and intentions to adopt safer sexual prac-
tices; they also engaged in fewer acts of unprotected intercourse.
Carey and colleagues (2000) replicated their first study by using a second
sample of 102 low-income women. Women in the control group received a four-
session health-promotion program. Participants in the treatment group in -
creased their knowledge and their intentions to reduce their risky behaviors. Al-
though there were no differences in the treatment and control groups relative to
other outcomes, participants in the intervention who had less than perfect inten-
tions increased their condom use, talked more with their partners about con -
doms and HIV testing, and were more likely to refuse unprotected sex.
264 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
Belcher and colleagues (1998) used motivational interviewing as the ba -
sis for a single 2-hour session to promote HIV risk–reduction practices
among low-income urban women. They found that the participants’ knowl -
edge and self-efficacy did not improve over those of a control group who
received a 2-hour session on AIDS education. However, participants in the
intervention did report significantly higher rates of condom use at follow-
up. The results of these studies suggest that there is a role for motivational
interviewing in HIV prevention. However, further research is necessary to
determine if motivational interviewing is more useful as an adjunct to the
usual cognitive-behavioral group interventions common in HIV prevention
or whether motivational interviewing is more effective as a stand-alone in -
tervention. An important issue for investigation is determining which types
of HIV prevention interventions are best delivered by HIV counselors, as
opposed to people who may possess a more extensive counseling back -
ground.
/G49/G53/G53/G55/G45/G53 /G52/G45/G4C/G41/G54/G45/G44 /G54/G4F /G43/G41/G52/G44/G49/G4F/G56/G41/G53/G43/G55/G4C/G41/G52 /G41/G4E/G44
/G44/G49/G41/G42/G45/G54/G45/G53 /G4D/G41/G4E/G41/G47/G45/G4D/G45/G4E/G54
Diabetes and cardiovascular disease (CVD) are chronic illnesses that are best
managed when health behaviors become integrated into long-term lifestyle
habits. Management of diabetes and CVD requires controlling numerous
health behaviors, such as diet, physical activity, smoking, and, in some cases,
self-monitoring and medication adherence. The complexity of the behavioral
regimen makes it difficult to assess patient adherence, as patients may rou-
tinely comply with certain recommendations, yet not with others.
Strategies are needed to motivate patients to consistently follow these
complex treatment regimens. As noted earlier, Smith and colleagues (1997)
evaluated the result of adding a motivational component to a standard behav-
ioral obesity intervention among women with non-insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus. Those who received the additional motivational sessions had signifi -
cantly better attendance at the group program, better compliance with filling
out food diaries and self-monitoring blood sugars, and better glycemic
control.
When working with people who have chronic illnesses, such as diabetes
and CVD, it is important to assess patients’ readiness to adopt each health
behavior individually, rather than viewing adherence as an “all or nothing”
phenomenon. Because controlling these conditions often implies multiple and
complex behaviors, prioritizing which behaviors to address and when may be
particularly important elements of motivational interviewing intervention in
these contexts. Patients may also benefit from affirmations and problem-
solving skills to help them sustain behaviors they are committed to, along with
motivational strategies that help them better understand their risks for dis -
ease-related complications.
Medical and Public Health Settings 265
/G53/G43/G52/G45/G45/G4E/G49/G4E/G47
Obtaining screening services represents a behavioral choice for which there
may be considerable ambivalence. Individuals may avoid screening tests be -
cause they fear the worst, or they simply may want to avoid the associated
pain and discomfort, cost, or time commitment. Motivational interviewing
has been used to modify screening behaviors in two studies: one looked at
increasing screening rates for mammograms (Ludman et al., 1999; Taplin et
al., 2000), and another addressed both mammogram and Pap smears (Lando
et al., 2001). Both studies were conducted in large health maintenance organi-
zations among women who had not received needed services within the
HEDIS 3.0 guidelines. Initial contact was made by mail with a follow-up
phone call at 2 and 6 months. Both studies had semistructured protocols, and
checklists were completed at each encounter. In one study, two types of phone
calls were compared: a brief reminder/scheduling call and a 5- to 10-minute
motivational interviewing call designed to identify concerns and address barri-
ers. The interventions were conducted by counselors at the masters’ level with
training in psychology. Ongoing supervision, including some tape review, was
done by the initial trainer. Both phone interventions were equally effective in
increasing screening rates for women who had not received a mammogram
within the 2-year window. However, the motivational interviewing call was
less cost-effective because of training and supervision costs (Fishman, Taplin,
Meyer, & Barlow, 2000). The second study compared an enriched usual care
(which included generic reminder calls and letters for many women) with an
outreach mail and phone motivational interviewing contact and an inreach
(an attempt to intercept women at scheduled clinic visits) contact, which also
entailed motivational interviewing (shown to not add any additional effect
due to low clinic visit rates among women needing screening). For the out -
reach and combined groups, the responses—primarily on barriers, beliefs, and
readiness to obtain screening—were used to tailor a letter encouraging the
women to schedule the screening. These women were aged 50 to 69 and met the
HEDIS 3.0 criteria for needing both mammograms and Pap smears. The inter-
ventions were conducted by noncounselor research specialists. Ongoing interven-
tion meetings were used to discuss issues and concerns with the intervention. At
14 months, women who received the outreach motivational interviewing had sig-
nificantly higher rates of screening for both tests, compared to the usual care in
all subgroups except for women over age 65. Taken together, these studies indi-
cate that motivational interviewing is a promising strategy to increase the use of
screening tests, at least among women with poor screening histories.
/G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G4E/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G41/G50/G50/G4C/G49/G43/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G53/G3A
/G50/G52/G45/G56/G45/G4E/G54/G49/G4E/G47 /G49/G4E/G46._/G45/G43/G54/G49/G4F/G4E
The studies already discussed here were conducted in developed and industri -
alized countries. There are serious health problems in developing countries,
266 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
however—for example, diarrheal diseases, malaria, and malnutrition—that
affect vast numbers of economically disadvantaged individuals. Motivational
interviewing has potential application in these areas.
Thevos and colleagues have conducted several studies in African peri -
urban communities where local health promoter volunteers were trained in
motivational interviewing (Thevos, Kaona, Siajunza, & Quick, 2000; Thevos,
Quick, & Yanduli, 2000). Their studies have focused principally on decreas -
ing diarrheal diseases through safe water treatment and storage behaviors at
the household level. The first trial was 8 weeks in length and measured disin -
fectant residuals in stored household water in 166 (out of 185 that began the
study) randomly selected households. Either standard health education alone
or an adaptation of motivational interviewing was delivered in four weekly
household visits. Health counselors received 5 hours of training in motiva -
tional interviewing over three sessions. The results showed a high adherence
rate to disinfectant use in both groups across the 8 weeks of assessment (range
71.1% to 94.7%), that was not statistically different. Possible explanations
for the null findings include the provision of free disinfectant to both groups
and inadequate statistical power (Thevos, Quick, & Yanduli, 2000). Another
mitigating factor was insufficient training of the health promoters. Originally,
10 to 12 hours of training were planned; however, because of scheduling diffi-
culties and illness, only 5 hours were actually delivered.
The second study, conducted in a different community, included 332
households in two geographically separate areas. Five local health promoters
were assigned to deliver either standard health education alone or motiva-
tional interviewing. In each condition, health promoters made at least four
household visits to discuss safe water. They received 8 hours of training in
motivational interviewing plus field supervision. At the 8-month follow-up,
there was a statistically significant 71% higher sales of water disinfectant in
the motivational interviewing group (Thevos, Quick, & Yanduli, 2000). In a
follow-up study in the same community that was conducted 16 months after
the intervention, significantly higher rates (twofold) of detectable disinfectant
in household water persisted in the motivational interviewing group (Thevos
et al., 2001).
A third study coincided with a social marketing campaign to promote
household water disinfection practices (Thevos, Kaona, et al., 2000; Thevos et
al., 2001). Local health promoter volunteers received either the health educa -
tion training associated with the campaign or the same training, supplemented
with motivational interviewing. Eighteen health promoters received four full
days of training in motivational interviewing, plus ongoing supervision. A
total of 198 households from two different geographic areas within one com -
munity were included in the study. All households in the entire community re-
ceived the social marketing campaign. At the 3-month follow-up, a statisti -
cally significant sixteenfold increase in the use of water disinfectant was
observed in the motivational interviewing area over the area receiving health
education and social marketing alone (Thevos, Kaona, et al., 2000).
In all these studies, the quality of delivering the motivational interviewing
Medical and Public Health Settings 267
intervention was assessed. The health promoters completed self-rating scales
and were independently rated by trainers in the field. These data indicated sta-
ble, high ratings on essential elements of motivational interviewing, such as
expressing empathy and avoiding argumentation. The use of other quality-
assurance techniques, such as tape recording, was not feasible in these settings
(Thevos et al., 2001).
Together these studies suggest that, with adequate training, interventions
using motivational interviewing have the potential to ameliorate some public
health problems that confront developing nations. However, successful adap -
tation of motivational interviewing for these settings requires creativity and
flexibility, along with an appreciation of cultural differences.
/G53/G55/G4D/G4D/G41/G52/G59 /G41/G4E/G44 /G46._/G55/G54/G55/G52/G45 /G44/G49/G52/G45/G43/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G53
Health care and public health settings represent potentially important chan -
nels for delivering motivational interviewing, as health care providers can
exploit “teachable moments,” in which patients may be more receptive to
modifying their behaviors. While the literature in this area is still emerging,
available evidence suggests motivational interviewing holds considerable prom-
ise as a behavior change approach for PH and medical settings. It should be
noted that there are at least 15 current U.S. National Institutes of Health–
funded studies where motivational interviewing is being tested as a primary or
adjunct intervention for health behavior change, with varying types of coun-
selors and delivery modalities, and the results of these trials will considerably
inform the direction of practice, policy, and research (Resnicow, DiIorio, et
al., 2001)
A key issue that must be addressed in future studies relates to internal va-
lidity (see Chapter 18), in particular, the use of appropriate controls for the
motivational interviewing intervention and rigorous assessment of treatment
fidelity. Few studies to date adequately describe methods used for training and
“certifying” providers (Glasgow et al., 2000; Smith et al., 1997), and the ex -
tent to which fidelity to motivational interviewing was attained is often un -
clear. Failure to account for quality and quantity of treatment delivery could
result in Type III error—that is, erroneously concluding an intervention failed
when, in fact, it wasn’t delivered with adequate dose or fidelity (Basch,
Sliepcevich, Gold, Duncan, & Kolbe, 1985). Research is currently being con -
ducted to elucidate the active ingredients of motivational interviewing and to
determine the optimal dose of motivational interviewing needed for effective
behavior change. Determining the internal validity of motivational interview -
ing interventions can be achieved by comparing motivational interviewing
head to head to other counseling methods, holding constant the attention ef -
fects, dose, and delivery modality. Additionally, by coding motivational inter-
viewing encounters with such systems as the Motivational Interviewing Skill
Code; Miller & Mount, 2001), dose–response analyses can be performed. It
268 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
can be hypothesized that individuals who received counseling that was of
higher fidelity should have better outcomes than those who received less-
skilled motivational interviewing counseling. Studies that measure dose and
fidelity of motivational interviewing interventions will help to illuminate its
essential elements, as well as the optimal dose.
Ultimately, the essential question may not be whether motivational inter-
viewing works in PH and medical settings, but how well, in what populations,
for which conditions and behaviors, and at what cost. Other issues are which
professions are able to deliver motivational interviewing with sufficient fidel -
ity, and how much training is needed to raise competence to adequate levels.
How will different health care delivery systems (e.g., public vs. private hospi -
tals; health maintenance organizations vs. preferred provider plans) be willing
and able to incorporate motivational interviewing into clinical practice, and
how will practitioners be reimbursed for training and delivery of motivational
interviewing? What is the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of telephone versus
in-person delivery of motivational interviewing? Other important research is -
sues include the effectiveness of motivational interviewing across different
sociodemographic populations, as well as its cost effectiveness relative to
other methods for changing health behaviors.
/G41/G43/G4B/G4E/G4F/G57/G4C/G45/G44/G47/G4D/G45/G4E/G54
Development of this chapter was supported by National Cancer Institute Grant No.
CA-69668 and National Heart, Lung, Blood Institute Grant No. HL64959 to Ken
Resnicow and by Grant No. HL62165 to Belinda Borrelli.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45
1. In considering which studies to include in this chapter, we relied almost entirely on
authors’ self-descriptions of their interventions. Thus, any intervention that was de-
scribed as motivational interviewing, or informed by motivational interviewing,
was considered to be such. In most cases, there was little published information to
determine the extent to which interventions adhered to motivational interviewing
principles or the extent to which such interventions were delivered with fidelity.
Therefore, it is likely that the studies included here are highly variable with regard
to their fidelity to motivational interviewing (see Chapter 16 for further discussion
of this issue).
Medical and Public Health Settings 269
CHAPTER 18
/G56/G61/G72/G69/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73/G6F/G6E/G61/G54/G68/G65/G6D/G65
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G61/G6E/G64 /G49/G74/G73 /G41/G64/G61/G70/G74/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73
STEPHEN ROLLNICK,J EFF ALLISON,S TEPHANIE BALLASIOTES,
TOM BARTH,C HRISTOPHER C. BUTLER,G ARY S. ROSE, and
DAVID B. ROSENGREN
Soon after an initial effort was made to adapt motivational interviewing for
brief interviews (Rollnick, Heather, & Bell, 1992) it seemed as if more method
development was needed. Colleagues were addressing a range of problems in
settings that were quite different to the specialist addiction counseling world
in which motivational interviewing was born (see Chapter 17). Time pressures
were often greater; there was less time for training practitioners who might
not have a background in counseling; and the recipients might not even want
help in the first place!
Between them, Chapters 16 and 17 clarify questions about effectiveness
and about why and how these adaptations were developed. This rising interest
in the flexibility of motivational interviewing undoubtedly presents a chal -
lenge to practitioners and trainers who are committed to implementing high-
quality interventions. For example, one of us (Rollnick) received a call from a
senior researcher who seriously wondered whether a 2-hour classroom intro -
duction to the stages of change model would be an adequate training in moti -
270
vational interviewing, not to mention a call about applying the technique to
obese household pets!
How far can motivational interviewing be adapted before its goals, skills,
and spirit are diluted beyond recognition? If a method is not actually motiva -
tional interviewing, then what is it? If one ventures away from home territory,
what other models and methods might inform our understanding and thereby
enrich clinical practice? The aim of this chapter is not to summarize or review
the adaptations of motivational interviewing that have been described else -
where, but to formulate some answers to these questions. To this end, the
present team of authors—experienced clinicians and trainers from a range of
backgrounds—set out to clarify and improve the usage of terms and to de -
velop consensus about the content of motivational interviewing and its rela -
tives. The outcome is a provisional framework for understanding approaches
to behavior change, in which three forms of intervention—brief advice, behav -
ior change counseling, and motivational interviewing—are compared and
contrasted. The implications of this framework for practitioners, trainers, and
researchers are then discussed.
/G42/G4C/G41/G4D/G49/G4E/G47/G2C /G4C/G41/G42/G45/G4C/G49/G4E/G47/G2C /G41/G4E/G44 /G54/G48/G45 /G52/G49/G47/G48/G54/G49/G4E/G47 /G52/G45/G46._/G4C/G45/G58
If motivational interviewing emerged as a reaction to blaming, labeling, and
the righting reflex in the addictions field, it could find a comfortable home in
a host of other contexts where behavior change is a regular topic of conversa-
tion. This much will be recognized by people who work in criminal justice,
psychiatric, chronic disease, and primary care settings, to mention just a few.
Despite the creative construction of methods like the patient- or client-
centered approach, telling people what to do about behavior change is still often
embedded in language, role definitions, routine procedures, training courses, and
even, it could be argued, in the design and layout of rooms and clinics.
The righting reflex is usually expressed in the form of a strong persuasive
effort in which the practitioner takes center stage in making the case for the
other to change behavior. While this may be useful in some circumstances and
with some recipients, our assumption is that in consultations about behavior
change this might be self-defeating, so that a key task is to facilitate self-
directed change as much as possible.
/G57/G48/G41/G54/G92/G53 /G49/G4E /G41 /G4E/G41/G4D/G45/G3F
Almost from the outset, adaptations of motivational interviewing have ap -
peared in the literature. One only need look as far as the chapter by
Saunders, Wilkinson, and Allsop (1991) in the first edition of this volume to
find a new name and a different perspective. Since then, the development of
these adaptations have been fast and furious, taking on names such as brief
Motivational Interviewing and Its Adaptations 271
motivational interviewing, brief negotiation, motivational enhancement ther -
apy, motivational consulting, motivational intervention, and motivationally
informed intervention, to name just a few. These terms are also sometimes
confused with names given to methods that are not connected to motiva -
tional interviewing, like FRAMES, brief intervention, and brief therapy.
Sometimes the term “motivational intervention” is given to a method that
bears little or no relation to motivational interviewing, but through the use
of the term “motivation,” it somehow gains a kind of spurious respectabil -
ity. After all, a horsewhip might be called a motivationally informed inter -
vention, but it clearly lies outside the confines of this review! Even in this
book, we find our colleagues in Chapter 16 obliged to use the phrase “ad -
aptations of motivational interviewing.” Given this state of affairs, a num -
ber of questions arise: Why did this naming occur? What attitude and skills
are needed when talking about behavior change? What are the similarities
and differences between various methods?
/G50/G72/G6F/G74/G65/G63/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
One reason for the variety of names used is a reluctance to use the term “moti-
vational interviewing” itself, because it might dilute the parent method be-
yond recognition (Rollnick & Miller, 1995). For example, an adaptation with
a strong technical orientation might place too little emphasis on empathic lis-
tening to bear much resemblance to motivational interviewing. Scrutiny of
these adaptations reveal that they vary quite widely in their reliance on differ-
ent principles and key elements of motivational interviewing. Caution about
calling them motivational interviewing would thus seem to be justified. Un-
derstanding the skills involved would appear to be essential.
/G41/G72/G65 /G54/G68/G65/G79 /G44/G69/G66/G66/G65/G72/G65/G6E/G74 /G4D/G65/G74/G68/G6F/G64/G73/G3F
It is one thing to avoid the dilution of motivational interviewing, quite an -
other to give every adaptation a new name. On the one hand, those who de -
veloped each method probably sincerely felt that their method was different to
some degree from others. The dimensions along which they vary include the
length of the intended consultation; the setting (emergency room, through
hospital inpatient and outpatient departments to primary health care settings);
the identified problem; whether or not the recipient is help-seeking; practitio -
ner background, training, skill level; and so on. On the other hand, when one
listens to practitioners talking about these methods, their similarities are often
more striking than their differences: They all seem to be delivered in a
nonconfrontational style, with a common goal—to elicit motivation to change
and to encourage the person to take responsibility for decision making.
The proliferation of different methods runs against the trend in the world
of specialist therapies, where it is generally very difficult to demonstrate spe -
cific effects of well-defined treatments (Mattson, 1998), and there is a
272 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
discernable movement toward producing generic, transtheoretical models and
methods. It is difficult to argue that these methods all have a content and
treatment effect that allows us to distinguish one from the other. Two of us
(Butler et al., 1999; Rollnick et al., 1992) viewed our own contribution of two
names with such reservation that in a subsequent book (Rollnick, Mason, &
Butler, 1999) we gave the method no name at all! There is a strong possibility
that proliferation of names will lead to confusion.
/G57/G68/G61/G74 /G48/G61/G70/G70/G65/G6E/G73 /G49/G6E/G73/G69/G64/G65/G3F
How might one make a decision about what method to practice, teach, or
evaluate? Our initial thought was to produce a taxonomy of different meth -
ods, with guidelines about what to use where and when. Unfortunately, the
absence of a clear definition and a statement of the skills involved rendered
this aspiration unrealistic. We therefore decided to put these methods to one
side and to start with the more general question of what attitude and skills
could be used for what purpose in consultations about behavior change. What
emerged was a provisional descriptive framework in which three forms of in-
tervention can be identified.
/G42/G52/G49/G45/G46._ /G41/G44/G56/G49/G43/G45/G2C /G42/G45/G48/G41/G56/G49/G4F/G52 /G43/G48/G41/G4E/G47/G45 /G43/G4F/G55/G4E/G53/G45/G4C/G49/G4E/G47/G2C
/G41/G4E/G44 /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47
To help the potentially bewildered practitioner, researcher, trainer, and aca-
demic reviewer, as well as the more experienced motivational interviewing
practitioner and researcher, we have suggested a provisional framework (Box
18.1), which identifies three kinds of intervention: brief advice, behavior
change counseling, and motivational interviewing. They are differentiated by
the intervention context and goals, as well as the practitioner’s style and skills.
These factors may operate independently but tend to co-vary. Box 18.1 is
merely a framework for bringing them together in a coherent manner. How -
ever, as it stands, all three methods focus on the task of talking about behav -
ior change. We use the terms “practitioner” and “recipient” or “client” to de-
note the two individuals involved in these interactions. As ungainly as these
terms may be, they are broad enough to encompass the range of circumstances
within which these interventions occur.
/G53/G6F/G6D/G65 /G50/G72/G61/G63/G74/G69/G63/G61/G6C /G45/G78/G61/G6D/G70/G6C/G65/G73
Here are a few examples of useful exchanges between practitioners and recipi-
ents, taken from the everyday practice and training experience of the authors;
which of these scenarios, we asked ourselves, involved motivational interview-
ing? If they were not motivational interviewing, what skills and methods were
being used?
Motivational Interviewing and Its Adaptations 273
274 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
BOX 18.1. Three Kinds of Behavior Change Interventions
Behavior change Motivational
Brief advice counseling interviewing
Context
Session time 5–15 minutes 5–30 minutes 30–60 minutes
Setting Mostly opportunistic Opportunistic or Mostly help-seeking
help-seeking
Goals BA goals, plus: BA and BCC goals,
plus:
Demonstrate respect Establish rapport Develop relationship
Communicate risk Identify client goals Resolve ambivalence
Provide information Exchange information Develop discrepancy
Choose strategies
based on client
readiness
Initiate thinking Build motivation for Elicit commitment to
about change in change change
problem behavior
Style
Practitioner– Active expert–passive Counselor–active Leading partner–
recipient recipient participant partner
Confrontational or Sometimes Seldom Never
challenging style
Empathic style Sometimes Usually Always
Information Provided Exchanged Exchanged to
develop discrepancy
Skills
a
Ask open-ended questions ** ** ***
Affirmations ** ** ***
Summaries * *** ***
Ask permission ** *** ***
Encourage recipient choice and responsibility ** *** ***
in decision making
Provide advice *** ** *
Reflective listening statements * ** ***
Directive use of reflective listening * * ***
Variation in depth of reflections * ** ***
Elicit change talk * ** ***
Roll with resistance * *** ***
Help client articulate deeply held values * * ***
aSkills range from nonessential to essential using a 3-point scale (one, two, or three asterisks).
/G45/G78/G61/G6D/G70/G6C/G65 /G31/G3A /G42/G72/G69/G65/G66 /G41/G64/G76/G69/G63/G65
A social worker conducts a routine visit to a vulnerable young mother
with whom he has a good relationship. He asks about her concerns, and
she says that her boyfriend has been smacking the child, not particularly
hard, but that she is unhappy about this. The social worker suspects that
drugs are being used by this couple. He apologizes for having so little
time to talk things through and asks her permission to be frank about his
views and concerns. He tells the mother that because the child’s safety is
paramount, the smacking is a cause for serious concern. He also mentions
that if she is using drugs, this could harm her and her child’s develop -
ment. The mother becomes tearful; she readily agrees to contact the social
worker if she needs help and to receive him again in 2 days’ time. He ac-
knowledges the courage she has shown in trying to solve her problems
and encourages her to take stock of her situation and make choices in her
own best interests and those of her child.
In this meeting, traffic was almost all one way and consisted mainly of an out-
line of risks of certain behaviors. Nevertheless, under the circumstances, it was
carried out in a clear and compassionate manner.
/G45/G78/G61/G6D/G70/G6C/G65 /G32/G3A /G42/G65/G68/G61/G76/G69/G6F/G72 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65 /G43/G6F/G75/G6E/G73/G65/G6C/G69/G6E/G67
A junior doctor seized the moment and conducted a 6- to 7-minute inter-
view about smoking at the bedside of a man who had recently had a heart
attack. Afterward, the man said that he had been made to think very seri-
ously about giving up smoking and that he was surprised that the young
doctor had not given him a lecture; she seemed to listen and to want to
understand. When asked what she had done in this consultation, the doc-
tor replied, “I didn’t push; I listened and let him tell me about why he
might quit.” She said she had remembered two things from a series of
brief behavior change workshops: letting people tell you why and how
they might change, and not jumping ahead of readiness to change.
This clinician clearly had an interest in communication, some ability to listen,
and an awareness of the patient-centered model. Was she using motivational
interviewing? Our guess is that, according to the framework (see Box 18.1),
this was probably an example of behavior change counseling. Without listen -
ing to or looking at a recording of her interview, it is difficult to be sure; but
there is little reason to believe she was using motivational interviewing. The
influences on her practice came from undergraduate communication skills
training in patient-centered consulting and workshops on behavior change.
/G45/G78/G61/G6D/G70/G6C/G65 /G33/G3A /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
A probation officer is about to drive a client on a supervision order to
visit his young daughter who is living with the client’s ex-wife. Before set-
Motivational Interviewing and Its Adaptations 275
ting out, they discuss the offender’s feelings of frustration and loss at no
longer living with his wife and daughter and how much he misses them.
The probation officer steers the conversation to the course of events that
led to the breakdown of the marriage—due to the client’s drug use and
dealing—and the client says how very much he would like to reestablish
the marriage. The probation officer elicits from the client a clear intention
to achieve abstinence to demonstrate his love and commitment to his
family. The client’s goals and values become clearer, as his own under -
standing of his future options comes into sharper focus.
This is a good example of motivational interviewing. Helping the person re -
solve the contrast between personal values and the behavior problem is an -
other characteristic of motivational interviewing (develop discrepancy). It is
likely that a lot of the directing and steering was done by using reflective lis -
tening and selective reinforcement.
/G45/G78/G61/G6D/G70/G6C/G65 /G34/G3A /G4E/G6F/G74 /G52/G65/G61/G6C/G6C/G79 /G61 /G42/G65/G68/G61/G76/G69/G6F/G72 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65 /G43/G6F/G6E/G73/G75/G6C/G74/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E
A home visitor, described by colleagues as a “born listener,” has had little
professional training. She did attend 2-day training in motivational inter-
viewing. She goes to an overcrowded flat in a poor township where a
pregnant mother is overwhelmed by a host of problems, including alco-
hol dependence, depression, and physical conflict with her boyfriend. She
says that she has no hope for either herself or her child, and she wishes
that the pregnancy could have been aborted. The home visitor stays for
an hour and arranges more appointments. The home visitor said that she
did a lot of listening and also talked a little bit about what could improve
the baby’s health; the mother seemed brighter when she left and had ex-
pressed some concern about alcohol damaging the fetus.
This example raises the distinction between using listening skills in the form of
generic counseling (probably used here) and more focused talk about behavior
change (little evidence here). Motivational interviewing and behavior change
counseling involve more than listening empathically. There is a clear focus on
behavior change.
/G54/G68/G72/G65/G65 /G4B/G69/G6E/G64/G73 /G6F/G66 /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G65/G6E/G74/G69/G6F/G6E
The descriptive guide in Box 18.1 reflects expert judgment and consensus. As
a work in progress, its ongoing development will continue to be informed by
clinical research and practice. The category labels represent best clinical prac -
tice; there is no attempt to assert relative value of the skills and strategies.
Although most skills listed may be employed in any of three categories, we dif-
ferentiate the relative emphasis, occurrence, and necessity of each to brief
advice, behavior change counseling, and motivational interviewing; excluded
are elements or characteristics that we consider equivalent across all catego -
276 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
ries. The interventions might be used in more than one meeting with the pa -
tient. The focus is on the skills necessary to the intervention, not the skills of
the practitioners. We do not assume that brief advice or behavior change
counseling is employed by a less-skilled practitioner.
/G42/G72/G69/G65/G66 /G41/G64/G76/G69/G63/G65
This cluster of skills is fairly easy to characterize, so well engrained is it in ev -
eryday conversation in health, social care, and other settings. In this context,
however, we look to characterize advice giving in a way that maximizes its po-
tential for effectiveness, as it is delivered in a sensitive manner.
The context of brief advice helps explain its character. Brief advice is typ-
ically short in duration and focused on a specific problem area (e.g., diabetes),
although more than one behavior may be addressed within that domain (e.g.,
diet, exercise, and so on). Brief advice often occurs within an opportunistic
setting. That is, the recipient may not be directly seeking assistance for the
behavior or situation to which the brief advice is directed. Instead, the practi -
tioner takes advantage of a circumstance where brief advice may prove help-
ful. This opportunity may spontaneously arise or be a component of the
planned intervention. For example, a client visits his or her physician about
joint pain, and a discussion about weight loss ensues.
The style of brief advice suggests an inequality of roles between the prac-
titioner and recipient. The practitioner has taken on an expert role, and the
client is the recipient of this expertise. Although this may imply a somewhat
more passive participant stance, this does not have to be the case. Good prac-
tice standards in this circumstance are designed to diminish this inequality and
passivity, thus increasing the likelihood of change. Of considerable impor-
tance here is the demonstration of respect in the manner in which the partici -
pant is addressed, privacy is ensured, and permission is requested before offer-
ing advice.
Denise Ernst (personal communication, March 2000) identifies three situ-
ations in which brief advice is appropriate: (1) the recipient asks for informa -
tion; (2) the practitioner has information that might be helpful to a partici -
pant; or (3) the practitioner feels ethically compelled to provide advice. In the
first two situations, brief advice is usually prefaced by a request for permis -
sion. In the last circumstance, the practitioner may or may not ask permission
to proceed. In all instances, however, we might expect the practitioner to elicit
participant response to the advice and its pertinence to current life circum -
stances. Participant responsibility and choice are also emphasized.
The skills here include identifying an appropriate circumstance for brief
advice, raising the subject in a respectful manner that does not elicit unneces -
sary resistance, and then presenting information, often about risk, to the re -
cipient. Open questions might occasionally be asked to assess the recipient’s
reactions. Listening skills are usually limited to brief summaries and perhaps
surface-level reflections. Other skills, including the use of deeper reflections,
Motivational Interviewing and Its Adaptations 277
receive little emphasis in this approach. Stage of change or readiness to change
may occasionally inform the advice given, but does not play a central role in
this intervention.
The overall goal of brief advice, as with all three interventions, is to facili-
tate behavior change. In brief advice, the specific tasks of the practitioner are
to communicate risk, provide information, and initiate a behavior change se -
quence.
/G42/G65/G68/G61/G76/G69/G6F/G72 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65 /G43/G6F/G75/G6E/G73/G65/G6C/G69/G6E/G67
Behavior change counseling is derived from the patient-centered method
(Stewart et al., 1995), with some principles and skills linked to the more spe -
cific subject of health behavior change (Rollnick et al., 1999) and motiva -
tional interviewing. The context for behavior change counseling is often
broader than for brief advice, including more problem areas and behaviors,
but is not typically the systemic change that may be included in a motivational
interviewing encounter. Systemic change involves the client deciding that a
major shift in identity or behavior patterns, or both, is required. For example,
a client addicted to alcohol not only stops drinking but also takes on the iden-
tity of a nonuser, with its accompanying behavior shifts in several categories.
Although it can be very brief in nature, behavior change counseling also
extends to longer time frames. Still, the overall brevity remains a defining fac-
tor. Behavior change counseling may also be opportunistic, but more often it
is a planned element of the encounter. For example, a person with diabetes
meeting with a dietician may discuss diet, exercise, and meal planning but
could also discuss identity issues related to having diabetes. Awareness of
stages of change and client readiness drives the content and process of the ses-
sion. The practitioner does not look to actively develop discrepancy, this being
a guiding principle of motivational interviewing, where, for example, the dis -
crepancy between personal values and a potentially destructive behavior is ac-
tively explored.
The roles of the practitioner and recipient are more egalitarian than in the
brief advice session. The practitioner using behavior change counseling oper -
ates as an adviser to a client who is an active and engaged participant. The en-
counter is more collaborative than typically observed with brief advice, and
greater attention is placed on building rapport. However, this does not neces -
sarily require the same intensity of relationship building that is essential to the
good practice of motivational interviewing. Behavior change counseling often
has a task-oriented flavor. This form of counseling, therefore, does not derive
its content only from motivational interviewing but from the patient- or
client-centered method that is so commonly taught and practiced in healthcare
and social care settings (see, e.g., Rollnick et al., 1999). The “spirit” of this
activity is one of shared decision making.
The difference between behavior change counseling and motivational in -
terviewing skill clusters narrows. They employ many overlapping skills, al -
278 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
though in a somewhat different manner. In behavior change counseling, open
questions and reflective listening statements are used to understand the client’s
views and feelings about the why, how, and when of behavior change (lifestyle
habits, medication use, etc.). However, the reflective listening used may be less
directive. That is, the practitioner follows the client in listening rather than di-
recting the process. The focus is less on eliciting change talk and more on un -
derstanding the person. The practitioner avoids engendering resistance and
negotiates an agenda that is sensitive to the readiness of the person.
The practitioner’s tasks include those described in brief advice while add-
ing specific elements that are designed to identify the client’s goals (rather
than those of the practitioner), select strategies based on the goals and the cli -
ent’s readiness, and then work purposively to build motivation for change. In-
formation is exchanged rather than provided (see Rollnick et al., 1999); to
achieve this, open questions and reflective listening are used to elicit the cli -
ent’s knowledge and information needs and to elicit his or her personal inter-
pretation of the information provided.
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
The third kind of intervention, for which we have reserved the term “motiva-
tional interviewing,” clearly includes high-quality listening as described under
behavior change counseling, but it also requires the strategic use of specific
psychotherapeutic methods to diminish resistance, resolve ambivalence, de-
velop discrepancy, and trigger behavior change. With behavior change coun-
seling, for example, the practitioner asks open questions to encourage the cli-
ent to talk and then offers reflective listening statements to convey an
understanding of what the client says. With motivational interviewing, the
practitioner asks particular open questions that are intended to elicit certain
kinds of speech (change talk) and selectively reflects the elements of client
speech that enhance motivation for change, promote the resolution of ambiva-
lence, and reinforce behavior change. The practitioner may invite (not impose)
new perspectives and resolutions that are compatible with the client’s value
system. When responding to resistance, the practitioner using motivational in-
terviewing chooses responses that are intended to diminish and defuse resis -
tance and redirects the client to change talk. The principle difference between
behavior change counseling and motivational interviewing, then, is the practi-
tioner’s conscious and strategic use of his or her own responses to elicit and
reinforce certain kinds of speech from the client, while reducing other types of
client responses.
Because of its emphasis on listening, as well as the broader goals included
in this approach, motivational interviewing tends to happen less in brief op -
portunistic settings than it does in help-seeking settings. It can also be used
where the client is obliged to attend counseling—for example, in criminal jus -
tice settings. The practitioner often has a background in counseling, although
this is not a requirement. The practitioner works in a collaborative manner
Motivational Interviewing and Its Adaptations 279
with the client, with a primary emphasis on building the relationship. The
“spirit” of this activity can be likened to that of a dance, where the practitio -
ner leads a delicately balanced collaborative effort.
/G43/G4F/G4D/G4D/G4F/G4E /G45/G4C/G45/G4D/G45/G4E/G54/G53/G3A /G54/G48/G45 /G53/G50/G49/G52/G49/G54 /G4F/G46._ /G42/G45/G48/G41/G56/G49/G4F/G52
/G43/G48/G41/G4E/G47/G45 /G45/G4E/G43/G4F/G55/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G53
Conversations about behavior present a fairly unique challenge: the aspira -
tions about change of practitioner and recipient don’t necessarily fall on
peaceable common ground (see Rollnick et al., 1999). One can sometimes al -
most touch the tension in the atmosphere. Feelings of disengagement, opti -
mism, hope, and fear of impending conflict can swing back and forth, some -
times expressed, often not. Each of the three methods described in Box 18.1 is
an attempt to steer a constructive path through this kind of conversation, to
avoid the righting reflex, and to encourage, as one of us (Allison) often puts it,
dancing rather than wrestling. The danger with a list like that in Box 18.1 is
that is does not adequately capture the less tangible tone of the consultation.
All of these methods require the capacity to be flexible, to tolerate uncer-
tainty, to allow silence to generate thoughtfulness but not unnecessary anxi-
ety, and—particularly with behavior change counseling and motivational in-
terviewing—the ability to refrain from providing solutions or arguments for
change.
/G53/G4F/G4D/G45 /G49/G4D/G50/G4C/G49/G43/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G53
/G50/G72/G61/G63/G74/G69/G63/G65
These three methods for talking about behavior change are not separate enti -
ties, as Box 18.1 clearly illustrates. They overlap in some senses, and they con-
tain some distinct characteristics, much like three different styles of regional
cooking might vary. How does one choose what method to use? We have sug-
gested that this is largely determined by context: the time one has available,
and whether or not the client is actively seeking help about a behavior change
issue. Another possibility we gave serious thought to is that the more intensive
methods are better suited to client problems that are more intractable. While
this rings true for us as practitioners, we hesitate at this stage to go beyond de-
scribing methods into the world of client–treatment matching, knowing how
difficult it has been for research on specialist therapy to match client problems
to different treatments (Mattson, 1998).
Care should be taken to avoid oversimplifying the question of skillfulness
in using these methods. An understandable temptation is to view the more
complex method, motivational interviewing, as more skillful. However, the
conceptually simpler method, brief advice, can be far from easy to use well.
Anyone who has been in a situation like that encountered by the social worker
280 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
in the first example here knows that to use brief advice in such a situation re -
quires considerable skill. Indeed, many seasoned practitioners have been heard
to observe, after a career embracing many thousands of consultations, that ex-
perience has taught them to simplify the communication skills they use, for
example, by using shorter questions and empathic listening statements, and by
avoiding overambitious goals for the consultation. This is what an experi -
enced cook will often say: the art is in knowing what to leave out rather than
what to put in. Brief advice, done well, can have an artful quality that matches
the sophistication of motivational interviewing. Time and resources are often
critical considerations. Brief advice can represent effective use of limited re -
sources. It can also reflect a considered ethical judgment not to go into more
personal matters with a client who has consulted for some other reason.
Choice about what method to use involves weighing up what kind of skills are
required for what situation.
When looking at Box 18.1 practitioners will inevitably move from the
question of what method to use to a comparison of their own skills with those
listed. Through self-guided learning, supervision, and training it should be
possible to identify gaps in their skills portfolio. After considering the frame-
work, a practitioner might say, “I want to be practicing motivational inter-
viewing, but after examining this framework, I realize reflective listening skills
should be more central to my practice. But let me remind myself. What exactly
is reflective listening? What are the skills? How do I learn these skills, and
how do I practice them?”
/G4C/G65/G61/G72/G6E/G69/G6E/G67 /G61/G6E/G64 /G54/G72/G61/G69/G6E/G69/G6E/G67
This topic has been addressed in Chapters 13 and 14, and is also identified as
a serious challenge in public health applications in Chapter 17. Relevant here
are the implications of the framework presented in this chapter. Essentially,
we hope that it will help learners find out where they are in the spectrum of
behavior change interventions and to decide what skills they will need for
their practice to be congruent with a given method. Trainers and facilitators
should be able to establish jointly agreed learning objectives with practitio -
ners. As training progresses, the framework allows all concerned to assess
progress and consider the extent to which practitioners need to add new skills
to their repertoire.
The list of skills in Box 18.1 are by no means comprehensive or the last
word on this subject. Facilitators might well ask practitioners how valid are
the skills from their perspective? What should be left out, and what needs to
be put in? Do the categories in Box 18.1 have face validity? What empirical
support exists for these categories?
Among the more specific implications for learning that emerge from the
framework are that it will take more effort to achieve competency in motiva -
tional interviewing; that in learning brief advice and behavior change counsel-
ing, one often needs to encourage practitioners to “not do” things, to “un -
Motivational Interviewing and Its Adaptations 281
learn” old habits that are usually connected to telling people why or how they
might change, or to using a confrontational interviewing style; that some prac-
titioners, because of their background, work circumstances, and learning pref-
erences might not wish to or may not be well suited to doing certain kinds of
interventions; and that undergraduate or prequalification training might focus
initially on brief advice and some of the key elements of behavior change
counseling.
/G52/G65/G73/G65/G61/G72/G63/G68
In pursuing the aim of this chapter, to clarify the inner working of behavior
change efforts, one implication for research is strikingly clear—evaluating a
complex intervention is no simple matter. Writers and reviewers of grant pro-
posals might find the framework in this chapter useful for locating and under-
standing the method to be evaluated. Studies will benefit from developmental
work which precedes the end-stage question of the effectiveness of a given
method (see Chapters 16 and 17). This might include addressing the following
questions:
• What does existing practice look like, and what skills are used by prac-
titioners?
• How might a chosen method fit into this context? What skill combina-
tion and method best suits this setting? What are the reactions of cli-
ents?
• How well have practitioners acquired competence in training? What
training methods were used? Were practitioners able to transfer skills
into real consultations?
• Was the delivery of the method adequately monitored with reliable and
valid measurement tools?
This list is by no means comprehensive, neglecting, for example, the assess -
ment of outcome. However, it demonstrates that unless attention is paid to
what practitioners actually do in training and in real consultations, the con -
clusions of a study will inevitably be tinged with reservations and uncertainty,
a theme that is clearly running through the review in Chapter 16.
/G42/G52/G49/G45/G46._ /G41/G44/G41/G50/G54/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G53 /G52/G45/G56/G49/G53/G49/G54/G45/G44
In light of the framework in Box 18.1, one might conclude that, by default,
many of the adaptations reviewed in Chapters 16, 17, and 20–24 are exam -
ples of behavior change counseling or even brief advice. We are obliged to
speculate about this, because it is not clear exactly what skills were used by
the practitioners involved. For example, the first study of an adaptation
(Rollnick et al., 1992) used a reasonably well-documented method that was
282 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
called, perhaps ambitiously, brief motivational interviewing. However, the re-
fined use of reflective listening was not built into the method, and its delivery
was not properly monitored. The fact that recipients changed—that they
might have engaged in change talk under difficult circumstances in a busy hos-
pital ward environment—does not mean that motivational interviewing was
used by the practitioners involved. The framework presented here should en -
able those developing adaptations of motivational interviewing to avoid inac -
curacies of this kind.
/G43/G4F/G4E/G43/G4C/G55/G53/G49/G4F/G4E/G53
A look back over the last 10 years at the field of motivational interviewing
and its relatives might give the impression of practitioners, trainers, and re -
searchers learning as they go along! There is a lot of truth to this assertion. In-
ductive processes have undoubtedly played a major role in the development of
methods, informed by clinical encounters, training experiences, and the chal -
lenges thrown up by trying to evaluate efficacy and effectiveness. This has led
to some confusion about what method to learn, practice, and evaluate, and it
has also generated creativity. The aim of this chapter has been to encourage
this activity to move forward on a surer skills-based footing, freer from a po-
tentially misleading array of names of methods. Three methods, that vary in
complexity, have been proposed as a possible way forward.
There has undoubtedly been a yearning for the quick fix in some quar-
ters, where the search for a really brief method is associated with a desire to
have something that can be applied to or on people; in truth, a high-quality
exchange about behavior change is a demonstration of skillfulness that is not
equivalent to following a recipe. The technical fix, therefore, might exist, but
it will not be based on motivational interviewing, behavior change counseling,
or the patient-centered method.
/G41/G43/G4B/G4E/G4F/G57/G4C/G45/G44/G47/G4D/G45/G4E/G54/G53
Stephen Rollnick coordinated the writing of this chapter. The remaining authors all
contributed equally, and are therefore listed in alphabetical order. We are sincerely
grateful to our colleagues in the international Motivational Interviewing Network of
Trainers who also contributed to this effort in its early stages—Hal Arkowitz, Chris
Dunn, William Miller, and Ken Resnicow.
Motivational Interviewing and Its Adaptations 283
CHAPTER 19
/G54/G68/G65 /G52/G6F/G6C/G65 /G6F/G66 /G56 /G61/G6C/G75/G65/G73 /G69/G6E
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
CHRISTOPHER C. WAGNER and FRANCISCO P. SANCHEZ
If you bring forth what is within you, what you bring forth may
save you.
—G OSPEL OF THOMAS
People change their behavior and lifestyle for many reasons. Some change be -
cause their current lifestyle no longer brings them sufficient pleasure. Some
change because external forces constrain them. Still others change because
their lifestyle no longer fits their identity. In each of these situations the per -
son’s values are elements of the change process.
This chapter focuses on using clients’ values as a means to increase moti-
vation to move toward a more satisfying lifestyle (issues related to counselor
values are addressed in Chapter 12). Focusing on values helps the person ap -
preciate those things in life that are more vital to the person than drug use or
other problematic behaviors (Miller, 1998). Focusing on values can help cli -
ents define the kind of life they want to lead and the kind of person they want
to be, thus fortifying their determination to make adaptive changes.
284
/G56/G41/G4C/G55/G45/G53 /G41/G4E/G44 /G42/G45/G48/G41/G56/G49/G4F/G52
/G57/G68/G61/G74 /G41/G72/G65 /G56/G61/G6C/G75/G65/G73/G3F
For an overview of values, we turn to two authors whose work is directly
applicable to motivational interviewing. Carl Rogers (1964), whose person-
centered therapy provides conceptual underpinnings for motivational inter -
viewing, proposed definitions for two types of values. He defined “operative
values” as “the tendency for any living beings to show preference, in their
actions, for one kind of object or objective rather than another” (p. 14).
“Conceived values” were defined as “preference(s) of the individual for a sym-
bolized object” (p. 14). The preferences in the first term are behavioral and in
the second they are conceptual. Milton Rokeach (1973, 1979) believed that
one function of values is to motivate, and he conceptualized values as either
modes of conduct (instrumental values, such as obedience, helpfulness, and
loving) or end states of existence (terminal values, such as wisdom, social rec -
ognition, and pleasure). Instrumental values motivate because they represent
the idealized modes of behavior that are necessary to reach desired end states.
Terminal values are motivating because they represent the desired end states.
In this chapter we draw from these definitions to conceptualize values as
either behavioral ideals or preferences for experiences . As behavioral ideals,
values function as judgments about what is good and not good with corre-
sponding prescriptions for behaving consistent with the beliefs. When a per-
son expresses that an important value is “to love one another,” that person is
indicating that it is “bad” to intentionally harm or perhaps even ignore others.
As preferences for experiences, values guide individuals toward seeking situa-
tions in which they may experience excitement, relaxation, novelty, competi-
tion, comfort, belongingness, or security. While the person may have beliefs
corresponding to these activities (e.g., “Being active keeps me healthy . . . ”),
often it is the experience that is at the center of the value (e.g., “ . . . But more
important, running just feels good”).
/G54/G68/G65 /G53/G74/G72/G75/G63/G74/G75/G72/G65 /G6F/G66 /G56/G61/G6C/G75/G65/G73
Abraham Maslow’s (1970) motivational pyramid, traditionally described as
one of “needs,” proposes a hierarchical structure of values. In Maslow’s
scheme, biological needs are prepotent—people generally value (and will seek)
sustenance of the body, protection from pain or danger, and facilitation of
pleasure in preference to activities that do not serve this end. When biological
needs are largely satisfied, social needs (values) are pursued: acceptance by
others; a sense of belongingness; receipt of attention, approval, and praise.
Once secure in the social realm, psychological values—those regarding achieve-
ment, knowledge, and understanding—are often pursued. Finally, people tend
to pursue even “higher” values of beauty, self-actualization, creation, and
transcendence of identity barriers.
One implication of Maslow’s structure is that when a person is forced to
The Role of Values 285
choose between a behavior that only fulfills a lower-order need and one that
only fulfills a higher-order need, it is natural to choose the former. Thus, when
drug use or another problematic behavior helps a person escape pain or gain
pleasure, then it is natural for the person to continue that behavior, despite so-
cial rejection. When the problem behavior meets both biological and social
needs, such as belonging to a peer group, it is natural for the person to con -
tinue the behavior even when it interferes with the pursuit of higher-order
strivings toward achievement or self-actualization. To choose a behavior that
meets these higher-level needs over the problem behavior that meets lower-
order needs requires either confidence that the new behavior will continue to
meet the lower-order needs or a transcendence of the natural order of motiva-
tions. From this point of view, behavior that conforms to higher-level values
may be the exception, not the rule.
Schwartz and Bilsky (1987) proposed another structural model by classi -
fying values into three types: biological, interactional, and social institutional.
Using the Rokeach value survey (1973), they validated seven value domains
that lead toward individualistic or collectivistic goals: enjoyment, achieve -
ment, self-direction (individualistic), maturity, security (mixed), conformity,
and prosocial (collectivistic). They proposed another domain, social power,
but there were no markers in the Rokeach lists to investigate it. This study
suggested the presence of bipolar value dimensions of individualistic vs.
collectivistic goals: self-direction vs. conformity, and achievement vs. prosocial
values. They also reported some support for a dimension of enjoyment vs.
prosocial values. These findings do not mean that a person cannot simulta-
neously hold opposing sets of values; in fact, there is some evidence that peo-
ple have different value structures for different life roles (work vs. social;
Brown & Crace, 1996).
/G43/G6F/G6E/G73/G69/G73/G74/G65/G6E/G63/G79 /G62/G65/G74/G77/G65/G65/G6E /G56/G61/G6C/G75/G65/G73 /G61/G6E/G64 /G42/G65/G68/G61/G76/G69/G6F/G72
It is tempting to believe that behavior is generally consistent with values. A
person who values fairness doesn’t cheat; a person who values honesty doesn’t
lie. The evidence for the influence of other factors on behavior is strong, how-
ever. For example, immediately after declaring that “caring for others” is the
basis of their religious faith, seminary students on their way to lecture on the
Good Samaritan parable step over men slumped in doorways, moaning for
help, simply because the students were told they are late for their presentation
(Darley & Batson, 1973). Concerned bystanders ignore calls for help from
victims of accidents, stabbings, and other emergency situations, apparently in-
hibited by the presence of other nonintervening onlookers (Darley & Latane,
1968; Latane & Darley, 1968). Even when reduced to “twitching, stuttering
wreck(s),” individuals continue to deliver apparently painful shocks to inno -
cent volunteers simply because the experimenter tells them that they “have no
choice” (Milgram, 1963, p. 377). These studies do not negate the fact that
286 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
people often behave in congruence with their expressed values, although they
do call into question the strength of these values when the situational pull is in
an opposite direction.
Although the influence of situations on behavior is undeniable, it is not
absolute. Instead, behavior is the result of an interaction between the situa -
tional pull and personal tendencies. Individuals select the situations in which
they participate, interpret the meaning of situational attributes, and make
behavioral choices. Motivation to behave in a values-congruent manner ap -
pears to be enhanced when a person identifies higher personal values as salient
to the situation, has strong attitudes about the situation based on personal ex-
perience (Schuman & Johnson, 1976), and has well-defined, challenging
behavioral goals (Locke & Latham, 1990). A positive outcome expectancy or
sense of self-efficacy further enhances the values-behavior consistency (Bandura,
1986; Feather, 1992), as does a positive mood state (Feather, 1992).
However, several factors appear to lessen the congruence between values
and behavior. Lack of recognition of the relevance of values to specific behav-
ioral choices appears to lessen congruence (Kristiansen, 1985), as does a lack
of recognition of the negative consequences of the behavior upon oneself or
others (Schwartz, 1974). When individuals deny personal responsibility for
behaving in a values-congruent manner or for the resulting consequences (at-
tributing responsibility instead to the situation itself or to other persons in-
volved), value-behavior congruence is also diminished (Schwartz & Howard,
1980). In addition, values–behavior congruence appears to decrease when
positive role models express rejection of relevant values or when negative role
models endorse those values (Schwartz & Ames, 1977).
These and other findings suggest possibilities for facilitating increased con-
sistency between values and behavior in counseling. The counselor might en-
courage the client to adopt the role of a self-investigator (Hermans, 1987) and to
carefully contemplate the relationship between personal values and behavior
(Conroy, 1979; Kristiansen, 1985; Wojciszke, 1987), considering past personal
experiences and reliable external information (Fazio & Zanna, 1981; Schuman
& Johnson, 1976). The counselor could help the client define goals, appreciate
the value choices offered by various situations and the consequences of making
certain choices, and increase hope, confidence, and a positive attitude. Through
discussion, the client may come to experience his or her value system as increas-
ingly stable and clear (Schwartz & Howard, 1980), yet not inflexible (Rogers,
1961). Over time, the client may take increasing responsibility for making val-
ues-congruent behavior choices (Schwartz & Howard, 1980), as well as for the
consequences of those choices (Schwartz, 1974).
These findings provide some guidance for counselors who are encourag -
ing clients to move in a values-congruent direction, although there appears to
be an important caveat: one needs to be seen by clients as a “positive referent”
or risk fostering opposition to the information or suggestions provided
(Schwartz & Ames, 1977).
The Role of Values 287
/G56/G61/G6C/G75/G65/G73 /G61/G6E/G64 /G50/G72/G6F/G62/G6C/G65/G6D/G61/G74/G69/G63 /G42/G65/G68/G61/G76/G69/G6F/G72
We focus on three viewpoints found in the literature regarding the relation -
ship between values and problematic behavior: problematic behavior may be
primarily self-oriented (good for the individual, but harmful to others), short-
sighted (good for the individual now, bad for the individual later), or ineffi -
cient (satisfies some needs or values, but prevents satisfaction of others). To
help explain these points and for subsequent discussion, we present the case
example of Tina.
Tina is a 33-year-old woman who presents for substance abuse treatment
at an inner-city agency, following an arrest for possession of cocaine. She
appears unhealthy and exhausted. She reports smoking cocaine over ex -
tended weekends, smoking a pack of cigarettes per day and drinking beer
and wine while using cocaine. She lives in public housing with her
mother. She is currently unemployed, and her only source of income is
money she makes through “running” drugs between dealers and buyers.
She has two daughters, ages 8 and 11, whom she regularly leaves with her
mother while she goes on her binges. She previously spent considerable
time with her daughters, helping them with homework, playing games
with them, and shopping, but this has decreased substantially over the
past year.
People who display problematic behavior are sometimes perceived as
“lacking in values.” They may be seen as selfish, choosing personal plea-
sure over other values promoted by society such as caring for one’s family
or being involved in community affairs (Peele, 1990). One example of such
thinking is the moral model of addiction, which considers problematic drug
use to be an immoral and unrestrained pursuit of self-centered values. In
our example, Tina’s cocaine consumption could be considered representa -
tive of self-oriented values as she has neglected her daughters while using
cocaine.
“Short-sighted” behaviors are those that reap short-term rewards while
ignoring long-term negative consequences. Substance use and other problem -
atic behaviors often lead to immediate rewards of increased pleasure or relax-
ation, as well as other short-term rewards such as excitement or a sense of be-
longing to a peer group. It is typically over the long term that these behaviors
are unsatisfying. For example, it is healthy to desire to be part of a peer group
that shares experiences and viewpoints, but when the common denominator
among group members is use of substances, one may find one’s needs for be -
longing are met only temporarily; the social bonds may dissolve as the sub -
stances disappear. In our case example, Tina’s problematic behaviors are
short-sighted; they provide pleasure and excitement now, but over the long
term they may lead to a dissatisfied sense of self, a feeling that life has been
wasted, and legal consequences that prevent her from obtaining a satisfying
job or lifestyle.
288 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
“Inefficient” behaviors fulfill certain needs at the expenses of others. In -
tensive substance use may fulfill values of relaxation and pleasure, as well as
belongingness, while simultaneously reducing achievement and self-esteem.
Tina’s cocaine use produces pleasure and she finds the surrounding lifestyle
exciting, yet these needs are fulfilled at the expense of other values she holds
about parenting, achievement, and self-esteem.
While these focus areas can help in analyzing clients’ problem behaviors,
it is best to avoid strong initial assumptions about what values drive those be-
haviors. Our preconceptions about which values are most important may
blind us to a thorough understanding of clients’ own value system. Counselors
can reduce the influence of their own biases by exploring these notions with
clients, asking clients to identify potentially self-oriented, short-sighted, or in -
efficient behaviors for consideration. Discussion of problematic behaviors in
the context of the values they serve may decrease resistance because it is the
clients themselves who identify the behaviors and any conflicts or undesired
consequences with the values held. Once these relations are identified, clients
may determine that they do not need to change their values per se but must
simply find different ways to fulfill their preferences for experiences. Although
the counselor can inform the client of ways that others have achieved this, no
one but the client can discover which other behaviors meet needs and conform
to personal ideals. Creativity is helpful in this venture, as the behaviors that
“work” may be social, vocational, educational, recreational, artistic, or spiri-
tual in nature. For Tina, who values both excitement and autonomy, the goal
may not be to change those values but perhaps to find less problematic ways
of achieving them, whether that be through dancing, career building, or per-
haps even kick boxing!
/G56/G41/G4C/G55/G45/G53 /G41/G4E/G44 /G50/G53/G59/G43/G48/G4F/G54/G48/G45/G52/G41/G50/G59
/G54/G68/G65/G6F/G72/G65/G74/G69/G63/G61/G6C /G50/G65/G72/G73/G70/G65/G63/G74/G69/G76/G65/G73
One foundation for considering the role of values in motivational interviewing
is humanistic theory. Among its basic tenets are assertions that people are mo-
tivated by the desire for growth and self-direction (Rogers, 1964) and are con-
tinually striving for the actualization of their potential (Maslow, 1967). Rog -
ers proposed that as children and adolescents experience reward or rejection
for various behaviors, they learn to value or devalue those aspects of self that
underlie the various behaviors. As certain behaviors are consistently (or in -
tensely) met with rejection or punishment, individuals tend to “close off” or
disown those “parts” of their self. Individuals receiving considerable rejection,
or “negative regard,” become more likely to lack recognition of personal
problems, lack desire to change, lack awareness of internal feelings and val -
ues, avoid close relationships, and be unwilling to communicate with others
about their inner experiences. Rogers’s client-centered therapy involved pro -
viding an interpersonal atmosphere in which clients would increasingly be -
The Role of Values 289
come aware and accepting of their experiences and values, the disowned as -
pects of self, and a sense of self-direction. Rogers (1961) reported that clients
often would increasingly value self-direction, flexibility of behavior and sense
of self, acceptance of their internal complexity and contradictory feelings, an
openness to internal experiences that were previously ignored or rejected, ac -
ceptance of others, and self-trust. In addition, clients were observed to increas-
ingly reject facades and compulsions to live by others’ standards, expecta -
tions, or rewards.
Mowrer’s (1945) work on integrative learning suggests that learning can
be interrupted by the time delay between contradictory short- and longer-term
results of a given action, setting up a “vicious circle” or nonintegrative strat -
egy. For example, Tina’s use of cocaine provides excitement. Finding ways to
afford and obtain the drug feeds her desires for adventure and achievement.
Running drugs provides interpersonal reinforcement, as both the dealers and
the buyers enjoy seeing her and reinforce her for helping. Using cocaine is a re-
ward for successfully completing her “mission,” and its euphoric properties
add to her positive feelings. At the end of a several-day run, however, Tina
ends up feeling ashamed for neglecting her daughters, feels she has been
“used” by the dealers and buyers, and experiences depressed mood, feeling
that she once again let herself and her family down and “wasted” several
days’ time. In this situation, focusing on her values about parenting and
achievement may promote insight about the nonintegrative nature of her
behavior pattern. This insight may be obscured by the delay between the de-
sirable short-term consequence of enjoyment, excitement, and adventure and
the undesirable longer-term consequences of experiencing shame and de-
pressed mood.
Mowrer’s (1966) “integrity therapy” helps clients willingly claim appro-
priate responsibility for actions they find troubling. Mowrer attributed
psychological distress to the lack of integrity or correspondence between a
person’s behavior and moral beliefs; psychological relief begins with acknowl-
edgment of the troubling nature of the behavior. According to Mowrer, “it is
the truth we ourselves speak rather than the treatment we receive that heals
us” (1966, p. 114). He called the speaking of such truth a “painful but liberat-
ing self-disclosure.” Once discovering themselves in a genuine way, including
the discrepancy between behavior and ideals, individuals liberate themselves
from their distress.
Rokeach (1979) proposed that values function as motivational guide -
posts, stimulating an increase in value-behavior consistency, thus improving
self-esteem. Rokeach also believed that although different individuals may
hold similar values, differences in the relative importance of each value may
account for differences in behavior. His values self-confrontation (VSC) ap -
proach involved individuals rank-ordering their value preferences, comparing
their ordered list with that of a positive reference group, and discussing the
implications of the ordering priority.
290 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
/G45/G6D/G70/G69/G72/G69/G63/G61/G6C /G53/G74/G75/G64/G69/G65/G73
Although we uncovered relatively few published outcome studies that focused
on values-oriented approaches with problematic behaviors, those that we
found are instructive. A study of heavy smokers who received treatment at a
smoking cessation clinic found posttreatment differences in smoking rates be -
tween a group that participated in a values ranking and examination process
versus a control group. At the conclusion of the 19-day clinic, the control
group was smoking at 28% of its pre-clinic average, while the values group
was at 5%; this difference was maintained at 2-month follow-up (Conroy,
1979).
Schwartz and Inbar-Saban (1988) used Rokeach’s VSC method with
overweight individuals interested in losing weight. They assessed individuals’
value priorities, then discussed the congruence of these priorities with the
rank-ordered priorities that differentiated between weight-losing (wisdom = 2,
happiness = 11) and non-weight-losing (e.g., wisdom = 5, happiness = 5)
groups in a pilot study. Individuals undergoing VSC lost more weight over the
following 2 months than a nontreatment group or than a discussion-control
group, and they continued to lose more weight than the discussion-control
group over the following 12 months (during which time the nontreatment
group received VSC and subsequently also surpassed the discussion group in
weight loss). The VSC method produced values change among participants to-
ward congruence with the positive reference group, and the value change me-
diated the weight loss, presumably by increasing dissatisfaction about the dis-
crepancy between the individuals’ and reference groups’ scores.
Although not using an explicitly values-oriented approach, Downey,
Rosengren, and Donovan (2000) reported that the perception of discrepancy
between substance use and self-standards was a significant motivator of absti-
nence among individuals who participated in public-sector addiction treat -
ment, including a brief motivational intervention. Their article also reviews
the literature on the relationship between addictive behaviors and identity is -
sues, which is a focus closely related to that of this chapter.
/G56/G41/G4C/G55/G45/G53 /G41/G4E/G44 /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47
/G57/G68/G79 /G46._/G6F/G63/G75/G73 /G6F/G6E /G56/G61/G6C/G75/G65/G73/G3F
From a humanistic viewpoint, motivational interviewing involves assisting in -
dividuals to define their current and ideal selves, then pursue movement from
the current self toward the ideal. Thus, a focus on values may help increase an
individual’s sense of the importance of change, as well as define the direction
of change. The counselor may assist clients to more fully appreciate their
current self by eliciting discussion of problematic behaviors in relation to self-
oriented, short-sighted, or inefficient value choices. This can assist clients to
The Role of Values 291
uncover reasons for continuing to engage in less-than-optimal behaviors, de -
spite resulting negative consequences. When the problematic behaviors can be
seen as (misguided) choices to achieve valued ends, individuals may become
less defensive about protecting those choices and more open to exploring
other means of achieving their values.
A values focus can help a person define his or her “ideal self” by explor -
ing those behavioral ideals to which the person resonates. Sometimes, individ-
uals have forgotten about these values or have rejected them as naive or un -
achievable. Simply focusing on these ideals can help a person detect current
behaviors inconsistent with the ideal. In our case example, Tina’s explicit
focus on her ideal self as healthy parent and provider may help her appreciate
the problems posed by her attempts to live an exciting, fast-paced, glamorous
lifestyle. In this way, the person’s values guide the direction of change.
A focus on values may stimulate motivation for change. Focusing on dis -
crepancies between ideal life conditions and actual conditions may induce a
desire to “recalibrate” daily behaviors to be more congruent with deeply held
beliefs. Awakened to a deeper sense of self and values, the person may become
increasingly aware that the problematic behaviors meet certain short-term
needs but do not lead to fulfillment of more deeply held values or long-term
satisfaction. Focusing on ideals can help decrease clients’ defensiveness and
increase desire for change by shifting the focus away from consideration of
“negative” behaviors or lifestyle, toward a focus on a positive, more deeply
satisfying lifestyle that can be pursued and enjoyed. Clients may come to per-
ceive that they do not necessarily have to purge valued aspects of their current
self; instead, they need to restrain certain tendencies in order to develop a
deeper, more aware self and live with a greater sense of purpose (importance)
and power (confidence). By doing this, they may also reduce the negative emo-
tions that are often related to the identification of a discrepancy between val -
ues and behavior (Avants, Singer, & Margolin, 1993–1994).
Ambivalence about various possibilities can be viewed in part as the
experiential result of multiple conflicting values. In our example, Tina’s am -
bivalence can result from a conflict between her short-term values of excite -
ment and a glamorous lifestyle and her longer-term values of good parenting
and a lifestyle that permits sustained achievement, despite its “ordinary” na -
ture. While ambivalence may be resolved from concluding that longer-term
values take precedence over short-term values, there are other paths to its res-
olution. Sometimes, it is not so much a conflict between the long- and short-
term values themselves but an issue that the strategies for fulfilling short-term
values are precisely those strategies that prevent fulfilling the longer-term val -
ues. There are ways to gain excitement other than using cocaine and living a
fast lifestyle. By seeking with the client the positive motivations behind the
problematic behaviors, we can open the door to consideration of alternative
behaviors that address short-term needs without unduly interfering with the
pursuit of long-term goals.
292 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
Similarly, ambivalence can arise from conflicts between individualistic
and collectivistic values (e.g., self-direction vs. conformity), or from valuing
one behavior or experience that interferes with another valued behavior or ex-
perience (e.g., partying late at night with friends makes it difficult for Tina to
get up and help the kids off to school). Clarifying the relative importance of
these values may help reduce ambivalence.
/G48/G69/G67/G68/G6C/G69/G67/G68/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G56/G61/G6C/G75/G65/G73 /G69/G6E /G74/G68/G65 /G50/G72/G61/G63/G74/G69/G63/G65 /G6F/G66 /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
The use of values can be incorporated into the practice of motivational inter -
viewing in many ways. The most obvious way is to “keep an ear open” for cli-
ents’ values. Many of the underlying principles and practices of motivational
interviewing already focus on clients’ values or can be easily adapted to do so.
In helping a client to better understand the values guiding everyday
behavior, two of the motivational interviewing principles are especially useful.
When expressing empathy, counselors can focus on unspoken values behind a
client’s statements. For example, one day Tina arrives late for her appoint -
ment, explaining that the kids have been sick and her mother relies too much
on junk food, so Tina made the kids a good breakfast before leaving the
apartment. A counselor could interpret this situation in many ways. The coun-
selor may interpret the explanation as unimportant, as a need to vent stress, or
perhaps as a test of the therapeutic relationship. Given the client’s history of
tending to her own needs over her childrens’, the counselor may view this
behavior as a sign of resistance to treatment or even doubt the veracity of
the report itself. Depending on the interpretation, the counselor may explore the
perceived resistance, reflect the client’s frustration, reassure the client that
the counselor won’t reject or punish her for arriving late, or simply shrug off the
explanation. Using the principle of expressing empathy and focusing on
the values of the client, the counselor could respond, “It seems like it’s impor-
tant for you to be a good mother and do the best you can for your kids, even if
you have to sacrifice some things for yourself or if other people might not under-
stand.” This response expresses the counselor’s understanding of the meaning of
the client’s behaviors and refocuses the conversation on a deeply held value (e.g.,
caring for her children), its relation to current behavior (feeding the kids nutri-
tious foods in case her mother doesn’t), and the importance of the value (it’s
worth risking the counselor’s misunderstanding, disbelief, or annoyance).
Rolling with resistance is typically discussed in terms of the momentary
interpersonal behaviors of the client and counselor. The counselor does not
oppose resistant behaviors. When a client argues, the counselor explores the
client’s views, changes topics or does anything other than argue back. When a
client withholds his or her opinion, the counselor does not insist the client ex-
plain it. In terms of values, the resistant behaviors may indicate some opposi -
tion between the client’s competing internal values, between the values of the
client and counselor, or between the values of the client and society. For ex -
The Role of Values 293
ample, although she desires a more sustainable lifestyle that builds toward a
better future, Tina may perceive available employment opportunities as too
menial or unrewarding. Similarly, she may be attached to aspects of her cur -
rent lifestyle that likely decrease her chances of developing a more sustainable
one, such as buying expensive clothes and jewelry. Challenging her on these
values may increase resistance. “Rolling with” these issues by explicitly ac -
knowledging her valuing meaningful employment and a sense of social status
may help develop an atmosphere in which she is able to consider these value
conflicts in a less defensive manner.
Whereas the previous two principles focus on understanding current
behavior, the principle of developing discrepancy is intended “to create and
amplify . . . a discrepancy between present behavior and . . . broader goals
and values” (Chapter 4 in this volume). In the practice of motivational in -
terviewing, the counselor does not dramatically point out the discrepancy
(e.g., “So having social status is more important to you than saving money
to give your children a better life?”). Instead, the counselor develops the
theme of discrepancy bit by bit over an extended conversation or across
counseling sessions. One may elicit the development of discrepancy from the
client rather than leading with an interpretation regarding apparent conflicts
between values and behavior (e.g., “We’ve talked several times about how
important it is to you to ‘get somewhere’ in life. At the same time, you like
buying fashionable clothes, and being looked up to by others and you feel
like it’s drudgery to go to work every morning. How do these fit to-
gether?”).
Standard motivational interviewing strategies may be adapted to focus
explicitly on clients’ values. In early discussions, these strategies may help cli-
ents define their current self in light of their values. Using the opening strate-
gies, the counselor may directly ask about clients’ values (both ideals and pref-
erences for experiences), reflect statements related to ideals or preferences,
summarize described experiences in light of clients’ values, and affirm the ef -
fort involved in determining clients’ ideals and their relation to current life -
styles. Emphasizing personal choice in behavior or lifestyle may prompt ex -
ploration and ownership of values (e.g., “It’s up to you to decide which kind
of life you want to lead—what’s important to you?”). Counselors can review
a typical day to help clients define their preferences for experiences, as well as
gather information for the later consideration of discrepancies between cur -
rent behavior choices and values. When providing assessment feedback, coun-
selors can determine clients’ reactions to the results and explore any dissatis -
faction in terms of clients’ values.
Double-sided reflections can be expressed as mirroring the ambivalence
that results from an underlying values conflict. The exploration of good
things/less good things is essentially a values clarification exercise already, and
counselors can make an explicit link to client values when summarizing this
topic (e.g., “So while you view your current lifestyle as exciting and you like
294 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
leading a fast life, you also feel like you’re not getting anywhere and you think
it’s not-so-good for your kids, which bothers you because it’s important to
you to build a career and to be a good mother”). Focusing on values as prefer-
ences for experiences can help clients improve their understanding of the func-
tions of their current behavior, as well as help them formulate a clearer sense
of the values they are seeking to fulfill through the behavior.
Motivational interviewing strategies may directly assist clients in their at-
tempts to define their core values and ideal self. When looking forward, cli -
ents can be asked to consider possible futures that may result from particular
choices in relation to deeper values (e.g., “Looking ahead, how do you expect
things to be a year from now if you continue to focus on excitement and being
‘part of the scene’? How might things be different if you focus that time on
your desires to achieve more?”). The decisional balance exercise is a values ex-
ercise similar to good things/less good things, except with a focus on future
behavior. Once the pros and cons have been identified, counselors may ask
clients to consider which of these options best meet clients’ ideals while also
fulfilling their preferences for experiences. Counselors may reflect that clients
have the opportunity to create different lifestyles and to choose in part who
they will become in the future through the course of action they choose. Use
of the importance ruler is another strategy with an obvious relation to values.
Valuing a behavior, choice, or situation means that one considers these things
important. When counselors reflect clients’ statements regarding what makes
a particular choice important (or not), it is a natural time to incorporate a
more general discussion of the clients’ values.
Values can also play a role in increasing confidence. Increasing awareness
of one’s ideals leads to making more conscious choices about the extent to
which one will strive to live in consonance with those values. Intentionally re-
calling both ideals and preferences for experiences may be useful to clients in
tempting or stressful situations and can help fortify clients against making
harmful choices. For Tina, intentionally recalling her ideals of being a good
mother and personal achievement through building a career may help her re -
fuse a friend’s offer to take her out on the town or share some cocaine with
her. Recalling that her desire to participate in these is related to her prefer -
ences for exciting experiences may then cue her to actively seek another excit-
ing experience in order to help protect her against relapse.
The role of values may again be highlighted during the change planning
process, when clients are asked to state why the chosen plan is important to
them. When clients make a commitment to a particular behavior plan (e.g., to
quit smoking), it can be useful to reflect that they are at another level making
a commitment to a particular identity (e.g., an ex-smoker). Further, it may be
useful to review any previous unsuccessful attempts to implement changes and
look for values that may have been neglected. For example, Tina quit using
drugs and alcohol on several previous occasions, motivated by self-directed
anger about neglecting her children’s needs, as well as by the desire to improve
The Role of Values 295
her lifestyle. Each time, after a period of working full-time, developing more
intimate relationships with her children, and using her earnings almost en -
tirely to provide for the family, Tina relapsed. Although her change attempts
produced positive short-term results, her zeal for improving things for her
daughters and for “making up for lost time” created a situation in which her
values regarding excitement and sociability were left unfulfilled and the situa -
tion became nonsustainable over time.
/G49/G6E/G63/G6F/G72/G70/G6F/G72/G61/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G4F/G74/G68/G65/G72 /G50/G72/G6F/G6D/G69/G73/G69/G6E/G67 /G54/G65/G63/G68/G6E/G69/G71/G75/G65/G73
Various clinicians and researchers have added values-oriented techniques into
their practice. One common approach has been to adapt Rokeach’s card sort
and values self-confrontation (VSC) approach.
Brown and Peterson (1990) describe using VSC to treat addictive behav -
iors, having clients rank their top values, then discussing those values in com -
parison to those of successfully recovering individuals (with high rankings of
the terminal values of inner harmony, self-respect, and wisdom and the instru-
mental values of honesty and forgiveness). Following the discussion, clients re-
corded daily ratings of their value-behavior consistency for each of their
ranked values.
Sanchez (2000) studied the outcome of a values card sort exercise with al-
cohol abusers in a 1-hour motivational interviewing format, based in part on
the work by Miller and C’de Baca (1994). Topics discussed included the
meaning of the various values statements, evaluation of current value-behav-
ior consistency, perceived barriers to and opportunities for increasing value-
behavior consistency, and personal evaluation of the extent to which the use
of alcohol plays a role in achieving or preventing consistency. An attention-
control group viewed addiction-related videos in the presence of the interven -
tionist. The values group had better outcomes on measures of drinking behav-
ior and consequences at 3-month and 6-month follow-up. Sanchez reported
impressions that the technique increased the ease of practice, as well as client
engagement.
De Francesco (2001) reports using the values card sort approach with
firefighters, focusing on exercise and dietary behaviors. Firefighters were
asked to discuss how their health goals fit with their values. De Francesco de -
scribes how this can resolve ambivalence and increase motivation by helping
participants more closely tie their behavioral goals to their own specific values
(e.g., leading an active lifestyle vs. losing weight). One participant reflected his
perception that he may have previously failed at weight loss because he was
essentially doing it for the “wrong” reasons, that is, reasons unrelated to his
values (i.e., he valued “looking good” more than the health benefits that result
from exercise and his focus during previous change attempts had been on im -
proving health).
Other motivational interviewing practitioners have incorporated a focus
on values-behavior consistency into their work with persons with HIV (Ryan,
296 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
Fisher, Krutch, & Downey, 2001), in motivational counseling groups (Inger -
soll, Wagner, and Gharib, 2000), and in efforts toward health promotion
(Chapter 17 in this volume).
Rusk and Ervin (1996) outlined a somewhat different values clarification
approach named “guided self-change” (no apparent relation to the similarly
named approach of Sobell & Sobell [1998]). They described the goal not as
curing of illness but “healing of spirit.” They proposed several principles that
resemble those of motivational interviewing. First, labeling is viewed as coun -
terproductive because it focuses clients on deficits and distracts them from
their values. Second, an essential task for clients is “compassionate self-obser-
vation,” carefully monitoring behavior in light of values without passing judg-
ment or self-criticism. Third, clients are encouraged to take personal responsi-
bility for developing and implementing change plans. Clients are provided
with audiotapes of each session and are encouraged to review them privately,
in order to facilitate further consideration of the values discussed in session.
Between sessions, clients are encouraged to implement real-life experiments
that clarify or amplify personal values or increase value-behavior consistency.
Perhaps somewhat different from the practice of motivational interviewing,
the therapist is viewed as a mentor or guide who offers specific values for cli-
ents to consider as ideals: respect, understanding, caring, and fairness. (In the
Schwartz–Bilsky [1987] structure, these are most representative of the pro-
social, maturity and self-direction domains.)
Simon, Howe, and Kischenbaum (1995) offer several additional promis-
ing techniques, such as having clients write words ending in “ing” that tell
something about who they are (e.g., loving, hard-working). Discussion of the
implications of the self-identity words as reflected in the person’s life may fo-
cus on the present. However, counselors can listen for underlying values and
help clients explore those further. The authors offer other existential tech -
niques, such as having the person write down several answers to the question
“Who are you?” then exploring the answers provided in relation to the values
implied in the client’s answers. Similarly, they suggest having the person imag-
ine a life-threatening experience, then focus on questions such as “What do
you have yet to get out of life that is important?” or “What contributions
would you like to make in this life that you have not yet completed?”
/G53/G55/G4D/G4D/G41/G52/G59
Incorporation of a values perspective in the practice of motivational inter -
viewing is supported from both conceptual and practical bases. Focusing on
clients’ values is consistent with the self-directedness of the person-centered
framework underlying motivational interviewing and may help clients view
behavior change more as desired movement toward a more fulfilling lifestyle
than an undesired loss of familiar and reinforcing habits and ways of being.
Initial attempts to explicitly incorporate a values focus have yielded positive
The Role of Values 297
preliminary empirical findings as well as positive comments from practitioners
and clients. This chapter has suggested several other specific ways in which a
focus on values may be explicitly incorporated in order to help clients change.
/G41/G43/G4B/G4E/G4F/G57/G4C/G45/G44/G47/G4D/G45/G4E/G54/G53
We thank Jessye Cohen, Karen Ingersoll, and David Rosengren for their thoughtful re-
views of an earlier version of this chapter.
298 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
CHAPTER 20
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
/G61/G6E/G64 /G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G41/G64/G68/G65/G72/G65/G6E/G63/G65
ALLEN ZWEBEN and ALLAN ZUCKOFF
It is not patients who should comply with their doctors’ demands,
but doctors who should comply with their patients’ informed and
considered desires.
—S. Holm, cited by Barry Blackwell,
Treatment Compliance and the Therapeutic Alliance
/G57/G48/G41/G54 /G44/G4F /G57/G45 /G4D/G45/G41/G4E /G42/G59 /G93/G41/G44/G48/G45/G52/G45/G4E/G43/G45/G94/G3F
Terms such as “compliance” and “adherence” have been used interchange -
ably in the pharmacotherapy and psychosocial treatment literature, to refer to
individuals’ entering into, attending, and completing treatment, as well as to
their performance of treatment activities and tasks. We have chosen not to use
the term “compliance” because of its connotation of obedience to authority,
and association with such concepts as “resistance” or “denial”; clients labeled
“noncompliant” have often been seen as personally deficient in motivation or
said to possess character traits that make them prone to failing to engage in
and sustain a treatment relationship.
Consistent with the outlook inherent in motivational interviewing, we
299
make no assumptions about the personalities of those who participate incon -
sistently in treatment or choose not to attend as expected; rather, we start
from the belief that these decisions and behaviors are determined in large part
by the interactions of treatment seekers with treatment providers and systems
(Daley & Zuckoff, 1999; Zweben, Bonner, Chaim, & Santon, 1988). We
therefore use the more neutral term “adherence” to describe the extent to
which people follow through with agreed-on or prescribed actions, or do what
providers expect them to do, where treatment is concerned. This term may
designate keeping appointments and maintaining timely attendance, taking
medications as prescribed, or completing specific tasks between appointments
(e.g., attending support groups, selecting a significant other to participate in
sessions, doing reading or writing assignments, engaging in activation tasks
for depression or exposures for anxiety disorders, self-monitoring, or taking
medication for various medical conditions). Adherence, then, is broadly de -
fined to encompass those factors that may have an impact on how fully a par-
ticular treatment is delivered as a result of participant decisions and actions.
/G57/G48/G59 /G49/G53 /G49/G54 /G49/G4D/G50/G4F/G52/G54/G41/G4E/G54 /G54/G4F /G45/G4E/G47/G41/G47/G45 /G41/G4E/G44 /G4D/G41/G49/G4E/G54/G41/G49/G4E
/G43/G4C/G49/G45/G4E/G54/G53 /G49/G4E /G54/G52/G45/G41/G54/G4D/G45/G4E/G54/G3F
Those who do not adhere to a therapeutic regime can represent a costly and
troublesome problem for treatment providers. When clients attend inconsis-
tently or participate halfheartedly in therapy activities, clinicians can become
frustrated and even demoralized. At the same time, individuals who occupy
available slots without fully using the treatment offered can reduce access for
others who want it; and, because many will eventually need additional ser-
vices, health care costs overall may be unnecessarily increased (Carroll, 1997).
As pressure has been brought to bear on treatment programs to maintain eco-
nomic viability in the context of the demands of managed care, frequent
missed appointments and high rates of dropout have drawn increasing sys -
temic and administrative attention.
More important, mounting evidence of a relationship between treatment
adherence and treatment outcome (Brown & Miller, 1993; Corrao et al.,
1999; Daley, Salloum, Zuckoff, Kirisci, & Thase, 1998; Fiorentine & Anglin,
1996; Hu et al., 1998; Simpson, Brown, & Joe, 1997; Walker, Minor-Schork,
Bloch, & Esinhart, 1996) has made problems of adherence a focus of profes -
sional concern. Response to both pharmacological and psychosocial treatment
has been shown to depend on producing an adherence effect (Volpicelli,
Alterman, Hayasguda, & O’Brien, 1997). Significant relationships have been
found among treatment retention and symptomatic improvement, life func -
tioning, and client well-being (Daley et al., 1998; Mattson et al., 1998;
Westerberg, 1998). Thus, individuals who adhere to a treatment regime ap -
pear to have a better chance of success than do those who do not.
The magnitude of the adherence problem is quite striking and has been
well-documented in the mental health, substance abuse, and medical fields
300 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
over the past 25 years (Baekeland & Lundwall, 1975; Blackwell, 1976; Chen,
1991; Dobscha, Delucchi, & Young, 1999; Garfield, 1994; Hochstadt &
Trybula, 1980; Hser, Maglione, Polinsky, & Anglin, 1997; Ito, Donovan, &
Hall, 1988; Joyce, 1990; Krulee & Hales, 1988; Matas, Staley, & Griffin,
1992; Onken, Blaine, & Boren, 1997; Owen, Rutherford, Jones, Tennant, &
Smallman, 1997; Solomon & Gordon, 1988; Stark, 1992; Wolpe, Gorton,
Serota, & Wright, 1993; Wright, 1993). Dropout rates among psychiatric pa-
tients are between 31 and 56% prior to the fourth session (Carroll, cited in
Mattson et al., 1998); about 30% of alcohol clients drop out between 2 and 5
months of treatment while only 26% remain in treatment past 6 months, and
only 58% of scheduled psychotherapy appointments are kept (Carroll, cited
in Mattson et al., 1998). Pharmacotherapy studies have reported sample rates
of failure to take medications for such conditions as rheumatic fever, diabetes,
heart disease, tuberculosis, and even leprosy to be anywhere from 37% to
67% (Wright, 1993). These figures raise serious questions about whether per-
sons in need of help with psychiatric, substance use, or medical problems are
adequately receiving that help.
It should be acknowledged that the specific nature of the relationship be-
tween treatment adherence and treatment outcomes remains uncertain and re-
quires further investigation. Retention in psychosocial treatment is not always
associated with better outcomes (see, e.g., Crits-Cristoph et al., 1999). Fur-
thermore, although adherence predicts better outcomes in many contexts
(Westerberg, 1998), it is not always clear that adherence is the source of those
improved outcomes. For some clients, staying in treatment longer may spur
greater efforts to change; for others, improved attendance may simply reflect
the fact that these clients were more “ready” to begin with. To illustrate, in
Project MATCH (Project MATCH Research Group, 1998b), a multisite, cli-
ent–treatment matching study dealing with alcohol problems, pretreatment
motivational readiness predicted both treatment adherence and treatment out-
comes.
Nonetheless, the bulk of the evidence in both pharmacological and
psychosocial interventions leads to the conclusions that without adequate lev-
els of treatment attendance, it would be difficult for persons to take maximum
advantage of treatment (Mattson et al., 1998); without participants’ active co-
operation, treatment cannot have its desired impact. Developing more effec -
tive approaches to improve adherence is thus arguably a critical challenge con-
fronting providers.
/G57/G48/G41/G54 /G49/G53 /G54/G48/G45 /G45/G56/G49/G44/G45/G4E/G43/G45 /G54/G48/G41/G54 /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C
/G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G43/G41/G4E /G42/G45 /G55/G53/G45/G44 /G54/G4F /G49/G4D/G50/G52/G4F/G56/G45 /G41/G44/G48/G45/G52/G45/G4E/G43/G45/G3F
/G57/G68/G61/G74 /G52/G65/G73/G65/G61/G72/G63/G68 /G48/G61/G73 /G42/G65/G65/G6E /G44/G6F/G6E/G65/G3F
Table 20.1 summarizes all the published or presented tests of motivational in-
terviewing of which we are aware that include findings on adherence effects.
The adaptations of motivational interviewing (AMIs; see Chapter 16, this vol-
Motivational Interviewing and Treatment Adherence 301
302 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
TABLE 20.1. Adherence Effects of Adaptations of Motivational Interviewing
Study Sample Interventions Adherence effects Caveats
Miller et al.
(1988)*
42 problem drink -
ers, recruited by
advertisement;
moderate severity
AMI (DCU or DCU +
referral vs. wait list
control (DCU deferred
6 wk)
Treatment entry
14.3% overall at 6 wk, 33.3%
overall at 18 mo
Integrity?
No control.
Kuchipudi
et al. (1990)
114 male acute in -
patients admitted to
a VA hospital with
alcohol-related ill-
ness + past medical
advice to quit
drinking
AMI (3 brief inter -
views with medical
staff, 1 long interview
with social worker, 1
group with psychiatric
nurse) vs. NIC, added
to standard care
Treatment entry
AMI = NIC (18.4% overall at
10–16 wk)
Intervention as de -
scribed conflicts with
principles of motiva -
tional interviewing.
Bien, Miller,
& Burroughs
(1993)*
32 men entering
VA outpatient
alcohol treatment;
high severity
AMI (DCU) vs. diag -
nostic control, prior to
start of standard treat -
ment
Treatment entry
AMI = diagnostic control
(81.2% overall)
Therapist effects?
Brown &
Miller
(1993)*
28 alcohol-depend-
ent adults entering
private residential
treatment
AMI (DCU) vs. NIC,
at start of standard
treatment
Task performance
Compliance and goal attainment
(therapist rated): AMI > NIC
Integrity?
Therapist effects?
Saunders
et al. (1995)
122 opiate-depend-
ent adults entering
a methadone
program
AMI (no feedback) vs.
EC: 1 extended ses -
sion, brief follow-up
session at 1 wk
Retention
Days in treatment: 151 AMI vs.
127 EC
Wk in study: 22.3 AMI vs. 17.8
EC
Study follow-up contact: AMI >
EC (1 wk, 3 and 6 mo)
Integrity?
Therapist effects?
Smith et al.
(1997)*
22 obese women,
age 50+, with
NIDDM and able
to exercise, re-
cruited to a 16-
session group
behavioral weight
control program by
advertisement or
letter
AMI (1 session at ini-
tiation, 2 at midpoint,
with feedback), vs.
NIC, added to stan-
dard treatment
Attendance
Sessions: 13.3 AMI vs. 8.9 NIC
Retention
Completion (16 wk):
AMI = NIC (77% overall)
Task performance
Food diaries submitted: 15.2
AMI vs. 10.1 NIC
Days glucose monitored: 46.0
AMI vs. 32.2 NIC
Days exercised: 35.2 AMI vs.
23.7 NIC (p = .07)
Days recorded calories: 76.8
AMI vs. 55.7 NIC (p = .07)
Integrity?
Manual?
Training?
AMI was the only 1:1
contact provided.
Aubrey
(1998)*
77 adolescents en -
tering outpatient
polysubstance
treatment; high
severity
AMI (DCU) vs. NIC,
at start of standard
treatment
Attendance
Sessions: 17 AMI vs. 6 NIC
Integrity?
Therapist effects?
Booth et al.
(1998)
192 intravenous
drug users; re -
cruited through
community out-
reach; high
severity
AMI (MI and RI, no
feedback) vs. RR: 5
sessions, 1/2 hr each, +
offer of free vs. pay
treatment; rapport-
building first session in
AMI and RR
Treatment entry
AMI = RR (at 8 week)
Attendance
Intervention sessions: AMI = RR
(3.94 overall)
Strategies used in AMI
found not to be tai -
lored to subject readi -
ness to change.
Daley et al.
(1998)*
23 depressed co -
caine dependent
psychiatric inpa-
tients, discharged
to dual-diagnosis
aftercare on antide -
pressant medication
AMI (MI and DDRC,
no feedback) vs. TAU:
5 1:1 and 4 group ses -
sions during first
month of aftercare
Retention
30 days: 100% AMI vs. 41.7%
TAU
90 days: 72.7% AMI vs. 8.3%
TAU
Attendance
Intervention sessions (9): 7.2
AMI vs. 2.7 TAU
Integrity?
Nonrandomized (con-
secutive assignment).
TAU unspecified.
Motivational Interviewing and Treatment Adherence 303
TABLE 20.1. (continued)
Study Sample Interventions Adherence effects Caveats
Daley &
Zuckoff
(1998)*
100+ adults with
substance and psy -
chiatric diagnoses
in a psychiatric
hospital, referred to
dual-diagnosis af-
tercare.
AMI (MI and DDRC,
1 session, no feedback)
vs. NIC, added to
usual discharge plan -
ning.
Treatment entry
67% AMI vs. 35% NIC
Analysis?
Integrity?
Nonrandomized (his-
torical control, not de -
scribed).
Kemp et al.
(1998)
74 adults with psy -
chotic diagnoses in
a psychiatric hospi -
tal on antipsychotic
medication; 60%
involuntary
AMI (MI and CT, no
feedback) vs. NSC: 4–
6 sessions + optional
boosters, added to
routine management
and aftercare
Task performance
Medication compliance (ob -
server-rated): 5.5–5.7 AMI vs.
3.5–4.3 NSC on 7-point scale
(postintervention and at 3, 6, 12,
and 18 mo)
Integrity?
Mattson
et al. (1998)
1,726 alcohol-
dependent adults
voluntarily seeking
aftercare or outpa -
tient treatment at
9 sites
MET (4 sessions) vs.
CBT (12 sessions) vs.
TSF (12 sessions)
Retention
Wk in treatment: 8.8 CBT vs.
8.1 TSF (8.3 MET, ns)
Attendance
Sessions: 80% MET vs. 68%
CBT vs. 63% TSF
Fewer MET sessions
offered; wk in treat -
ment for MET could
be 1, 2, 6, 12 only.
Mhurchu
et al. (1998)
121 adults with
hyperlipidemia re-
ferred to a hospital-
based dietetic de-
partment for diet
advice
AMI (MI and advice,
with feedback) vs.
TAU: 3 interviews
over 3 mo
Task performance
Dietary intake reductions:
AMI = TAU (at 3 mo)
Therapist effects?
Training?
Baseline dietary intake
was low.
Berg-Smith
et al. (1999)
127 adolescents in
the Dietary Inter-
vention Study in
Children (DISC)
since age 8–10
AMI (initial session
with 4–8 week follow-
up, 5–30 min each,
with feedback), as-
sessed pre/post
Task performance
Action plan formulation
(interviewer report): 94%
Action plan implementation
(interviewer report): 89%
Analyses?
Integrity?
No control.
Harland
et al. (1999)
523 adults 40–64,
not engaging in
regular exercise,
recruited from a
primary medical
practice
Brief (1 session) vs. in-
tensive (6 sessions in
12 wk) AMI, with or
without vouchers, vs.
BA, all with feedback
Task performance
Activity/vigorous activity/moder-
ate activity:
Brief AMI = intensive AMI > BA
(at 12 wk)
Brief AMI = intensive AMI = BA
(at 1 yr)
Integrity?
Manual?
Therapist effects?
Training?
Swanson
et al. (1999)
121 adults admitted
to psychiatric units
of two private hos -
pitals; psychiatric
(100%) and sub -
stance abuse (77%)
diagnoses; volun-
tary
AMI (brief URICA
feedback at admission,
1-hr interview
predischarge) vs. NIC,
added to standard
care; all received
URICA and aftercare
referral
Treatment entry
All: 47% AMI vs. 21% NIC
Dual diagnosis: 42% AMI vs.
16% NIC
Psychotic diagnoses: 47% AMI
vs. 21% NIC
Affective diagnoses: 50% AMI
vs. 20% NIC
Integrity?
Manual?
Treasure
et al. (1999)
125 women diag -
nosed with bulimia
nervosa at a hospi -
tal eating disorders
unit
MET vs. CBT: 4
weekly 1:1 sessions, as
first phase of sequen -
tial treatment, fol -
lowed by group or
individual CBT
Retention
Intervention completion (4 wk):
MET = CBT (66.7% vs. 76.3%,
ns)
Integrity?
Pretreatment waiting
list of up to 3 years.
Connors
et al. (2000)*
126 adults diag -
nosed with alcohol
dependence or
abuse admitted to a
12-wk outpatient
1:1 and group
treatment program
AMI (DCU) vs. RI vs.
NIC, prior to start of
standard treatment
Retention
Completion: AMI > NIC,
RI = NIC
Attendance
Group: AMI > NIC, RI = NIC
1:1 and group: AMI > NIC,
RI = NIC
None.
(continued)
304 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
TABLE 20.1. (continued)
Study Sample Interventions Adherence effects Caveats
Dench &
Bennett
(2000)
51 alcohol-depend-
ent adults entering
a 6-wk day treat -
ment program
AMI vs. EC (replica -
tion of Saunders et al.,
1995)
Retention
Completion (6 wk): AMI = NIC
(66.7% overall)
Attendance
Days (completers): AMI = NIC
(28.0 vs. 26.0, ns)
Days (dropouts): AMI = NIC
(17.2 vs. 19.7, ns)
Therapist effects?
Training?
Martino
et al. (2000)*
23 adults with sub -
stance and mood
or psychotic diag -
noses entering a
12-wk partial
hospital program;
high severity
AMI (with feedback)
vs. SI: 1 session, 45–
60 min, at start of
standard treatment;
both vs. historical
NIC
Attendance
Days: 31 AMI vs. 17 NIC (22
SI, ns)
Tardiness index: 0.00 AMI vs.
0.18 SI
Early departure index: 0.00 AMI
vs. 0.17 SI
Task performance
Days medication compliant (self-
report): AMI = SI (89% vs.
86%, ns)
Integrity?
Manual?
Therapist effects?
Schneider
et al. (2000)
89 adults diagnosed
with substance
abuse or depend -
ence at 14 EAP
sites; moderate se-
verity
AMI (DCU) vs. DCU-
C; all received neutral
initial assessment,
personal feedback
report in second inter-
view, and written dis-
position
Treatment entry
AMI = DCU-C (66% profes -
sional, 60% self-help overall
at 3 mo)
Task performance
Followed initial treatment plan:
AMI = DCU-C (63% vs. 54% at
3 mo, ns)
Source of provider
adherence ratings
unclear.
Donovan
et al. (2001)
654 drug-dependent
adults evaluated,
referred, and placed
on wait list for
publicly funded in-
patient or outpa -
tient treatment
AMI (SC +DCU,
scheduled clinical fol-
low-up, unscheduled
support services) vs.
SC. All received assess-
ment, resource book -
let, weekly study
contract
Treatment entry
AMI = SC (71% overall)
Retention
Completion: AMI = SC (71%
overall)
High refusal/exclusion
rate
Lincourt
et al. (in
press)
167 men with sub -
stance use diagno -
ses mandated to
treatment, unable
to identify treat -
ment goals
Group AMI (6 ses -
sions, with assessment
and feedback) vs.
NIC, at start of
standard treatment
Retention
Completion: 56% AMI vs. 32%
NIC
Attendance
Sessions: AMI = NIC (16.2 vs.
18.2, ns)
Missed appointments: 17% AMI
vs. 24% NIC
Integrity?
Training?
Archival study; study
condition self-selected.
Note. All adherence effects reported are statistically significant unless otherwise noted. *Published information supple -
mented by personal communication with study author.
Abbreviations: AMI, adaptation of motivational interviewing; BA, brief advice control; CBT, cognitive-behavioral ther -
apy; CT, cognitive therapy; DCU, Drinker’s Check-Up (assessment + 1 feedback interview); DCU-C, DCU with confron-
tational feedback; DDRC, dual disorders recovery counseling; EC, education control; MET, motivational enhancement
therapy (4 sessions, feedback); MI, motivational interviewing; NIC, no-intervention control; NSC, nonspecific counseling
control; RI, role induction; RR, risk reduction intervention; SC, Standard Care control; SI, standard interview control;
TAU, treatment-as-usual control; TSF, twelve-step facilitation; URICA, University of Rhode Island Change Assessment.
Caveats: Analysis?, no statistical analyses of significance of results; Integrity?, no measures described to ensure that pro -
viders adhered to intended intervention; Manual?, no written intervention manual or curriculum described; No control,
absence of control condition for adherence outcomes; Therapist effects?, Possibility of therapist effects due to single or un-
specified intervention provider(s); Training?, training and supervision of intervention providers not described or inade -
quately described.
ume) employed in these studies include “check-up” (assessment and feedback)
interventions and AMIs without feedback, single- and multiple-session inter -
ventions, add-on AMIs and integral treatment modules, and interventions
given individually and in groups. These studies also span a range of popula -
tions and settings, from alcohol and drug treatment to treatment of psychiat -
ric disorders to medical and behavioral health applications. Table 20.1 de -
scribes the nature of the interventions and their measured effects on various
aspects of adherence and offers caveats for interpreting individual studies, al -
lowing us to describe our conclusions about the data while leaving readers
free to make their own assessments. (We do not include information on out -
comes; these are well covered in Chapter 16.) All reported findings are statisti-
cally significant unless noted.
/G57/G68/G61/G74 /G44/G6F/G65/G73 /G74/G68/G65 /G52/G65/G73/G65/G61/G72/G63/G68 /G53/G68/G6F/G77/G3F
The available studies can best be described as providing preliminary guidance
and directions for further investigation where treatment adherence is con -
cerned. With only a few exceptions, most of these studies were designed to as-
sess treatment outcomes, and adherence effects were looked at secondarily
(and at times peripherally) rather than systematically. In addition, many of
these studies are limited in ways that require caution in interpreting them.
We have included two unpublished studies and several which do not meet
the methodological requirements of the randomized controlled trial (RCT);
we have done so because these studies provide data on adherence effects in ar-
eas with little or no coverage in available RCTs (adolescents, health behavior
change in primary care, dual diagnosis aftercare, group motivational inter-
viewing).
Though results of these studies must be treated with caution, this is also
true of RCTs with other limitations of internal validity (see Chapter 16, this
volume). Sample sizes are often small; interventionist training is often either
left undescribed or, when described, too limited to ensure that those providing
the intervention are competent to do so effectively; measures to ensure that
the intervention delivered matches the one intended by the researcher (manu -
als, tape recording and monitoring of sessions, ongoing supervision) are often
absent; interventions are often performed by one person, raising the question
whether it is the intervention or the unique qualities of the individual that ac -
counts for the effect; and limited description of interventions often makes it
difficult to assess the extent to which the spirit and practice of motivational
interviewing are incorporated. In some cases in which descriptions are given,
serious questions can be raised, as the interventions either are at odds in im -
portant ways with motivational interviewing or reduce motivational interview-
ing to its strategies while neglecting its spirit and its focus on communicational
process (e.g., Booth, Kwiatkowski, Iguchi, Pinto, & John, 1998; Kuchipudi,
Hobein, Fleckinger, & Iber, 1990; Mhurchu, Margetts, & Speller, 1998).
Motivational Interviewing and Treatment Adherence 305
Studies that correct for these problems in internal validity are under
way, including studies being conducted by at least four of the researchers
listed in Table 20.1 (Booth et al., 1998; Daley et al., 1998; Martino,
Carroll, O’Malley, & Rounsaville, 2000; Smith, Heckemeyer, Kratt, & Mason,
1997). Randomized controlled designs with adequate power to detect mod -
erate adherence effects, interventions sensitive to adherence-influencing fac -
tors such as level of motivational readiness, and routine collection of data
on adherence as well as physiological, psychiatric, and substance use out -
comes will in time allow us to pass more definitive judgment on the adher -
ence effects of AMIs.
What conclusions can we draw now (however tentatively and preliminar-
ily) where enhancement of adherence is concerned? In the majority of con -
trolled studies (12 of 21), AMIs were found to produce significant adherence
effects. The effects of AMIs in five studies were equivalent to those produced
by other well-specified or standard interventions with which they were com -
pared (Booth et al., 1998; Mattson et al., 1998; Mhurchu et al., 1998; Schnei-
der, Casey, & Kohn, 2000; Treasure et al., 1999), and in four others add-on
AMIs produced no incremental benefit where adherence was concerned (Bien,
Miller, & Burroughs, 1993; Dench & Bennett, 2000; Donovan, Rosengren,
Downey, Cox, & Sloan, 2001; Kuchipudi et al., 1990). Of the two studies
that assessed adherence following an AMI intervention but did not include a
comparison group, one appeared promising (Berg-Smith et al., 1999), the
other less so (Miller, Sovereign, & Kriege, 1988).
The findings of adherence effects in the preponderance of studies leave us
cautiously optimistic about motivational interviewing as an add-on adherence
intervention. In several of these studies, across multiple populations, the ad-
herence findings were quite robust; Connors, Walitzer, and Derman (2000)
are especially impressive in that a single motivational interviewing session led
to significantly greater treatment attendance (and also significantly better
drinking outcomes) compared not only to a no-treatment control but also to a
role-induction interview, a well-researched and empirically supported treat -
ment preparation intervention (Walizter, Derman, & Connors, 1999).
We can also discern a number of patterns in these studies that provide the
beginnings of a more nuanced picture. One is that AMIs seem to be effective
in facilitating transition of clients from one level of treatment to another; in
Swanson, Pantalon, and Cohen (1999), receiving an AMI more than doubled
aftercare entry rates among all subjects as well as specifically among clients
with affective disorders, psychotic disorders, and dual (psychiatric and sub -
stance use) disorders, whereas in Daley and Zuckoff (1998) the intervention
fell just short of doubling aftercare entry. This result also raises a question as
to whether intervention effects may be greater for groups of clients in transi -
tion, as opposed to nonclients being recruited into treatment (as in Booth et
al., 1998; Miller et al., 1988; and Schneider et al., 2000), where AMIs either
failed to outperform their alternatives or produced limited effects on treat -
ment entry. Preliminary results of one ongoing study of nonclient recruitment
306 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
(Zuckoff, Ryan, & Thoma, 2000) also suggest that the effect under such cir -
cumstances may be expected to be smaller.
A second finding is that AMIs may exert their effects on outcomes at least
in part by promoting adherence. Brown and Miller (1993), the only investiga-
tors to examine this hypothesis explicitly, found that an adherence effect me -
diated improved residential treatment outcomes among those who received an
AMI intervention. Five other studies (Aubrey, 1998; Connors et al., 2000;
Daley et al., 1998; Kemp, Kirov, Everitt, Hayward, & David, 1998; Lincourt,
Kuettel, & Bombardier, in press; Saunders, Wilkinson, & Phillips, 1995;
Smith et al., 1997) found effects on a variety of measures of attendance, treat-
ment commitment, readiness to change, and task completion, as well as on
treatment outcomes. These findings suggest that examination of relationships
between adherence effects and outcomes is an important direction for future
research.
A third pattern can be found in the relative effectiveness of single-session
and multiple-session interventions. Six single-session interventions (excluding
assessment, putting Drinker’s Check-Up interventions in that category) were
associated with improved adherence (Aubrey, 1998; Brown & Miller, 1993;
Connors et al., 2000; Daley & Zuckoff, 1998; Harland et al., 1999; Martino
et al., 2000); in four others, AMIs were either not superior to alternate inter-
ventions (Mhurchu et al., 1998; Schneider et al., 2000) or produced small
(Miller et al., 1988) or no (Bien, Miller, & Burroughs, 1993) adherence
effects. Multiple-session interventions account for nine findings of improved
adherence (Berg-Smith et al., 1999; Daley et al., 1998; Harland et al., 1999;
Kemp et al., 1998; Lincourt et al., in press; Saunders et al., 1995; Smith et al.,
1997; Swanson et al., 1999); in five others, AMIs were not superior to alter-
nate interventions (Booth et al., 1998; Treasure et al., 1999) or produced no
incremental benefits in terms of adherence (Dench & Bennett, 2000; Donovan
et al., 2001; Kuchipudi et al., 1990). In the one study that compared single-
and multiple-session (six offered, mean attended = 3) AMIs (Harland et al.,
1999), no significant overall differences were found, but subjects who received
the multiple-session AMI plus vouchers for free use of exercise facilities in -
creased their general activity level significantly more than did those in any
other condition. When we recognize that in a number of successful interven -
tions “multiple” denoted only a second, brief contact, and that these interven-
tions are otherwise dissimilar in terms of structure and the populations on
which they were tested, the added value of at least one follow-up session
would appear to be worth the additional effort and expense required.
Fourth, an important question, in light of the limited resources of many
treatment programs, is whether a group intervention can be of comparable ef-
fectiveness in promoting adherence as those delivered individually (see Chap -
ter 25, this volume). Lincourt and colleagues (in press), in an archival study,
found that a six-session AMI group significantly enhanced adherence com -
pared with treatment as usual. Daley and Zuckoff (1998), in a nonrandom -
ized, open-treatment trial, found that offering a single-session AMI in small
Motivational Interviewing and Treatment Adherence 307
groups enhanced treatment entry compared with an historical control. These
studies suggest that group AMIs may be at least potentially useful in promot -
ing treatment adherence, but a definitive judgment must await more rigor -
ously designed trials.
We have focused thus far on the implications of studies in which AMIs
produced improvements in treatment adherence. What can be learned from
those studies in which significant differences between AMI and control or
comparison conditions were not found? In some cases, the implications of
these studies are difficult to interpret. In Project MATCH, for example, clients
receiving motivational enhancement therapy (MET) attended a significantly
higher proportion of their sessions than did those receiving cognitive-behav -
ioral therapy (CBT) or twelve-step facilitation (TSF) over the course of a 12-
week treatment period (Mattson et al., 1998). However, these differences
could be accounted for by the differential task demands between the three
treatment conditions; MET clients were required to attend only 4 sessions in
contrast to 12 for CBT or TSF. In Treasure and colleagues (1999), dropout
during the first 4 weeks of treatment was equivalent between MET and CBT
conditions; however, the fact that clients in this study had been on a waiting
list for up to 3 years prior to receiving treatment limits the generalizability of
these results.
One conclusion that can safely be drawn is that, unsurprisingly, adher-
ence interventions are subject to the law of diminishing returns: where mea-
sured adherence is already relatively high, there may be little to be gained in
trying to boost it further. For example, in Bien, Miller, and Burroughs (1993),
the only adherence measure used was subjects’ attendance at the first treat-
ment session; with over 81% of subjects overall attending, there may have
been little room for the intervention to show an effect. Two other studies of
alcohol- and drug-dependent samples in which no incremental effect was
shown may also have involved relatively high baseline adherence for the popu-
lation. In Donovan and colleagues (2001), 71% of all drug-dependent subjects
entered treatment after an average wait of 22 days, a proportion that com -
pares very favorably with other, similar samples (Hser et al., 1997; Stark,
1992). In Dench and Bennett (2000), 63% of all subjects completed treat -
ment according to stringent criteria; subjects receiving the control intervention
attended an average of 97% of contracted sessions, compared with 98%
among AMI subjects; among treatment completers, controls attended 26 of 30
possible treatment days, compared with 28 among AMI subjects. While AMI
subjects dropped out after marginally fewer days than controls, they did show
significant differences in the direction of readiness to change in all three sub -
scales of the SOCRATES from pre- to postintervention. Finally, in a study of
weight control, Mhurchu, Margetts, and Speller (1998) noted that target di -
etary intake was low among all subjects prior to the interventions; the findings
of no difference on adherence outcomes between the AMI and standard di -
etary advice groups seems clearly related to a ceiling effect, especially in light
of the significant further dietary reductions in both conditions.
A second, obvious conclusion is that AMIs are less likely to show adher -
308 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
ence effects when they deviate excessively from the core principles of motiva -
tional interviewing. For example, Kuchipudi and colleagues (1990) have been
cited (Rollnick & Miller, 1995) as an illustration of the problem of drift in the
dissemination of innovations (see Chapter 18, this volume). Subjects were
given the same message (the need to stop drinking and the importance and ef-
fectiveness of treatment) repeatedly by one treatment team member after an -
other in an effort to use the authority of the medical director to directly per -
suade subjects to enter a treatment program. No reference is made to any
motivational interviewing principles or strategies other than a generic “com -
passionate and concerned” style, and no evidence is presented that subjects
were asked for their own thoughts about their behavior or changes that might
be beneficial. Because provider training in motivational interviewing is not
mentioned—and social workers who provided some of the sessions were said
to be “experienced in alcoholism treatment,” presumably from a traditional
perspective—this should not seem surprising.
/G57/G68/G61/G74 /G51/G75/G65/G73/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73 /G52/G65/G6D/G61/G69/G6E /G74/G6F /G42/G65 /G41/G6E/G73/G77/G65/G72/G65/G64/G3F
As we began by noting, the current state of research regarding the relationship
of motivational interviewing-based interventions and treatment adherence can
best be described as preliminary. We can identify a number of issues that re-
quire clarification via further research.
/G57/G68/G61/G74 /G49/G73 /G74/G68/G65 /G52/G65/G6C/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73/G68/G69/G70 /G62/G65/G74/G77/G65/G65/G6E /G41/G64/G68/G65/G72/G65/G6E/G63/G65 /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G65/G6E/G74/G69/G6F/G6E /G61/G6E/G64
/G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G4F/G75/G74/G63/G6F/G6D/G65/G3F
Adherence to treatment is important to the extent that it leads to improved
treatment outcomes. Though the correlation between adherence and more
successful outcomes is well established, little is known about the circum -
stances and conditions under which adherence interventions result in greater
gains in treatment. Specifically, what kinds of clients receiving which kinds of
treatments (e.g., medical or psychosocial treatments) might benefit from ad -
herence strategies? For example, in certain medical treatments such as
antiretroviral treatment of AIDS, enabling patients to take medications ex -
actly as prescribed is crucial to outcome, while in some psychotherapy models
the relationship between adherence and outcome may be much less clear.
Clearly, studies that, like Brown and Miller (1993), systematically investigate
relationships between interventions, adherence, and measures of outcomes are
needed to elucidate these relationships.
/G49/G73 /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G53/G70/G65/G63/G69/G66/G69/G63/G61/G6C/G6C/G79 /G45/G66/G66/G69/G63/G61/G63/G69/G6F/G75/G73 /G69/G6E /G50/G72/G6F/G6D/G6F/G74/G69/G6E/G67
/G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G41/G64/G68/G65/G72/G65/G6E/G63/G65 /G43/G6F/G6D/G70/G61/G72/G65/G64 /G77/G69/G74/G68 /G4F/G74/G68/G65/G72 /G46._/G6F/G72/G6D/G73 /G6F/G66 /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G65/G6E/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G3F
Studies over the past 40 years have shown that treatment adherence may be
enhanced by interventions ranging from brief and opportunistic contacts
(Carr, 1985; Chafetz, 1961, 1968; Chafetz et al., 1962, 1964; Fiester, Cooley,
Motivational Interviewing and Treatment Adherence 309
& Bausinger, 1979; Hochstadt & Trybula, 1980; Koumans & Muller, 1965;
Koumans, Muller, & Miller, 1967; Olfson, Mechanic, Boyer, & Hansell,
1998; Turner & Vernon, 1976), to treatment contracting (Lash, 1998; Lash
& Blosser, 1999), to role induction (Zweben & Li, 1981), vicarious therapy
pretraining, and experiential pretraining (Walizter et al., 1999). The studies
we have reviewed suggest that motivational interviewing adds something
meaningful, and that employing it is at least as useful as adding other well-
specified treatment preparation interventions . As indicated earlier, these stud-
ies tend to focus mainly on treatment outcomes rather than adherence per se.
Only Connors and colleagues (2000) provide the first clear evidence that em -
ploying a motivational interviewing approach may at least in some situations
be preferable not just to no intervention but to other forms of adherence inter-
vention. Clearly, comparative randomized trials, which attend to both adher -
ence and motivational concerns along with the issues of internal validity, are
required to definitively answer the question we posed previously.
/G57/G68/G61/G74 /G41/G72/G65 /G74/G68/G65 /G93/G45/G66/G66/G65/G63/G74/G69/G76/G65 /G49/G6E/G67/G72/G65/G64/G69/G65/G6E/G74/G73/G94 /G6F/G66 /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G55/G73/G65/G64 /G61/G73 /G61
/G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G41/G64/G68/G65/G72/G65/G6E/G63/G65 /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G65/G6E/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G3F
The issue of how motivational interviewing exerts its effects on outcomes has
been raised repeatedly by Miller (e.g., 2000) and others, and this question
may be asked with equal urgency in the area of adherence effects. Many can-
didates for “effective ingredient” can be identified: eliciting of change talk,
emphasis on personal choice and control or “autonomy support” (Foote et al.,
1999; see also Deci & Ryan, 1985), a specific style of responding to expressed
resistance (Miller, Benefield, & Tonigan, 1993), the way in which advice is
presented and plans for change are negotiated, and so on. However, current
research provides limited assistance in evaluating the importance of these as -
pects of AMIs in promoting adherence. Dismantling studies, as well as post
hoc analyses and qualitative studies examining counseling process, may in
time provide a clearer picture.
Among the components for which data are currently available is formal
feedback. A majority of the interventions under consideration here incorpo -
rate a feedback process, although it should be noted that these interventions
vary from DCU-style feedback reports to systematic but less structured feed -
back processes to feedback on a single measure of readiness to change. Over -
all, it appears that AMIs incorporating feedback display somewhat more con-
sistency in enhancing adherence than those that do not, but an important
question is whether and how different kinds of feedback may elicit differing
effects.
One variation is between differing styles in which feedback can be pro -
vided. Schneider and colleagues (2000) found that “confrontational” presen -
tation of feedback was as effective in eliciting treatment entry as was feedback
done in the style of motivational interviewing. However, Schneider and asso -
ciates did not investigate the effects of what study therapists actually did, as
310 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
opposed to what they were assigned to do. Miller and colleagues (1993) had
similarly found no statistically significant main effect of motivational versus
confrontational styles on reductions in drinking; it was only in the post hoc
analysis, in which they linked the actual practice of therapists to client out -
comes, that Miller and associates found confrontational therapist behaviors to
be significantly related to worse drinking outcomes.
A second variable is the nature of the feedback itself. Preliminary results
presented by Zuckoff and colleagues (2000) suggested that providing limited
versus extensive feedback may lead to different outcomes where treatment en-
try and retention is concerned. Nye, Agostinelli, and Smith (1999) found that
with nonclient subjects, presentation of normative and self-focusing feedback
can either increase problem recognition or generate defensiveness, depending
on whether they are presented independently or together. Such studies may
help to determine when feedback plays a key role in the effectiveness of AMIs,
and how it interacts with other core components of motivational interviewing
(e.g., counselor’s style of communication), in order to maximize therapeutic
impact.
A second prominent candidate for effective ingredient is the interpersonal
style associated with motivational interviewing. The creation of a positive
therapeutic relationship as a key ingredient in treatment success in general,
and in motivational interviewing in particular, is reviewed elsewhere in this
book. However, the specific question of how this “way of being with people”
affects adherence is worth considering here. It would seem intuitively obvious
that persons who leave an encounter feeling respected, valued, and deeply un-
derstood will want to return for more of the same, especially as such experi-
ences may be relatively rare outside the therapeutic environment (Zuckoff &
Daley, 2001). Empirical support for this intuition emerges in a comparative
trial of “low-structure” (psychodynamic) and “high-structure” (cognitive-
behavioral) treatments for alcohol problems, in which Nielson, Nielson, and
Wraae (2000) found that irrespective of treatment assignment, having a coun-
selor with a high “conceptual level” (CL) predicted greater likelihood of com-
pletion of the first four sessions than having a counselor with a low CL; this
held true, contrary to prediction, whether the client’s CL was high or low. Of
interest is how conceptual level was defined: therapists with high CL were de-
scribed as demonstrating empathy, flexibility, receptiveness, tolerance for am-
biguity, intuitiveness, and a noncontrolling, nonauthoritarian stance—which
the authors note could serve as an accurate summary of the interpersonal style
proper to motivational interviewing. Research that clarifies how much the ad-
herence effects of AMIs rest on counseling style, as opposed to specific strate -
gies and techniques employed, would seem of central importance.
/G49/G6E /G57/G68/G61/G74 /G57/G61/G79/G73 /G41/G72/G65 /G57/G65 /G43/G61/G6C/G6C/G65/G64 /G6F/G6E /G74/G6F /G47/G6F /G62/G65/G79/G6F/G6E/G64 /G74/G68/G65 /G52/G65/G73/G65/G61/G72/G63/G68/G3F
The research reviewed suggests core principles for motivational intervention
and directions for future inquiry but it does not provide a specific answer to
Motivational Interviewing and Treatment Adherence 311
the question encountered by clinicians every day: what can I do to increase
the likelihood that the clients I see will attend treatment and adhere to the
plans we formulate? There are two main reasons for this. First, AMIs have
been designed primarily to help people resolve ambivalence about change,
with the presumption that doing so would lead to greater commitment to
treatment. As discussed earlier, the question of how motivational interview -
ing can be adapted to address directly the specific task of enhancing adher -
ence has been much less explored. Second, in everyday practice clinicians
are unlikely to have access to the resources and infrastructure needed to
provide the kinds of structured AMIs that have been most frequently tested.
Guidelines for incorporating motivational adherence strategies in a variety
of treatment types and settings would assist front-line clinicians in becoming
more effective.
Therefore, we have developed an adherence model and intervention to as-
sist clinicians in dealing with adherence issues. Based on the principles and
practices of motivational interviewing and used in clinical contexts, this model
views motivational readiness for treatment as consisting of two intertwined
yet distinguishable dimensions: problem acceptance and treatment acceptance
(Daley & Zuckoff, 1999; Zuckoff & Daley, 2001). Problem acceptance, the
correlate of readiness to change, may be described as the extent to which an
individual comes to experience change as needed (e.g., problem recognition or
perceived severity), wanted (e.g., hope vs. fear), and within reach (e.g., self-
efficacy). A high level of problem acceptance is taken to be necessary for a
productive encounter with treatment, but it is not, however, seen as sufficient
for treatment adherence. Individuals must also find treatment itself acceptable
if they are to endure the often difficult or even distressing experiences of trying
to improve their lives. Thus, what is typically described as client ambivalence
about change may in some cases reflect a situation in which the individual
clearly recognizes a problem and is ready and willing to work at resolving it
(high level of problem acceptance) but feels hesitant to try to do so via the
pathway being offered (low treatment acceptance).
The phenomenon of “spontaneous remission” or natural change in sub -
stance use and psychiatric disorders makes it clear that in many cases individ -
uals have or can find the resources needed to succeed at self-change (Granfield
& Cloud, 1996; Husby, 1985; Lambert, 1976; Malan, Heath, Bacal, &
Balfour, 1975; McCollough et al., 1994; Miller, 2000; Pillay & Wassenaar,
1995; Sobell, Sobell, & Toneatto, 1992; Sobell, Sobell, Toneatto, & Leo,
1993; Stall & Biernacki, 1986; Vaillant, 1995; Waldorf, Reinarman, &
Murphy, 1991). However, for those who make a series of unsuccessful self-
change attempts, or who do not perceive their situation as subject to volun -
tary change, their level of treatment acceptance, or readiness to accept help,
may be the determining factor in whether or not they achieve the changes they
are considering or planning to make. In the sections that follow, we describe
an adherence approach that employs principles of motivational interviewing
for the purpose of recognizing and dealing with factors that typically cause cli-
312 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
ents to become ambivalent about needing, accepting, and using help—and
thus to participate inconsistently or terminate treatment prematurely.
/G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G52/G45/G41/G44/G49/G4E/G45/G53/G53 /G41/G4E/G44 /G41/G44/G48/G45/G52/G45/G4E/G43/G45
Box 20.1 links various sources or “risk factors” for nonadherence with
the constructs of problem and treatment acceptance, and consequently repre -
sents an initial step toward furthering our understanding of how various moti-
vational interviewing strategies can be employed systematically to facilitate
treatment adherence. The proposed framework recognizes that the range of
possible sources of nonadherence and related strategies may vary in accor -
dance with different populations and/or settings and could be adapted and
tested in a variety of programs.
Individuals low in problem acceptance often have reservations about the
nature, extent, and severity of the presenting problems. They are uncertain or
ambivalent about whether the “identified” problem really needs changing, as
the perceived costs of maintaining the behaviors do not outweigh the familiar
benefits. To illustrate, among drug-dependent clients, the long-term conse-
quences of continued use (e.g., health effects, arrest, and incarceration) may
not outweigh the immediate rewards or pleasures of “getting high.” Some in-
dividuals may resolve the dilemma by minimizing the importance of the pre-
senting problem, offering such comments as “I won’t get caught since I use
only on the weekends with friends.”
Low problem acceptance may also reflect tension between an individual’s
hopes and fears about consequences of efforts at change. In some cases this
conflict is concrete and specific; the hope of a problem drinker that life can be
more rewarding by engaging in an abstinent lifestyle may conflict with the
fear that a drinking significant other may leave once improvement in the prob-
lem begins to occur. More broadly, persons considering taking steps toward
significant life changes may lack a significant sense of safety to be willing to
risk giving up what is familiar for an uncertain future.
Finally, ambivalence about fully accepting the need for change may stem
from doubts as to whether such change can really be accomplished. Faced
with what seems an intolerable reality, a person has only three choices: deny
that it is a reality, fall into a state of helplessness and despair, or find a way to
change it. Problem acceptance rests in part on possession of the belief that the
last of these is a real possibility, or on development of this belief.
A range of factors similarly influences treatment acceptance. Previous
negative treatment experiences, negative relationship expectancies, external
barriers to care, cultural attitudes, and ideological commitments may all have
a negative impact on readiness to accept help; rapport-damaging interactions
may reduce it further. In addition, individuals may find themselves being of -
fered help in a form they find unacceptable, even though they are open to re -
ceiving help per se. For example, a patient may be interested only in taking
Motivational Interviewing and Treatment Adherence 313
medication for high blood pressure, while the clinician is recommending
changes in diet and exercise.
Individuals who have had a series of unsuccessful treatment experiences
may develop negative therapist and outcome expectancies. The latter may be a
consequence of having had counterproductive relationships with clinicians re-
sulting in a worsening of symptoms and other problems (e.g., marital separa -
tion or divorce, or medication side effects). In some cases, clients may begin
treatment anticipating an authoritarian, neglectful, or manipulative interper -
sonal style on the part of the clinician; while these expectancies may be based
on previous relationship experiences, their negative impact on treatment ac -
ceptance can be exacerbated if the clinician intentionally or unintentionally
acts in ways that re-evoke them.
Ambivalence about treatment may also stem from cultural, ideological,
or practical issues. Among some populations, stigma is attached to seeking
help from mental health professionals, and help-seeking individuals may fear
being labeled “crazy” by their peers. For others, issues about self-disclosure
and confidentiality can become a major impediment in seeking and participat-
ing in therapy. Individuals with strong belief systems about the nature and
source of their problems may bridle at perceived efforts of treatment providers
to impose a different view—for example, members of twelve-step mutual sup-
port groups may resist psychiatric or psychological conceptualizations of their
addictions and treatment needs. Yet others may be overwhelmed with every-
day concerns (e.g., family hardships) or reside in unstable social environ-
ments, making it difficult to attend or participate in treatment; without ade-
quate resources or support, such individuals may be unable to cope with or
fulfill such task demands of treatment as attending sessions weekly, following
a pill-taking regime, or doing homework assignments.
Individuals in these high-risk categories (i.e., low problem and/or treat -
ment acceptance) have often been categorized as “unmotivated” and “untreat-
able” at worst, or “hard -to-reach” or “resistant” at best, resulting in large
numbers being turned away from needed services (cf. Cooney, Zweben, &
Fleming, 1995). Our model moves away from this “client driven” perspective
and toward an interactional one (Carroll, 1997; Daley & Zuckoff, 1999;
Mattson et al., 1998; Zweben & Barrett, 1993). Thus, the focus has shifted to
eliminating provider practices that serve as roadblocks, and finding those that
facilitate adherence in different populations and settings.
/G50/G52/G41/G43/G54/G49/G43/G41/G4C /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G53/G54/G52/G41/G54/G45/G47/G49/G45/G53
/G46._/G4F/G52 /G49/G4D/G50/G52/G4F/G56/G49/G4E/G47 /G54/G52/G45/G41/G54/G4D/G45/G4E/G54 /G41/G44/G48/G45/G52/G45/G4E/G43/G45
/G4F/G76/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77
Box 20.1 provides a repertoire of interventions believed to be effective in ad -
dressing the aforementioned adherence problems. These strategies are drawn
314 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
Motivational Interviewing and Treatment Adherence 315
BOX 20.1. An Exploratory Framework for Addressing Adherence
Motivation
category
Sources of nonadherence
(risk factors)
Selected strategies
Problem
acceptance
• Misperceptions,
misunderstandings, and/or
uncertainties about the
significance of the presenting
problem
• Fears about unintended
consequences of change
• Doubts about whether change
is possible or within reach
• Open questions
• Empathic reflection
• Providing feedback
• Deploying discrepancy
• Normalizing unclarities
• Normalizing anxiety about change
• Eliciting “change talk”
• Exploring values
• Reviewing past successes
• Affirming small steps
• Amplifying doubts
Treatment
acceptance
• Uncertainty or ambivalence
about change
• Concerns about the suitability of
the treatment modality offered
• Misperceptions about treatment
needs
• Previous negative treatment
experiences
• Negative therapist or treatment
outcome expectancies
• Negative general relationship
expectancies
• Culture-specific differences
• Stigma
• Mandated treatment/coercion
• High barriers to care (financial
problems, family hardships)
• Low self-efficacy in handling
treatment demands
• Persistent empathy and
nondefensiveness
• Normalizing gradual development of
trust
• Exploring understandings of how
treatment works
• Providing information about how
treatment works
• Eliciting perceptions of treatment needs
• Providing information on treatment
needs
• Decisional balancing
• Reviewing past treatment experiences
• Exploring and addressing previous and
future barriers to change in treatment
(e.g., immunizing)
• Negotiating proximal goals (i.e.,
prioritizing and sequencing tasks)
• Communicating a nonperfectionistic
message
• Recognizing nonadherence as a sign of
damaged rapport
• Addressing breeches in rapport
• Involving a supportive other for
motivational support
• Identifying positive experiences of
receiving help
• Supporting self-efficacy or coping
capacities
• Displaying optimism about treatment
effectiveness
from the research on motivational interviewing and our own clinical experi -
ences. Though varied in intensity and style, these interventions share the same
goal of enhancing problem and treatment acceptance.
Adherence strategies might be most broadly categorized as Phase 1 and
Phase 2 strategies (see Chapters 6 and 10, this volume). Phase 1 strategies are
focused on (1) assessing the individual’s current levels of problem acceptance
and treatment acceptance; (2) formulating hypotheses as to the wishes, beliefs,
feelings, and experiences that are influencing each of these dimensions; and (3)
considering options for resolving ambivalence about change and/or treatment.
Phase 2 strategies are aimed at helping clients develop an adherence plan
appropriate to their capacities, resources, preferences, and treatment needs.
This entails preparing clients to address sundry sources of nonadherence
whenever they occur during the course of treatment. Clients may need to be
helped to maintain participation via employment of the full array of adher -
ence strategies.
/G50/G68/G61/G73/G65 /G31/G3A /G41/G73/G73/G65/G73/G73/G69/G6E/G67 /G61/G6E/G64 /G55/G6E/G64/G65/G72/G73/G74/G61/G6E/G64/G69/G6E/G67 /G49/G6E/G66/G6C/G75/G65/G6E/G63/G65/G73 /G6F/G6E /G41/G64/G68/G65/G72/G65/G6E/G63/G65
Traditional adherence strategies involve telling, instructing, or showing clients
what to expect from treatment and what they will need to do to make it suc-
cessful (Zweben & Li, 1981). The underlying assumption is that clients are
more likely to be engaged and retained if they are provided with the correct
information about the respective roles and functions of clinician and client.
This approach may be all that is necessary to gain the cooperation of clients
who enter treatment with relatively high levels of problem and treatment ac-
ceptance; doubts or uncertainties these clients have about treatment may well
stem from a lack of information about the proposed treatment rather than
from underlying motivational issues.
In contrast, for clients with relatively low levels of problem and treatment
acceptance, traditional induction techniques may be insufficient. The doubts
or uncertainties these clients have about participation may stem from motiva -
tional matters (e.g., low self-efficacy, mistrust of the counselor, or ambiva -
lence about change) rather than ignorance or misunderstanding of the pro -
posed treatment. Measurement of initial treatment readiness might help to
identify which clients might benefit from traditional adherence instruction and
which might be helped more by a motivational interviewing-style intervention.
Phase 1 of our motivational adherence intervention begins with an
empathic assessment, defined by Miller (1998b) as “getting to know the client
well enough to be able to understand him/her from the inside while being able
to provide a broader perspective.” A major goal of the adherence assessment
interview is to create a safe atmosphere in which to explore the client’s
thoughts and feelings.
The counselor seeks to discover clients’ views about problems and expec-
tations of treatment. Discovery may entail reviewing the chain of events that
brought clients to treatment and eliciting their perceptions of the importance
316 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
of addressing problems without offering interpretation. This process may be
accomplished via the use of core motivational interviewing strategies, includ -
ing open-ended questions, clarification and elaboration of client responses,
and empathic reflection. Data on client perceptions may also be obtained
through standardized measures; for example, in the alcohol treatment field,
measures of clients’ perceptions of their alcohol use are included on such in -
struments as the Inventory of Drinking Situations (IDS; Annis, Graham, &
Davis, 1987 ) and the Desired Effects of Drinking questionnaire (Simpson, Ar-
royo, Miller, & Little, 1999).
Clinicians may ask about, reflect, and then summarize clients’ past treat-
ment experiences as they relate to adherence. Current beliefs about treatment
may be influenced by previously unmet expectations (“I took the medication but
I was still depressed”), unhappiness with therapist style (“My therapist didn’t
really seem to care about me”), or practical obstacles that were never resolved
(“I could not find a reliable baby sitter,” “I had no way to get to the clinic”).
During the assessment process the clinician is also on the lookout for
such “early warning signs” of nonadherence as client beliefs that are discrep -
ant from what is being proposed in the treatment plan (e.g., a client beginning
psychodynamic therapy for anxiety symptoms who believes that talking about
the past is pointless). The clinician then communicates his or her observations
and understandings about the confluence of factors that might have an impact
on the client’s participation in treatment through a process of information
sharing, summarizing, and empathic reflection of both positive and negative
reactions to information exchanged.
As mentioned earlier, there is a wide range of possible reasons for which
clients might not participate in treatment; the clinician’s goal is to help clients
recognize or sort out some of these possible reasons.
This discussion often highlights and helps clients to recognize the discrep-
ancy between their behavior, problems, or concerns and “where they want to
be” (their goals) or “who they want to be” (their values). For example, a cli -
ent revealed bitterly that despite a strong desire and commitment to reduce
her drinking, she left therapy prematurely to avoid communicating feelings of
anger and frustration about the program to her treating clinician—an abrupt
departure that resulted in a full-blown relapse. Deploying the discrepancy be -
tween the personal importance of her goal and her reluctance to deal directly
with an obstacle to achieving it led her to commit herself to learning other
ways to cope with negative feelings toward others.
Once clients begin to engage in change talk regarding adherence to the
treatment, the clinician asks them to rank the risk factors they have identified
in order of importance. The value of such an exercise lies in helping to clarify
which are the greatest threats and thus need to be addressed most urgently, to
sensitize clients to any ongoing pattern of nonadherence (e.g., “I always avoid
sources of bad feelings;” “I don’t expect the therapist to want to see me after I
stop doing well and miss an appointment”), and to help them to become com-
mitted to overcoming these major roadblocks.
Motivational Interviewing and Treatment Adherence 317
/G50/G68/G61/G73/G65 /G32/G3A /G44/G65/G76/G65/G6C/G6F/G70/G69/G6E/G67 /G61/G6E/G64 /G49/G6D/G70/G6C/G65/G6D/G65/G6E/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G61/G6E /G41/G64/G68/G65/G72/G65/G6E/G63/G65 /G50/G6C/G61/G6E
Phase 2 involves the negotiation of an adherence plan. This occurs only if a
consensus is arrived at about the particular issues that need to be addressed.
The clinician elicits ideas about how to resolve these issues and then (with per-
mission) reviews alternatives to nonadherence; these alternatives may include
talking things over in the sessions before acting on disappointed feelings,
keeping a log to track negative feelings about the treatment process, identify -
ing and involving significant others to provide additional support or to en -
hance motivation, or breaking down long-term treatment goals (which in
many cases could feel overwhelming) into manageable tasks (e.g., sobriety
sampling vs. long-term abstinence, taking medication on a limited trial basis,
or improving communication with spouse before reinitiating a sexual relation-
ship). Presenting a menu of options and reviewing their pros and cons (deci -
sional balancing) gives clients the opportunity to choose one that is most ap -
propriate to their needs, preferences, and capacities. In this way the counselor
conveys confidence in clients’ ability to take responsibility for making their
own decisions and wishes to succeed.
Clinicians should avoid negotiating with individuals who still have linger-
ing doubts about addressing adherence issues; otherwise, they might feel pres-
sured into making an adherence plan before feeling ready or confident to im-
plement it. Rather, the counselor might empathically reflect misgivings while
normalizing the inaction—for example, it might be important to tell a client
that many people prefer to find out how difficult it will be to remember to
take their medication regularly before they decide whether to come up with
ideas for enhancing their memory. Clients usually breathe a “sigh of relief”
when this happens.
Individuals confronted with an aversive task, such as deciding whether to
remain in treatment, may be better prepared to take action over time (Zweben
et al., 1988). Such clients may benefit from hearing that treatment can focus
initially on the question of whether treatment-based change is warranted or
desired without necessitating immediate commitment to an extended treat -
ment process. At the same time, the counselor needs to be prepared to shift
out of the negotiating stance if conditions warrant it. In certain cases (e.g.,
clinically deteriorating clients) it may be necessary for the clinician to express
his or her own concerns about the client’s leaving before the decision is final-
ized. However, in accordance with the spirit of motivational interviewing, the
clinician should obtain permission before stating his or her concerns.
It will be unsurprising that after they leave, some clients may have “sec -
ond thoughts” or negative reactions about different matters that occurred
during the treatment session. These thoughts or reactions may arise when cli -
ents do not feel comfortable with self-disclosure, especially to a person in a
position of authority; some may feel that they do not have the “right” to ques-
tion an authority, and/or may be fearful of retaliation, and thus decide that it
is safer to appear cooperative even if such a stance is counterproductive to
their treatment needs. For example, some clients might be seriously concerned
318 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
that a prescribed medication is having little effect on their mood disorder; yet,
rather than reveal their disappointment, they might prefer to stop taking the
medication completely without first notifying the treating physician. This sce -
nario, if repeated with different clinicians, could eventually become a major
impediment to improvement.
Therefore, it is important for clinicians to focus clients’ attention on pos-
sible future reactions by describing what these reactions might be and discuss-
ing ways to respond to them. The clinician reinforces the importance of deal -
ing with these delayed reactions if or when they occur while expressing
optimism about the client’s efforts to cope with these challenges. Not doing so
raises the danger of an individual’s acting precipitously rather than after care-
ful consideration and consultation with treatment providers.
To prepare a client to deal with delayed negative reactions, the counselor
might deliver the following message at the close of a Phase 2 session: Mixed
feelings or ongoing uncertainties about treatment, as well as setbacks or mo -
ments of struggle, are a normal part of the treatment process rather than signs
of failure; discussing these matters openly can become a real opportunity for
further learning and change. This “nonperfectionistic” message often helps to
reduce the guilt, shame, or embarrassment that commonly occurs when an in-
dividual is unable to cope; just as important it also serves as mechanism to
“immunize” the client against reacting impulsively to disappointment, frustra-
tion, or overall dissatisfaction with his or her own progress.
/G53/G55/G4D/G4D/G41/G52/G59
Studies have revealed that clients who adhere to a treatment regime usually
fare better than those who do not, and that motivational interviewing tech -
niques can be effectively employed to facilitate adherence with various client
groups and treatments across a variety of settings. Specifically, motivational
interviewing appears to be helpful in decreasing ambivalence in order to main-
tain treatment participation. The current research allows us to be cautiously
optimistic, but far more will be required before questions can be answered
more definitely. Further work needs to be conducted not only in comparative
outcome trials but also in process-focused research, to clarify the mechanisms
of change and the optimization of the effective ingredients of AMIs.
Based on a review of the literature and our own clinical experience, we
developed a framework for gaining a better understanding of interrelation -
ships between motivational variables (problem acceptance and treatment ac -
ceptance) and adherence factors for the purpose of enhancing the delivery of
motivational adherence strategies. We believe that we now have valuable tools
to address adherence problems and that if they are applied systematically and
in the spirit of motivational interviewing, at the beginning of treatment and
throughout its course, we can enable a greater number of clients to take opti -
mal advantage of therapy.
Motivational Interviewing and Treatment Adherence 319
CHAPTER 21
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G77/G69/G74/G68
/G41/G64/G6F/G6C/G65/G73/G63/G65/G6E/G74/G73 /G61/G6E/G64 /G59 /G6F/G75/G6E/G67 /G41/G64/G75/G6C/G74/G73
JOHN S. BAER and PEGGY L. PETERSON
There is considerable interest in using motivational interviewing with younger
populations. Much of this interest, we believe, is based on promising research
outcomes using motivational interviewing with adult populations and the on -
going challenge of providing effective services for young people (Moskowitz,
1985). Some tailoring of the use of motivational interviewing may be neces -
sary, however, when working with adolescents and young adults. Adolescents
are different from adults in important ways. Clinical presentations of young
people often differ from those noted among adults. Specific developmental
and psychological factors influence the setting, content, style, and goals for in-
terventions. This chapter reviews developmental issues and the rationale for
the use of motivational interviewing and then briefly examines the relatively
small existing evaluative literature. Finally, we present some clinical consider -
ations and note what we consider to be key issues for future attention.
We believe that motivational interviewing describes a clinical style that is
useful for a variety of health-related issues. Nevertheless, most efforts to apply
motivational interviewing with adolescents and young adults have addressed
substance use. This chapter thus focuses on substance use issues, despite any
320
theoretical reason that motivational interviewing should be limited to this
area of risk behavior.
/G44/G45/G56/G45/G4C/G4F/G50/G4D/G45/G4E/G54/G41/G4C /G43/G4F/G4E/G53/G49/G44/G45/G52/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G53
/G41/G64/G6F/G6C/G65/G73/G63/G65/G6E/G63/G65
Adolescence is a distinct life stage between childhood and adulthood charac -
terized by changes in biological, psychological, and social processes. Individ -
uals grow rapidly, develop secondary sex characteristics, develop higher-order
cognitive abilities, and gradually adopt adult social behavior. The major psy -
chological tasks of adolescence are the development of autonomy and identity
and the social and personal competencies needed for the adoption of adult
roles. Adolescence is commonly portrayed as a time of great turmoil that in -
cludes extreme parent–child conflict, mood swings, and irrationality on behalf
of the adolescent. Such extreme turmoil has largely been debunked as a myth
(Offer & Schonert-Reichl, 1992; Peterson, 1993). Although a significant mi -
nority of youth experience adolescence as tumultuous and troubled, problems
for many are due to family, social, and mental health issues that predate ado-
lescence. Over a third of adolescents transition to adulthood remaining well
adjusted throughout, and only about a quarter are consistently troubled
(Golombeck, Marton, Stein, & Korenblum, 1989).
Nevertheless, during adolescence there is an increase in activities that
pose a risk to health and safety, including alcohol use, drug use, and sexual
behavior. For example, by the 8th grade about a quarter of students report
having been drunk. By 12th grade this proportion increases to 65% (John-
ston, O’Malley, & Bachman, 2000a). The leading cause of death among
youth and young adults age 10–24 is motor vehicle crashes (31%), followed
by homicide (18%), suicide (12%), and other injury (11%) (Centers for Dis -
ease Control, 2000). Alcohol and other drug use have been implicated in all
these causes of death (Cherpitel, 1994; Maio, Portnoy, Blow, & Hill, 1994).
There is also a core group of young people who develop problems during ado-
lescence that remain chronic into adulthood. Fortunately for the majority of
adolescents, involvement in risk behaviors is time limited (Chen & Kandel,
1995). Furthermore, it is through testing boundaries and challenging social
prohibitions that young people learn to develop internal control over their
behavior (Jessor, 1991).
/G59 /G6F/G75/G6E/G67 /G41/G64/G75/G6C/G74/G68/G6F/G6F/G64
An end point for adolescence could be thought of as the point at which an in -
dividual is independently self-supporting and assumes adult roles. Arnett
(2000) has recently suggested an intermediary developmental process that he
calls “emerging adulthood.” He argues that individuals within the rough age
span of 18 to 25 are distinct demographically, subjectively, and psychologi -
Motivational Interviewing with Adolescents and Young Adults 321
cally from both younger (adolescent) and older (adult) age groups. Within
emerging adulthood, individual identity explorations in the areas of love,
work, and world view go beyond those initial formulations noted within ado-
lescence but stop short of adulthood. This developmental process appears in
cultures typically described as highly industrialized or postindustrial where
young people tend to stay in educational systems longer (well into the 20s)
and marriage and parenthood are often delayed. Like adolescence, emerging
adulthood is noted for high levels of risk behavior (use of substances, sex,
risky driving) as individuals explore their identities and roles. Rates of heavy
episodic drinking, for example, peak between the ages of 19 and 21 (John -
ston, O’Malley, & Bachman, 2000b). As Arnett (2000) states, ”Emerging
adults can pursue novel and intense experiences more freely than adolescents
because they are less likely to be monitored by parents and can pursue them
more freely than adults because they are less constrained by roles” (p. 475).
Risky behavior can also be exacerbated by the highly social settings common
within this age period. For example, increased drinking has been associated
with residence in U.S. college dormitories (Gfroerer, Greenblatt, & Wright,
1997) and membership in collegiate social organizations (Cashin, Presley, &
Meilman, 1998). Perceived social norms and peer use are strong predictors of
drinking and substance use behavior in this age group (Baer, in press).
As a caveat, not all adolescents experience the process of emerging adult-
hood. It is the relatively successful adolescents who are more likely to extend
educational processes toward more professional work. In fact, younger ado-
lescents most involved in substance use and other risk behaviors may be least
likely to extend role explorations. They are more likely to leave school earlier,
assume adults jobs at younger ages, and marry and have children earlier than
their less troubled peers (Baumrind & Moselle, 1985; Newcomb & Bentler,
1988). Thus, individuals characterized by a developmental process of emerg -
ing adulthood, and for whom motivational interviewing interventions might
be designed, may not represent all members of the age group.
/G52/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C/G45 /G46._/G4F/G52 /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47
/G57/G49/G54/G48 /G41/G44/G4F/G4C/G45/G53/G43/G45/G4E/G54/G53 /G41/G4E/G44 /G59/G4F/G55/G4E/G47 /G41/G44/G55/G4C/G54/G53
We see motivational interviewing as a promising style for working with ado -
lescents and young adults. The tasks of adolescence—developing autonomy
and individuation—require questioning and pushing against authority figures.
For adolescents and young adults, ambivalence is common. And, ambivalence
will extend beyond a specific risk behavior to quite general issues of identity
and roles. Clinical styles that are respectful, acknowledge choices and ambiva-
lence, and do not increase resistance seem to be logical choices. A clinical ap -
proach that not only minimizes arguing but also uses ambivalence to develop
motivation for change should be a welcome addition. We also sense a com -
mon curiosity and openness to philosophical questions among young people,
322 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
which might make motivational interviewing particularly helpful. Application
of motivational interviewing tends to support personal change goals rather
than institutional or counselor-based goals, which naturally supports explora-
tions of world views and continued efforts toward autonomy. That motiva -
tional interviewing can be used consistent with harm reductive goals also
seems well matched for younger individuals without chronic conditions.
Considerable resources have been devoted to universal prevention pro -
grams to prevent or delay initiation of risk behavior among young people. Yet
prevention effects are typically small (Department of Health and Human Ser -
vices, 2000; Pentz et al., 1989), and there is evidence that universal prevention
programs are not effective for youth who have already initiated risk behavior
(Brown & Horowitz, 1993; Ellickson & Bell, 1990). Motivational interview -
ing may be particularly appropriate for targeted or indicated prevention pro -
grams designed for young people already engaged in risk behaviors (see later).
We also see motivational interviewing as a promising approach for en -
gaging youth in services. Few youth identify their risk behavior as a problem
in need of treatment or other services. Motivational interviewing, with its
nonjudgmental and nonconfrontational style, may be a useful approach for
outreach or initial engagement (Slesnick, Meyers, Meade, & Segelken, 2000).
Further, motivational interviewing’s application in brief formats lends it to
use in informal settings where youth tend to spend time (e.g., drop-in, recre-
ational, or placement centers). Motivational interviewing may also be useful
within existing treatment programs. Most adolescents enter drug treatment
because someone else determined that they needed to be there (family
member, court, school official), and treatment programs suffer from high
noncompletion rates (20% to 50%; Winters, Latimer, & Stinchfield, 1999).
Given encouraging results with adult populations, motivational interviewing
may be helpful in improving treatment engagement and retention among ado-
lescents and young adults.
/G45/G46._/G46._/G45/G43/G54/G49/G56/G45/G4E/G45/G53/G53 /G4F/G46._ /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47
/G57/G49/G54/G48 /G41/G44/G4F/G4C/G45/G53/G43/G45/G4E/G54/G53 /G41/G4E/G44 /G59/G4F/G55/G4E/G47 /G41/G44/G55/G4C/G54/G53
Conducting motivational interviewing with adolescents and young adults is
relatively new, and to date there have been only a few well-designed studies.
All the studies of which we are aware have examined brief interventions, typi-
cally the provision of personalized feedback about a specific risk behavior fol-
lowing an assessment (cf. Miller & Sovereign, 1989). As reviewed herein, brief
interventions have been developed in several different settings for varied pre -
vention or treatment goals. Most programs describe the counselors delivering
the intervention in a style consistent with motivational interviewing, such as
nonconfrontational, empathic, using reflections and open-ended questions,
and developing discrepancies. These brief interventions typically are com -
pared to a “no-treatment” or “standard treatment” control group.
Motivational Interviewing with Adolescents and Young Adults 323
We are not aware of studies where aspects of the clinical style of motiva -
tional interviewing have been compared to other styles of intervention. Fur -
thermore, few studies have examined the content and delivery of the interven-
tion; thus it is difficult to evaluate which aspects of motivational interviewing
were specifically being tested.
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G61/G73 /G61/G6E /G49/G6E/G64/G69/G63/G61/G74/G65/G64 /G50/G72/G65/G76/G65/G6E/G74/G69/G76/G65 /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G65/G6E/G74/G69/G6F/G6E
A few studies have been conducted using motivational interviewing in what
could be considered an indicated preventive intervention, that is, targeting
youth who have already initiated risk behavior. Some have been small pilot
studies (Colby et al., 1998; Roffman, 2000). Others are currently in the field
(Peterson, 1998). An exception is a study by Monti and colleagues (1999) test-
ing a brief motivational interviewing intervention conducted with adolescents
admitted to the emergency room for an alcohol-related event. The hospital
emergency room (ER) provides access to youth who are engaging in risk
behavior who might otherwise not be identified and an opportunity for inter -
vention with youth who have just experienced consequences due to their risk
behavior (Barnett, Monti, & Wood, 2001).
In the study by Monti and colleagues (1999), youth age 13–19 were ran-
domly assigned to either a brief (35–40-minute) interview with personalized
feedback or to a standard care intervention (5 minutes), which provided hand-
outs and referral lists regarding ways to prevent alcohol/related injuries and
treatment resources. The interventionists’ therapeutic style was described as
having a “focus on empathy, not arguing, developing discrepancy, self-
effi cacy, and personal choice” (Monti et al., 1999, p. 991). Among the 18 to
19 year olds, those in the treatment condition reported reduced alcohol-
related risk at a 6-month follow-up compared to those in the standard care
condition (less likely to report drinking and driving, had fewer moving viola -
tions, and reported fewer alcohol-related injuries and fewer alcohol-related
problems with family, friends, police, and school). Interestingly, among youth
ages 13–17, no group differences were observed (Barnett et al., 2001). This re-
sult may in part be due to the fact that the younger adolescents did not report
high levels of drinking or consequences to begin with, thus making it difficult
to demonstrate change. The standard care treatment may also have been more
intensive for younger adolescents due to the use of a separate emergency de -
partment that provided more social work intervention.
Three additional studies have been completed that tested brief interven -
tions with personalized feedback delivered using a motivational interviewing
style as indicated prevention. One study provided a similar intervention to
that used by Monti and colleagues (1999) but targeted smoking cessation in a
sample of youth admitted to a hospital ER or substance abuse treatment
(Colby et al., 1998). Another study developed a “marijuana check-up” and
was offered to volunteers within one high school (Roffman, 2000). A third
324 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
study developed a brief intervention seeking to improve adherence to dieting
goals (reduction of cholesterol and dietary fat consumption) among a sample
of youth already participating in a longitudinal study (Berg-Smith et al.,
1999). All these studies described their interventions as providing brief feed -
back on the risk behavior in a style consistent with motivational interviewing
as described previously. All three of the studies found that that youth reduced
their risk behavior at follow-up. Yet several qualifications limit confidence in
findings. In the smoking cessation study, a clinically meaningful effect size
(.28) for abstinence rates at the 3-month follow-up was observed between the
motivational interviewing group and the brief advice control group (20% vs.
10%), but with a sample of only 40, this difference was not statistically signif-
icant. The other two pilot studies (Berg-Smith et al., 1999; Roffman, 2000)
did not have comparison groups.
Our own ongoing research effort, Project STARRS (Street Teen Assess -
ment and Risk Reduction Study) also seeks to test an indicated prevention
model but goes one step further by actually doing street intercepts of high-risk
youth. Homeless, or “street,” youth present some of the highest rates of sub -
stance use, as well as mental and health-related problems, among all adoles-
cents (Adlaf, Zadnowicz, & Smart, 1996; McCaskill, Toro, & Wolfe, 1998).
Yet only a small proportion of street youth seek help for alcohol or drug prob-
lems. Like those studies just described, in Project STARRS street youth are
randomly assigned to receive personalized feedback on risk behavior assessed
using a baseline interview. Motivational interviewing guides the clinical style.
The goal is to encourage youth to contemplate making changes in their sub-
stance use behavior and, if possible, facilitate linking youth to available social
services. Although preliminary results appear promising, formal evaluation
awaits larger sample recruitment.
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G77/G69/G74/G68 /G41/G64/G6F/G6C/G65/G73/G63/G65/G6E/G74/G73 /G69/G6E /G4F/G74/G68/G65/G72 /G54 /G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74
We are aware of two studies that included motivational interviewing in conjunc-
tion with other adolescent treatment services. The Cannabis Youth Treatment
project (CYT) is a large ( n = 600) multisite study comparing five outpatient
treatment modules for marijuana use (Dennis, 2000). Motivational enhance -
ment therapy (MET) conducted in two sessions was part of two of the five treat-
ments, combined with either 3 or 10 additional sessions of group cognitive-
behavioral (CBT) sessions (MET/CBT5 and MET/CBT12, respectively). The
other therapies that were compared were multidimensional family therapy
(MDFT), adolescent community reinforcement approach (ACRA), and a treat-
ment that added a family support component (FSN) to the MET/CBT12. The
study used two treatment arms, one that compared incremental increases in
treatment intensity (MET/CBT5, MET/CBT12, and MET/CBT12 plus FSN)
and the other that compared alternative treatments (MET/CBT5, MDFT, and
ACRA). Youth were randomly assigned to one of three treatments offered with-
Motivational Interviewing with Adolescents and Young Adults 325
in a given site. The specifics of the MET therapy were not reported in the pub-
lished paper, although treatment manuals are in preparation.
Although motivational interviewing was not evaluated as a stand-alone
treatment, there were some interesting findings. First, brief MET/CBT resulted
in similar outcomes to lengthier or more intensive therapies at 6-month fol -
low-up. For example, in the alternate treatment arm, MET/CBT5 had a simi -
lar percentage of youth reporting abstinence and no symptoms as did longer
programs (ACRA and MDFT). Second, any differences observed in outcomes
between MET/CBT5 and MET/CBT12 were in the direction of MET/CBT5
showing better outcomes. Thus, adding more cognitive-behavioral group ses -
sions did not appear to increase treatment effectiveness in terms of substance
use or substance use problems.
A second study that added motivational interviewing to existing treat -
ment services was conducted by Aubrey (1998). Youth were randomly as -
signed to receive or not receive one 30–60-minute motivational interviewing
session prior to residential treatment. The session provided youth with struc -
tured feedback on their drug use using an “empathic and motivational thera -
peutic style” (Aubrey, 1998 p. 22). Youth who received the motivational in-
terviewing session showed fewer days of alcohol use following treatment,
although there was no difference in days of other drug use. The motivational
interviewing session also appeared to impact treatment retention. Youth in the
motivational interviewing condition also showed greater treatment attendance
(17 sessions vs. 6 sessions).
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G77/G69/G74/G68 /G50/G61/G72/G65/G6E/G74/G73 /G6F/G66 /G41/G64/G6F/G6C/G65/G73/G63/G65/G6E/G74/G73
The role of the family is critical in both prevention and successful treatment of
adolescent risk behavior. Dishion (in press) has developed a brief intervention
for parents of adolescents called the Family Check-Up. The check-up is a
three-session intervention to strengthen and support parenting practices to re-
duce adolescent risk behavior. The three sessions include an initial interview
with parents and the adolescent, a family assessment session, and a feedback
session. The motivational intervention incorporates FRAMES components of
brief interventions: feedback, responsibility, advice, menu of options, and self-
efficacy. The style is one of building rapport with the client using techniques
of open-ended questioning, empathy, and reflections (Dishion, in press). An
initial test of the Family Check-Up (Rao, 1999) involved 40 families with
high-risk youth ages 11–14. Youth in families randomized into the motiva -
tional interviewing condition showed reduced problem behavior at follow-up
as reported by youth, parents, and teachers compared to youth assigned to a
wait-list control condition. Further, parents reported improved parent man -
agement skills. In another application, Dishion and Kavanaugh (in press) re -
ported that the motivational interviewing intervention provided in a school
context resulted in reduced escalation of deviant peer involvement, drug use,
and antisocial behavior (cited in Dishion, in press).
326 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G77/G69/G74/G68 /G43/G6F/G6C/G6C/G65/G67/G65 /G53/G74/G75/G64/G65/G6E/G74/G73 /G61/G6E/G64 /G41/G6C/G63/G6F/G68/G6F/G6C /G55/G73/G65
To date there have been several published studies of brief interventions using
motivational interviewing with U.S. college students targeting heavy alcohol
use. In a study conducted at the University of Washington (Marlatt et al.,
1998), heavy drinking college freshmen were recruited for a longitudinal
study of alcohol-related risk reduction throughout college. High-risk students,
defined as individuals in the top quartile of recent heavy drinking in high
school, were recruited for the study and completed a baseline assessment with-
in the first few weeks of the autumn academic term. These students were then
randomly assigned to receive a personal feedback interview using motiva -
tional interviewing principles. The personalized feedback was designed to ad -
dress issues of interest to college freshman. Feedback materials provided data
of typical and episodic drinking rates, normative comparisons to same-age
peers, perceived benefits and risks of drinking, and mythology about alcohol
effects (placebo and expectancy, tolerance). Dimeff, Baer, Kivlahan, and
Marlatt (1999) describe the content of this program, Brief Alcohol Screening
and Advice for College Students (BASICS), in detail. Trained interviewers not
only used motivational interviewing and feedback to develop discrepancies be-
tween behavior and standards but also provided education if the participant
was receptive.
Results of the study indicated that college students who received the mo-
tivational preventive intervention fared better than those who did not (Mar-
latt et al., 1998). At a 2-year follow-up, small effects were noted with respect
to drinking rates and more moderate effects were observed with respect to
alcohol-related negative consequences. Differences between control and moti-
vational intervention groups with respect to negative consequences continued
through a 4-year post-baseline assessment (Baer, Kivlahan, Blume, McKnight,
& Marlatt, 2001). Longitudinal analyses indicated that prevention effects ap -
pear to function, on average, by accelerating a normative pattern of reduced
drinking over time. Yet, the course of drinking varies a great deal from one
student to another. Further analyses suggested that the motivational inter -
viewing intervention may also have slowed drinking escalation over time rela-
tive to those who did not receive the intervention (Baer et al., 2001; Roberts,
Neal, Kivlahan, Baer, & Marlatt, 2000).
The effectiveness of the BASICs curriculum has been replicated with
other samples of general college students (Borsari & Carey, 2000; Murphy et
al., 2000), as well as in a program that tailored the motivational program
specifically for members of fraternities (Larimer et al., 2001). A key control
condition—that of a standard alcohol-education curriculum—was added to
the replication study by Murphy and colleagues (2000). This condition not
only provides an “attention control” not previously tested but also mimics
typical educational programming found on college campuses. The inclusion of
a standard educational control group further strengthens the conclusion that
personalized feedback is a critical part of the BASICS program.
Motivational Interviewing with Adolescents and Young Adults 327
As with much research using motivational interviewing (Rollnick &
Miller, 1995), what is not clear is how and under what conditions the pro -
grams are most effective. Risk reduction for college student alcohol use may
be possible based on mailed personalized feedback of a form consistent with
those used in drinkers’ checkup protocols (Agostinelli, Brown, & Miller,
1995). Two recent studies further suggest that group discussions by college
students about alcohol risk reduction not only fail to enhance the impact of
mailed feedback but may actually interfere with it (Walters, Bennett, &
Miller, 2000).
/G43/G4C/G49/G4E/G49/G43/G41/G4C /G43/G4F/G4E/G53/G49/G44/G45/G52/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G53
Motivational interviewing with adolescents and young adults does present
certain clinical challenges. Ingersoll, Wagner, Gharib (2000), for example,
note several dimensions thought to be characteristic of adolescents encoun -
tered in clinical settings for alcohol and drug problems: a history of control -
ling interactions with adults, previous exposure to exaggerated drug education
messages, a sense of invulnerability, coercion by justice systems, the need to
establish identity, and the likelihood that they have not progressed to sub-
stance dependence. Note that with this list, the prevailing result of each char-
acteristic is in the direction of more resistance to influence.
Such resistance can cut two ways. It makes motivational interviewing all
the more logical as a choice for a style of intervention. But it does not make
the use of motivational interviewing particularly easy. Ingersoll and colleagues
(2000) suggest that the counselor’s first task is to distinguish him- or herself
from other adults with more traditional messages. This may be accomplished
by providing information that is indeed different from that to which the
young person has previously been exposed. Counselors may also acknowledge
and reflect doubts the adolescent may have about of the motivational inter -
viewing session. Advice about options for change or for treatment, although
still an important component of brief interventions, should come only after
great care is made to develop alliances.
Implicit contracts about clinical relationships are important. It is the ex -
ceptional case where the adolescent or young adult seeks services. Young peo-
ple are often coerced into treatment and are often angry. These feelings will
conflict with engagement in any interview. Although this problem with en -
gagement can not be eliminated, there are strategies for minimizing its harm.
Counselors can openly acknowledge common thoughts and feelings and, if
appropriate, encourage the young person to see if he or she can benefit from
or enjoy the interview despite the circumstances (having to be there).
Indicated and targeted prevention programs suffer from a particular form
of this odd therapeutic contract. Prevention programs are seldom requested or
sought and often benefit from incentive systems to facilitate participation.
Thus the participation of young people may be less coerced but nevertheless
328 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
may be easily attributed to incentives such as payment, course credit, or, at
best, curiosity. In this situation, a fundamental difference exists between the
goals of the interviewer and interviewee. Young people may assume a “show
me” attitude: they are willing to go through the motions of participation but
not to engage in a therapeutic dialogue. Counselors can and should address
these concerns openly and try to provide some basis for a shared goal within
an interview. We often state, “You may be wondering if this interview will be
of any interest or use to you. I appreciate that. Let me know if and when we
hit on something that fits with your experiences.” In our work we have found
it critical to be sensitive to a young person’s doubts but also not to belabor the
issue. Essentially, rapport and alliance will develop when theexperience of the
interview is different rather than by hearing the counselor’s intentions that it
will be so. Often gently launching into material and feedback with a warm
and nonjudgmental tone is more effective than reflecting resistance. Indeed,
one reason for using feedback in motivational interviewing interventions with
young people is that it provides a structure for the interview and material to
interact about. It is through such discussion that rapport can be developed.
Protocols described in our foregoing review have attempted to provide feed-
back on dimensions of substance use that are most relevant to young people’s
experiences. It is also helpful to seek responses from young people about their
evaluation of the relevance of feedback content and not to pursue areas of dis-
interest.
We also encounter many young people who are not particularly verbal.
Even open-ended questions often result with the response “I dunno.” As noted
elsewhere in this book, motivational interviewing, and reflective listening in
particular, may be particularly useful for less verbal clients. Yet practitioners
need to be prepared to roll with this form of resistance with adolescents. We
find ourselves providing a great deal of structure by describing what is to be
expected in the interview, how long it will take, and that we are curious about
their thoughts even if they disagree. Close-ended questions become more com-
mon as well, as simple yes–no responses can at least orient discussion in a di -
rection. Therapists are sometimes slower and quieter with less verbal clients
but not so quiet as to raise the discomfort of the interviewee.
We explore and support personal goals, even those goals that are periph-
eral or even contrary to the point of the intervention. Many adolescents and
young adults may come to the attention of a health care provider because of
substance use but have personal goals, and even concerns, about quite differ -
ent issues (e.g., peer relations or sexuality). Counselors need to be quite flexi -
ble about topics of conversation and seek to develop discrepancies between
widely diverging topics.
We keep language nonjudgmental and must be attuned to highly sensitive
concerns about criticism and judgment among young people. For example, in
a treatment setting with adults, it does not usually raise resistance to use the
word “problem.” Yet with young people, particularly when participating in
preventive programs, merely referring to alcohol or drug use as a “problem”
Motivational Interviewing with Adolescents and Young Adults 329
can elicit a defensive reaction. We strive to talk with young people about their
“choices,” their “behaviors,” and, perhaps, their “risks,” but we do not label
behaviors “problems,” “issues,” or even “concerns” unless the young person
does so first.
It is noteworthy that these clinical issues likely vary from one group to
the next, from one culture to another, and as a function of age and context for
clinical services. Young adolescents with many problems and histories of in -
volvement with criminal justice systems may feel considerable distrust for al -
most any adult. High school and college students without other difficulties,
however, often appear curious about learning about risk reduction options.
Yet this interest is often expressed only after participants have been informed
that the program seeks to be different from other health education programs.
/G44/G49/G52/G45/G43/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G53 /G46._/G4F/G52 /G54/G48/G45 /G46._/G55/G54/G55/G52/G45
Using motivational interviewing with adolescents is still relatively new. The
evaluations that have been conducted to date have largely been small pilot
studies, and not all have used control groups. As noted previously, the central
components of the style of motivational interviewing have not been evaluated
specifically. Thus, any conclusions that are drawn about the appropriateness
and effectiveness of motivational interviewing with adolescents are necessarily
tentative.
That said, the consistency among the studies reviewed earlier warrants
some optimism. Taken together, existing studies suggest that brief interven-
tion using motivational interviewing for adolescents and young adults may re-
duce risk behavior, improve program retention, and improve substance abuse
treatment outcomes. Changes in behavior have been noted within randomized
clinical trials with longitudinal follow-up. One study reports significant effects
at a 4-year follow-up (Baer et al., 2001). Studies to date have focused on only
a few clinical problems. The current focus on alcohol use is reasonable given
the associated risk to health and safety. Yet many other health risk behaviors,
such as drug use, risky sexual practices, and physical risk taking, could be tar-
geted for interventions. Studies to date have also exclusively used “check-up”
protocols as tests of motivational interviewing. Clearly, personalized feedback
and the Drinker’s Check-Up are but one application of motivational inter -
viewing.
Motivational interviewing appears particularly promising as an interven -
tion method to reach youth and young adults who are engaging in risk behav-
ior. Thus, motivational interviewing may be most helpful for the development
of selected or indicated prevention programs. However, motivational inter -
viewing may also work well as a component within comprehensive universal
prevention programs that integrate both primary prevention and indicated
prevention. For example, one recent university program on a college campus
combined media campaigns to increase perceptions of risk and lower percep -
330 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
tions of drinking norms for the general college community and provided brief
motivational interventions targeting drinking students (Miller, Toscova, Mil -
ler, & Sanchez, 2000). However, for younger adolescents and those who have
not initiated risk behavior, it is unclear how motivational interviewing might
be used in universal prevention programs. School-based prevention programs
that are most effective avoid values clarification but rather develop resistance
and other life skills in conjunction with modifying drug use norms (Botvin,
Baker, Dusenbury, Tortu, & Botvin, 1990; Hansen & Graham, 1991).
It is noteworthy that when used for indicated prevention, motivational
interviewing may also prove to be controversial. Alcohol consumption by peo-
ple under the age of 21 is illegal in the United States, as is true of the use of
other nonprescribed drugs. At least in some contexts, goal setting and risk re -
duction messages may run counter to commonly held beliefs that young peo -
ple simply should abstain from illegal behavior, and professionals should tell
young people to do so. Clearly, we disagree with this model of preventive mes-
sages. Yet all prevention work is completed within a cultural and community
context. And most drug and alcohol use prevention programs make use of so-
cial processes and integrated social influences from many quarters (Mrazek &
Haggerty, 1994). Those using motivational interviewing in a prevention con-
text will need to carefully provide rationale and garner support from other im-
portant influences in young people’s lives.
As with research on motivational interviewing generally (see Chapter 16,
this volume), there is much we do not know about how it works and what
may be the necessary and sufficient conditions for positive outcomes. Re-
search is needed that examines the structure and cognitive complexity of moti-
vational interviewing interventions for adolescents of different ages. Younger
adolescents may require more simple or structured feedback within “check-
up”-type interventions. It is also possible that there is a lower bound in ado -
lescence in terms of cognitive complexity (abstract reasoning) where motiva -
tional interviewing would not be expected to be beneficial. Research is needed
that examines values commonly held among adolescents and young adults.
For example, motivation to change substance use might be based on quite
different values (avoiding parental conflict) than among adults. Most pro -
grams already focus on short-term consequences, rather than long-term ones.
Arnett’s (2000) model of role explorations for emerging adults suggests spe -
cific values to be addressed with motivational interviewing for many young
adults. Relational issues between adolescents and motivational interviewing
clinicians (i.e., therapeutic alliance) deserve research and clinical attention as
well. We suspect that there may be great variability in this dimension among
youth, as some youth are quite alienated from traditional social systems. As
noted previously, therapeutic alliances with adolescents and young adults may
require more time, energy, and technique compared to those with adults.
Finally, we are not naïve to the “file drawer problem” in clinical research.
The literature reviewed earlier for the most part includes published studies
with positive outcomes. We are aware of at least one dissertation testing moti-
Motivational Interviewing with Adolescents and Young Adults 331
vational interviewing in college populations, with a normative (not high-risk)
sample of college students (Miller, 1999) that did not result in treatment
effects favoring a motivational interviewing treatment condition. And, there
are several tests of motivational interviewing with young people in progress
(including our own) as we write. Perhaps in another 10 years with the third
edition of motivational interviewing, a review of applications with adolescents
and young adults will reveal different conclusions and we hope a much more
refined knowledge base for clinical application.
/G41/G43/G4B/G4E/G4F/G57/G4C/G45/G44/G47/G4D/G45/G4E/G54
Work on this chapter was funded in part by Grant No. 5 R01 AA12167 from the Na -
tional Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
332 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
CHAPTER 22
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
/G77/G69/G74/G68 /G43/G72/G69/G6D/G69/G6E/G61/G6C /G4A/G75/G73/G74/G69/G63/G65 /G50/G6F/G70/G75/G6C/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73
JOEL I. D. G INSBURG,R UTH E. MANN,F REDERICK ROTGERS,
and JOHN R. WEEKES
Few would argue that the goal of maintaining a criminal justice system is to
contribute to society’s protection by identifying and intervening with individu-
als engaging in criminal behavior. Notions of punishment and retribution un -
derstandably exist within this perspective, but, at the same time, public opin -
ion polls indicate support for offender rehabilitation. Another role of the
criminal justice system is to assist offenders in changing behaviors (e.g., sub -
stance use and inappropriate sexual behavior) that contribute to their crimi -
nality, thereby reducing their risk to reoffend. In addressing these multiple
tasks, criminal justice jurisdictions around the world have developed and im -
plemented a variety of interventions to address offenders’ needs (e.g., antiso -
cial attitudes and inadequate problem-solving skills (Andrews, Bonta, &
Hoge, 1990). Cursory examination of these interventions suggests that they
vary widely in their theoretical base, approach, and likely effectiveness in fa -
cilitating behavior change.
Despite this variety, since the 1980s great strides have been made in de -
lineating the hallmark characteristics of effective correctional programs. Spe -
333
cific program recommendations have been detailed in several meta-analytic
studies, which overall support the effectiveness of programs that target crimi -
nal behavior (Andrews, Zinger, et. al., 1990; Dowden & Andrews, 2000;
Lipsey & Wilson, 1993). Many of these social learning and cognitive-behav -
ioral skills-oriented programs are delivered to higher-risk offenders. Instead of
responding to the question, “What works?” this chapter addresses the ques -
tion “What can be done to help offenders engage and remain in programs that
focus on changing criminal behavior?” Motivational interviewing, it appears,
might provide one answer to this question.
Most criminal justice workers acknowledge that offender motivation is a
critical component to the behavior change process, but our experience with
the criminal justice fields in Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United
States indicates that definitions of offender motivation and intervention prac -
tices are wide ranging. In this chapter, we first discuss motivational issues in
criminal justice settings. Second, we examine the use of motivational inter -
viewing with offenders. Emphasis is placed on applications with sexual of -
fenders and offenders with substance abuse problems. A review of selected re-
search and clinical literature is provided. Third, we discuss using motivational
interviewing as a treatment adjunct. Fourth, some possible drawbacks to us-
ing motivational interviewing with criminal justice populations are covered.
And, finally, we suggest some of the future directions that criminal justice
workers might take in this field.
/G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G53/G53/G55/G45/G53 /G49/G4E /G43/G52/G49/G4D/G49/G4E/G41/G4C /G4A/G55/G53/G54/G49/G43/G45 /G53/G45/G54/G54/G49/G4E/G47/G53
In this section we discuss issues that affect motivation for behavior change in
criminal justice clients. Motivation can be conceptualized both broadly as
readiness to change criminal behavior and more narrowly as readiness to en -
gage and participate in treatment programs. Although many longer-term out -
comes can be measured following intervention, the measure of primary inter -
est to society, and ideally the offender, is the reduction in the likelihood of
future criminal behavior.
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E /G61/G6E/G64 /G74/G68/G65 /G43/G72/G69/G6D/G69/G6E/G61/G6C /G4A/G75/G73/G74/G69/G63/G65 /G43/G75/G6C/G74/G75/G72/G65
The overarching culture that exists within criminal justice systems often hin -
ders offenders’ motivation. Traditionally, the view has been that society must
“get tough” with offenders and treat them accordingly. Many citizens view of-
fenders as less than human and thus undeserving of respect and dignity. These
sentiments, coupled with the widely and strongly held misconception that
punishment reduces recidivism, has led to “boot camp” and “scared straight”
treatment programs and regimes, which maximize the level of confrontation
and external control.
Similarly, in some correctional facilities there is a palpable adversarial re-
334 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
lationship between staff and inmates. Within these systems, there is little
meaningful social interaction. Gestures of warmth and respect (e.g., eye con -
tact, smiling, and greetings) used by institutional personnel can lead col -
leagues to label them “con lovers” or “bleeding hearts.” For instance,
Larivière and Robinson (1996) found that only 23% of Canadian federal cor-
rectional officers exhibited empathic views toward offenders. Moreover, 76%
of the sample endorsed punishment as an important correctional goal. Only
54% of the officers believed in the efficacy of rehabilitation. Similar attitudes
can be found among correctional officers in the United Kingdom (Hogue &
Mann, 2000).
In contrast, our opinion is that this strong adversarial culture tends to
lead to a “them versus us” situation, which is the antithesis to the collabora -
tive spirit of motivational interviewing. Moreover, the belief that harsh treat -
ment will be good for offenders is simply untrue (Andrews, Zinger, et al.,
1990). Rather, we believe that motivational interviewing and its focus on re -
ducing resistance has the potential to provide criminal justice workers with
skills that could increase the effectiveness of their interactions with offenders
and improve the climate of the criminal justice system which has traditionally
been moralistic, judgmental, punitive, and demeaning.
Although there will undoubtedly be some technical considerations that
may alter the practice of motivational interviewing (see Chapter 18, this vol-
ume), its basic principles remain the same: eliciting client concerns, reflecting
ambivalence, and allowing the client to develop a plan for change that best
suits him or her. In this way, the respectful, humanistic ethos that character-
izes motivational interviewing might enhance the climate of criminal justice
settings.
However, training criminal justice personnel in motivational interviewing
cannot be done halfheartedly or with scarce resources, nor will this cultural
shift occur overnight. Like other successful interventions, it will require the
support and practice of the organization, including all levels of senior manage-
ment. Indeed, the widespread adoption of motivational interviewing in crimi -
nal justice settings would, in many instances, necessitate a major shift in cor -
porate perspective from a belief in coercive control to a philosophy that
espouses treating offenders with more respect.
/G53/G65/G6C/G66/G2D/G44/G65/G74/G65/G72/G6D/G69/G6E/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E /G54/G68/G65/G6F/G72/G79 /G61/G6E/G64 /G74/G68/G65 /G43/G72/G69/G6D/G69/G6E/G61/G6C /G4A/G75/G73/G74/G69/G63/G65 /G43/G75/G6C/G74/G75/G72/G65
Self-determination theory (SDT; Ryan & Deci, 2000) provides a helpful way
of conceptualizing the motivational problems inherent in a typical criminal
justice culture that emphasizes coercive control and authoritarianism. This
theory postulates that human motivation lies along a continuum anchored at
one end by “amotivation,” where there is a distinct lack of motivation to en -
gage in new behavior, through “extrinsic motivation,” where behavior change
may occur in response to specific environmental contingencies, to “autono -
mous (or “intrinsic”) motivation,” where behavior change occurs in response
Motivational Interviewing with Criminal Justice Populations 335
to the individual’s self-determined reasons and desires. Research on SDT has
shown that when behavior change is autonomously motivated, changes are
more lasting than when change is extrinsically or nonautonomously moti -
vated. Extrinsically motivated changes tend to persist only as long as the
change-focused contingencies that prompted the changes remain in place.
According to SDT, change agents can create environments supportive of
intrinsic motivation to change by addressing three basic human needs: (1) the
need for personal autonomy or experiencing one’s behavior as determined by
oneself and under one’s own control rather than the control of external forces;
(2) the need for relatedness or believing that others value and respect one’s
thoughts, beliefs, and feelings as part of a supportive, caring group; and (3)
the need for competence or coming to believe that one’s behavior is efficacious
in producing desired outcomes.
This theoretical analysis parallels the tripartite (i.e., autonomy, collabora-
tion, and evocation) spirit of motivational interviewing discussed in Chapter 4
(this volume), in that it emphasizes a framework within which to understand
how change occurs. Further, it provides clinicians with guidelines to specific
strategies that can provide a context in which motivation can become more in-
trinsic and new behavior more lasting. The basic behaviors the clinician
should employ map onto the foregoing three basic human needs outlined. In
terms of autonomy, personal responsibility is emphasized—where the individ-
ual always has a choice of how to respond to internal and external demands.
The need for relatedness is addressed through an empathic context in which
autonomy is supported and a genuine attempt is made to consider the individ-
ual’s views, beliefs, and behavior as valid and making sense from that individ-
ual’s perspective. And, finally, competence is enhanced by reinforcing the at-
tempts and commitments the individual makes toward positive change.
Some offenders, particularly repeat offenders, are well prepared to resist
all the criminal justice system’s threats to needs for autonomy, relatedness,
and competence. They demonstrate massive reactance and become more re -
fractory to change, rather than less. But Miller (1999b) contests the opinion
that most offenders will respond only to coercive control. He compares this
mind-set with that of counselors who advocated using confrontational ap -
proaches with “alcoholics” in the recent past. Many people believe that of -
fenders are likewise an “unmotivated” group who persist in their lies and de -
nial. Thus, it follows that one would need to confront and take control, but to
what end? Offenders, like the previously misunderstood “alcoholics,” may re-
spond much better to motivational interviewing than to confrontation.
By understanding the principles of SDT and implementing strategies to
enhance autonomy, relatedness, and competence, criminal justice workers
might be able to reverse some of the damage done to offender motivation by
the criminal justice culture that is supposed to be effecting change. As Miller
(1987) noted, motivational interviewing may be a welcome alternative to a
practice in forensic settings in which problem drinkers are coerced into tradi -
tional abstinence-focused, disease-model treatment programs.
336 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E /G61/G6E/G64 /G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G55/G70/G74/G61/G6B/G65
Criminal justice contexts present several challenges to those who assist offend-
ers with behavior change, challenges quite different than the ones most coun -
selors might encounter. First, offenders are frequently mandated for treat -
ment. Some clients view a court order as prima facie coercion and an
infringement upon their rights and thus steadfastly refuse to consider behavior
change. This is not surprising given the phenomenon of reactance (Brehm &
Brehm, 1981; Miller & Rollnick, 1991). When the idea of change or treat -
ment is forced on an unwilling recipient it is not uncommon for the individual
to engage in the problem behavior to a greater extent in an attempt to assert
his or her freedom. Others simply “jump through the hoops” by participating
in programs but show little personal investment in behavior change. For ex -
ample, quite often we see clients who participate minimally in group discus -
sions and fail to complete assignments.
Second, there is the widely held notion of the captive client—that offend -
ers are imprisoned and therefore collaborating with them is unnecessary. This
perspective obviously threatens the development of rapport between offenders
and criminal justice personnel and, we think, ignores the fact that most incar-
cerated persons will be released back into society. In addition, in many cases,
the client is not the offender. The offender may receive intervention, but the
client can be the court, government, or society in general. It is important to be
aware of the client and the stakeholders in the criminal justice context because
they can have an impact on the practitioner’s work. For example, ethical con-
cerns like dual roles can arise.
Third, “correctional plans” often dictate the therapeutic goals, giving the
offender little input. These documents mandate programs to be completed by
the offender, which by definition diminish freedom of choice and responsibil -
ity, and may even contain pejorative descriptors (e.g., substance abuser and
psychopath). For example, a program recommendation might be worded as
follows: “Inmate Smith will participate in the substance abuse program be -
cause he is an alcoholic and he will change his harmful behavior by learning to
abstain from drinking and practice relapse prevention.” After reading state -
ments such as this, it is not difficult to see why offenders would be reluctant to
contemplate behavior change. Of course, labeling and treatment prescription
are not unique to criminal justice settings. But they do become more salient in
an authoritarian setting that too clearly differentiates the keeper from the
kept.
Fourth, there is the temptation to “fix” offenders by telling them what
they “should” do in such an environment. We believe that this power dynamic
tends to move individuals away from collaboration and consideration of
change. By arguing for change and telling offenders what to do, we engender
resistance behavior. This is coupled with the fact that many outside agencies
may be implicitly impinging upon the therapy session, threatening to punish
clients who do not follow correctional plans or meet imposed treatment goals.
Motivational Interviewing with Criminal Justice Populations 337
Further, peers may reinforce antisocial attitudes and behavior in an of -
fender, resulting in program refusal. Thus, the courts, the institutional milieu,
and the criminal population all exert unique pressures on offenders which
may reduce the likelihood that they will consider changing criminal behavior.
Conversely, consistent with the motivational interviewing style, we view resis-
tance as an invitation to try a different approach and work within the of -
fender’s agenda rather than the state’s or his or her peers’.
Finally, internal factors also make incarcerated clients unique. For exam -
ple, some offenders categorically deny committing an offense. Sefarbi (1990)
found that 50% of sexual offenders denied committing their offense, and
Barbaree (1991) found categorical denial in 54% of rapists and 66% of child
molesters. For these types of individuals, treatment options can be limited
(Marshall, Thornton, Marshall, Fernandez, & Mann, 2001), but Mann and
Rollnick (1996) have suggested that motivational interviewing may be a use -
ful strategy in engaging clients in some of these cases. Indeed, many offenders
welcome motivational interviewing because it respects their viewpoint and
does not force change. In our experience, badgering a client to change his or
her perspective does little to encourage behavior change, whereas respecting
the client always leaves the possibility of movement toward change.
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E /G61/G6E/G64 /G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G50/G72/G6F/G67/G72/G65/G73/G73
Understanding the role of motivation in behavior change among forensic cli-
ents is a vital clinical issue and might have large social implications. Similar to
findings in studies with alcohol-dependent persons (e.g., Ryan, Plant, &
O’Malley, 1995), Stewart and Montplaisir (1999) found that “inadequate
motivation” was most frequently the reason that offenders drop out of some
programs. Forensic practitioners have been eager to decrease program attri -
tion because evidence indicates that failure to complete treatment increases
the risk of recidivism (e.g., Hanson & Bussière, 1998). Stewart and Millson
(1995), for example, found that as motivation to address treatment needs in -
creased, release suspensions decreased. These findings underscore the conclu -
sion that treatment motivation can influence release.
A principle of effective correctional rehabilitation that has been discussed
in the context of motivation is treatment responsivity (Andrews, Bonta, et al.,
1990). Responsivity refers to treatment delivery using approaches and modali-
ties that are matched to client characteristics such as intellectual ability and
cognitive style. Unfortunately, motivation is sometimes conceptualized as a
client trait rather than a reaction to the therapist’s style. This misconception is
complicated by the widely held expectation that criminal justice personnel are
“supposed to” motivate offenders. (To us this conjures an image of a cheer -
leader or a “personal power guru” who will energize the client and spur him
or her on to great achievements.) But, at best, criminal justice personnel can
work with offenders to create a situation in which the probabilities that they
will engage in self-exploration, contemplation of change, and change talk are
338 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
increased. And in this process, we believe that motivation to change is best
elicited from clients rather than imposed on them.
An example of the impact of offender motivation on recidivism comes
from Marques, Nelson, Alarcon, and Day (2000). They examined the effec -
tiveness of the SOTEP, an inpatient sexual offender program based heavily on
the relapse prevention model, to determine why the program did not seem to
work for some individuals. Case reviews indicated that offenders who were
unsuccessful in the program exhibited a high level of motivation to avoid
rearrest and imprisonment but little motivation that was not fear-based.
“Even after considerable exposure to treatment, some offenders were still in
the early stages of change” (Marques et al., 2000, p. 326). In reality, a strong
internal commitment to abstain from sexual offending was lacking, and al -
though participants left the program with skills and strategies for avoiding
reoffending, they lacked the motivation to actually apply such strategies.
Mann (2000) has hypothesized why relapse prevention fails to affect sex-
ual offenders’ motivation to change. She noted that the conditions needed for
relapse prevention assume that motivation is already present. That is, the cli -
ent must want to avoid relapse before he or she will apply whatever skills
were learned. Thus, without a focus on motivation as a treatment target, as
many as 50% of sexual offenders can complete lengthy relapse prevention in-
terventions without any apparent increase in motivation to change their
behavior. The message is clear: Motivation must be a critical component of
offender treatment.
/G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G57/G49/G54/G48 /G4F/G46._/G46._/G45/G4E/G44/G45/G52/G53
Research over the past decade, particularly the secondary findings from Pro -
ject MATCH (Project MATCH Research Group, 1997b), have begun to sug -
gest that the authoritarian approach to prompting behavior change is less ef -
fective than those approaches that target internal motivation. One of the few
matching variables that emerged from Project MATCH suggests that relative
to other interventions used in the study, motivational enhancement therapy
(National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, 1995) is well suited for
use with clients who are initially angry.
Project MATCH is an example of a large study that included offenders in
its sample; however, separate analyses have not been reported for the offender
subgroup. Results from this subsample might support our contention that it
seems reasonable that motivational interviewing has applications with offend-
ers in forensic settings. Miller (1991) endorses using motivational interviewing
in criminal justice settings because it is brief and inexpensive relative to other
interventions and has demonstrated significant benefit in treating alcohol
abuse and other addictive behaviors. Furthermore, motivational interviewing
is adaptable for use in criminal justice settings because its fundamentals can be
taught to a variety of professionals (Rollnick & Bell, 1991; see Chapter 18).
Motivational Interviewing with Criminal Justice Populations 339
Motivational interviewing has been used with offenders in clinical trials,
but its history is brief. Much of the literature consists of recommendations
rather than empirical reports. For example, McMurran and Hollin (1993)
suggest using motivational interviewing with alcohol-abusing young offend -
ers. Annis and Chan (1983) indirectly recommend motivational interviewing
by questioning the value of intensive and highly confrontive group treatment
of offenders with alcohol and other drug problems. Murphy and Baxter
(1997) came to a similar conclusion in their discussion of treatment programs
for domestic abuse perpetrators that focus on confrontation of client defenses.
In their discussion of stage-specific interventions for batterers, Walker Daniels
and Murphy (1997) also recommend motivational interviewing strategies. In
short, motivational interviewing is being considered by some individuals as a
viable treatment alternative to confrontational strategies in criminal justice
settings.
In terms of published curricula, in the most comprehensive application of
which we are aware, Graves and Rotgers developed a group program for
substance-abusing offenders known as motivational enhancement treatment
(Jamieson, Beals, Lalonde, & Associates, 2000). This intervention was de-
signed as a precursor to a cognitive-behavioral treatment program in settings
in which the detailed information needed for individualized feedback is absent
or incomplete, and in which constraints on staff availability limit the use of in-
dividual treatment sessions. Group exercises include “Drugs on Trial,” a
mock trial that examines the pros and cons of substance use, and “The Inner
Struggle” in which participants role-play the “Devil” and an “Angel” and at-
tempt to influence a participant who is trying to maintain changes in his or
her substance-using behavior. In motivational enhancement treatment, the fa-
cilitator’s role is to enhance autonomy, relatedness, and competence in a
group setting where substance use and its consequences can be discussed and
offenders can explore whether they want to change their substance use.
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G77/G69/G74/G68 /G53/G65/G78/G75/G61/G6C /G4F/G66/G66/G65/G6E/G64/G65/G72/G73
The forensic population for whom motivational interviewing has most often
been recommended is sexual offenders. These clients share a number of char -
acteristics with substance- abusing individuals, not the least of which is a high
rate of relapse to the problem behavior. George and Marlatt (1989) set the
stage for using motivational interviewing with sexual offenders by comparing
sexual offending to addictive behaviors. Other addictions treatment ap -
proaches (e.g., relapse prevention) have been successfully imported into the
sexual offender treatment field (Laws, 1989), and motivational interviewing
may be equally applicable. Garland and Dougher (1991) first suggested that
motivational interventions could occupy a crucial role in sexual offender
treatment, and others (e.g., Kear-Colwell & Pollock, 1997) have supported
this recommendation, although empirical studies are limited.
There are two reasons why motivational interviewing might make a sig -
nificant contribution to the field of sexual offender treatment. First, motiva -
340 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
tional interviewing is a respectful, humanistic approach to working with cli -
ents, which seems particularly important for sexual offenders (Marshall,
Anderson, & Fernandez, 1999). Sexual offenders are usually the most de -
spised group of the criminal population, facing condemnation from the pub -
lic, many criminal justice personnel, and other offenders. Sexual offenders
know that they are vilified and respond by developing self-serving biases
(Bradley, 1978) such as denying or minimizing their crimes, seeing themselves
as victims, and resisting trust and collaboration with others. Thus, a successful
intervention for sexual offenders needs to communicate clearly that the client
is respected despite his or her harmful behaviors. Only with such an approach
can a sexual offender recover the self-esteem necessary to contemplate behav -
ior change (see, e.g., Marshall et al., 1999).
Second, sexual offenders often present in treatment with the same moti -
vational issues as do substance abusers. They feel angry about attending com-
pulsory treatment, frightened about what might happen, reluctant to examine
their abusive behavior and the feelings which surround it, and unwilling to re-
linquish their only sense of control in a judgmental environment, and they
have difficulty accepting responsibility for their behavior (Mann, 1996).
In other words, sexual offenders are ambivalent about engaging in treat-
ment and behavior change. Mann and Rollnick (1996) report a case study of
this type. The client did not believe that he committed an offense despite ad-
mitting to engaging in sexual intercourse with the complainant. Further, he
believed that sexual offender treatment was irrelevant. Motivational inter-
viewing was used to reevaluate his involvement in the offense, including hav-
ing him determine whether he thought he could benefit from treatment. The
intervention included assessment feedback, a shift away from labeling, an em-
phasis on personal choice, and control in deciding whether to participate in
treatment. At follow-up the client was participating in treatment and meeting
treatment goals.
Posttreatment assessment indicated a decrease in precontemplation and
increases in contemplation and action. Similarities between sexual offending
and other addictive behaviors were noted, primarily the vulnerability of the
perpetrator to blame and labeling and the need to avoid using a confronta -
tional approach. Indeed, several such case studies have been documented in a
manual published by the U.K.-based National Organisation for the Treatment
of Abusers (Mann, 1996), where sexual offenders responded well to the moti-
vational interviewing approach. Based on these case studies, the manual also
suggests initial strategies for incorporating motivational interviewing into as -
sessment and treatment. Farrall (2001) also describes an application of moti -
vational interviewing with this population.
Mann (1996) identified a range of situations in sexual offender work
where motivational interviewing might be relevant:
1. With sexual offenders in the precontemplation stage of change .
These offenders may be mandated to treatment, but they can be unwilling to
enter treatment or they completely deny committing their offenses. Using mo -
Motivational Interviewing with Criminal Justice Populations 341
tivational interviewing to create a safe environment for exploration could en -
hance contemplation in such offenders.
2. In conjunction with assessment feedback . Sophisticated tools ex -
ist for assessing sexual offenders, such as penile plethysmography (see, e.g.,
Konopasky & Konopasky, 2000) and structured risk assessment procedures
(see, e.g., Thornton, in press). These provide valuable information about risk
and treatment needs, but they do not usually incorporate the client’s agenda.
Instead, they are often used as tools to label the offender and provide some
measure of public protection. We contend that motivational interviewing can
engage sexual offenders collaboratively in risk assessment procedures (see,
e.g., Mann, Ginsburg, & Weekes, 2002; Mann & Shingler, 2001) so that the
offenders’ interests are served and the public is protected.
3. With sexual offenders who drop out of treatment or those at risk
to drop out. Mann (1996) described a case in which a sexual offender became
increasingly resistant to what he felt was the stigmatization of being in a sex -
ual offender program. Components of motivational interviewing such as em -
pathy and emphasis on personal choice were used to help the client work
through his ambivalence and continue with treatment.
4. With sexual offenders who want to change . Given the fluid na-
ture of motivation, even offenders who are distressed by their behavior and
want to change might benefit from motivational interviewing. The reexamina-
tion of ambivalence and other strategies to enhance motivation could be in-
corporated into treatment programs (see, e.g., Dempsey, 1996).
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G77/G69/G74/G68 /G4F/G66/G66/G65/G6E/G64/G65/G72/G73 /G77/G69/G74/G68 /G53/G75/G62/G73/G74/G61/G6E/G63/G65
/G41/G62/G75/G73/G65 /G50/G72/G6F/G62/G6C/G65/G6D/G73
Substance abuse has long been linked to criminal behavior. This is most obvi -
ously so because users of drugs such as heroin and cocaine are, by definition,
offenders because of the illegal nature of these drugs. Moreover, some users
engage in theft and other criminal activity so they can procure these sub -
stances. In attempting to reduce substance abuse among offenders, available
studies provide only modest evidence for the efficacy of motivational inter -
viewing.
On the one hand, some studies have shown no impact of the intervention
relative to the control condition. Amrod (1997) studied the effect of motiva -
tional enhancement therapy (National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alco -
holism, 1995) on motivation to change heavy drinking in a sample of ran -
domly assigned incarcerated alcohol abusers. Group sessions focused on
resolving discrepancies between past behavior and future goals, and eliciting
change talk. At follow-up, there was no differential effect on motivation be -
tween the intervention and no-treatment control condition. Similar null find -
ings were reported by Ferguson (1998) after using motivational interviewing
in a double-blind, randomized, attention-placebo controlled study of man -
dated DUI offenders. At follow-up, there were no significant differences be -
342 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
tween the intervention and control groups in alcohol consumption. Easton,
Swan, and Sinha (2000) targeted motivation to change substance use among
perpetrators of domestic violence. Random assignment was only mentioned
with respect to the treatment group in which subjects participated in motiva -
tional enhancement therapy (National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alco -
holism, 1995). Posttest data indicated that participants in the intervention and
control groups showed increases in taking steps to change their substance-
abusing behavior. Finally, the anticipated effects of using motivational inter -
viewing with offenders were also not observed by Kennerley (2000) when he
used a motivational intervention as a pretreatment primer for randomly as -
signed domestic abuse perpetrators. No significant differences were found be -
tween the intervention and control groups on measures of treatment atten -
dance, participation, and likelihood of graduation.
On the other hand, some studies have shown modest effects of motiva -
tional interviewing relative to control comparison groups. Ginsburg (2000)
used motivational interviewing in a prison reception and assessment center
for recently adjudicated offenders. The aim was to enhance treatment readi -
ness (stage of change) in randomly assigned offenders with symptoms of al-
cohol dependence. The intervention included the use of objective assessment
feedback and a decisional balance exercise. Relative to control participants,
offenders participating in a motivational interview showed increases in
problem recognition, and precontemplators showed increased contemplation
of their drinking behavior. The assessment center seems to be a promising
setting for using motivational interviewing because offenders are at the front
end of their sentence. Early intervention might prime them for future treat-
ment. The alternative is to refrain from intervening and to miss a potentially
important opportunity while offenders wait to be placed in a facility to
serve their sentence. Harper and Hardy (2000) reported on the use of moti -
vational interviewing by probation officers supervising substance-abusing of -
fenders. They found modest positive effects of the intervention on partici -
pants’ attitudes toward their offending, although random assignment was
not mentioned and control group participants also showed some attitudinal
improvement.
The absence of clear effects in the first series of studies might suggest that
motivational interviewing and motivational enhancement therapy might be in-
effective with substance-using offenders. However, it is also possible that the
interventions were not delivered as intended. Treatment fidelity is an ex -
tremely important consideration because it has a direct effect on treatment
outcome (see Chapter 16, this volume). It is often difficult to determine the ex-
pertise of practitioners and the integrity of their interventions from the journal
description. Moreover, it is sometimes a leap of faith to assume that practitio-
ners are competent and that interventions are delivered as intended. Similarly,
a host of other methodological issues, such as inadequate statistical power,
might have minimized the likelihood of obtaining significant findings. This
area of research is clearly in a relatively early stage of development, as is the
Motivational Interviewing with Criminal Justice Populations 343
case with so many studies of motivational interviewing in other settings (see
Chapter 16, this volume).
/G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G41/G53 /G41
/G54/G52/G45/G41/G54/G4D/G45/G4E/G54 /G41/G44/G4A/G55/G4E/G43/G54
Earlier in this chapter we noted that many offenders resist engaging in treat -
ment programs, sometimes due to poor intrinsic motivation and sometimes
due to negative external factors. One promising avenue has been related by
Saunders, Wilkinson, and Phillips (1995) who suggest that using motivational
interviewing adjunctively with other treatments can enhance the potency of
the intervention. For instance, a useful feature of motivational interviewing is
its ease of integration with existing programs such as cognitive-behavioral re -
lapse prevention to form a broader treatment framework (Bien, Miller, &
Boroughs, 1993; Miller & Rollnick, 1991; Rollnick & Morgan, 1995). Bien
and colleagues (1993) characterize brief interventions as focusing on increas -
ing problem awareness and advising change in a way that complements more
extensive cognitive-behavioral interventions. A natural progression might be
to initiate treatment with a brief intervention such as motivational interview-
ing and follow with cognitive-behavioral skills training. Indeed, Baer, Kivla-
han, and Donovan (1999) suggest exactly this approach, where skills training
and motivational interviewing are integrated. Chapter 18 notes some of the
necessary skills involved.
Of course, combining the style of motivational interviewing with other
approaches would necessitate that program delivery staff learn how, for ex-
ample, to “roll with resistance.” Although difficult for many, these recom-
mendations are consistent with current thinking on treatment style for offend-
ers (e.g., Marshall et al., 1999). In adopting the motivational interviewing
style, it is thought that resistance and reactance will be minimized and attri -
tion rates reduced.
/G50/G4F/G53/G53/G49/G42/G4C/G45 /G44/G52/G41/G57/G42/G41/G43/G4B/G53 /G54/G4F /G55/G53/G49/G4E/G47 /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C
/G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G57/G49/G54/G48 /G43/G52/G49/G4D/G49/G4E/G41/G4C /G4A/G55/G53/G54/G49/G43/G45 /G50/G4F/G50/G55/G4C/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G53
Motivational interviewing is directive but still a client-centered approach. Its
use with offenders might be of concern in light of findings discussed by
Gendreau (1996). He noted that nondirective/client-centered therapies have
generally been ineffective in reducing recidivism, but it is unclear to what ex -
tent motivational interviewing falls under this rubric. Cognitive-behavioral
skills-based programs are generally accepted as being “appropriate” for use in
criminal justice settings (Gendreau, 1996; Ross & Lightfoot, 1985), and it
bears repeating that although motivational interviewing is client centered, it is
also directive in its use of reflective listening to selectively reinforce certain cli-
344 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
ent statements such as statements of concern and change talk. Moreover, the
use of motivational interviewing with offenders does not have to be geared to-
ward reducing recidivism, though this would be a welcome outcome. Other
uses of motivational interviewing include helping offenders consider change,
commit to change, engage in treatment, and remain in treatment (see Chapter
20, this volume). If any of these aims are achieved they could ultimately con -
tribute to reducing recidivism.
Another possible concern about using motivational interviewing with of -
fenders is ethical (Miller, 1994; Rollnick & Morgan, 1995). Under what cir -
cumstances should one not use motivational interviewing? For example, is it
acceptable to use it with individuals who are not contemplating change when
we believe this to be in their best interest? If our motive is to reduce the risk of
reoffense and thereby contribute to societal protection, is this acceptable?
Chapter 12 in this volume provides a more detailed discussion of these issues,
including the case of parole and probation personnel who must take special
care in using motivational interviewing because of the power inherent in their
relationships with offenders.
Central to the ethical practice of motivational interviewing is ensuring
that those who use it are properly trained. As Chapters 13 and 14 indicate,
this requires reflection, patience, and practice. One of its limitations might be
its relative complexity, in which case consideration might be given to training
practitioners in other methods closely related to motivational interviewing
(e.g., behavior change counseling) (see Chapter 18).
/G43/G4F/G4E/G43/G4C/G55/G53/G49/G4F/G4E
As the field of criminal justice continues to evolve, agencies are looking for in-
novative and effective ways of reducing recidivism by helping offenders
change their criminal behavior. Alternatives to incarceration such as drug
courts, restorative justice, and alternative dispute resolution are being exam -
ined by jurisdictions concerned about rising prison populations, the increasing
cost of prison warehousing, and the failure of incarceration as a deterrent to
criminal behavior. But, at the same time, when incarceration must be used, an
increasing number of correctional jurisdictions have begun to look critically at
their mandate and mission and the approaches they use to effect behavior
change. Offender motivation remains a priority in the criminal justice system
given the competing motives, incentives, and punishment that face offenders.
In this process, motivational interviewing is a theoretically relevant ap -
proach that has shown some evidence of efficacy in terms of behavioral
change in this population. At this point there is a great need for further exami-
nation, implementation, and evaluation of the approach in criminal justice
settings. In this chapter, we have discussed some of the motivational issues af-
fecting offender engagement in, and completion of, treatment. More generally,
we have also been concerned with issues affecting motivation to change crimi-
Motivational Interviewing with Criminal Justice Populations 345
nal behavior. Although low intrinsic motivation is often observed in forensic
clients, we ignore at our peril the problems caused by external pressures such
as mandated treatment, antitreatment peer approval, and, antirehabilitation
criminal justice cultures. Perhaps the biggest contribution that motivational
interviewing has to offer the criminal justice domain is its focus on building
supportive relationships. These are key ingredients to the success of any inter-
vention that attempts to foster internally motivated behavior change.
Motivational interviewing holds promise for enhancing offender motiva -
tion to change criminal behavior. When used by practitioners with knowledge
of SDT, this approach highlights therapist behavior and environmental condi-
tions that could allow motivation to flourish and change to be embraced. Mo-
tivational interviewing can be used with incarcerated offenders and offenders
under community supervision. Temporary detention units provide a promis -
ing milieu for using this approach with offenders who have violated their re -
lease conditions. Successful use of motivational interviewing by parole and
probation officers, correctional officers, and other criminal justice personnel
might help offenders reintegrate more quickly and successfully in our commu-
nities.
The motivational interviewing “spirit” of encouraging choice about
behavior change in an accepting therapeutic environment is not yet a staple of
the criminal justice landscape, but it is beginning to flourish in some quarters.
Despite the promise that this approach holds for use with criminal justice pop-
ulations, we must remain cognizant that it will not work equally well with all
offenders. However, if motivational interviewing is applied with care in crimi-
nal justice settings, and scientifically evaluated, it might demonstrate that
change can be promoted in difficult circumstances.
/G41/G43/G4B/G4E/G4F/G57/G4C/G45/G44/G47/G4D/G45/G4E/G54/G53
The opinions expressed in this chapter are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the Correctional Service of Canada, the Solicitor General of Canada, and
Her Majesty’s Prison Service of England and Wales. We wish to thank Jeff Allison,
Greg Graves, Chantal Langevin, Andrea Moser, Susan Vanderburg, and Scott Walters
for their helpful comments on an earlier version of this chapter.
346 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
CHAPTER 23
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
/G77/G69/G74/G68 /G43/G6F/G75/G70/G6C/G65/G73
BRIAN L. BURKE,G EORGY VASSILEV,
ALEXANDER KANTCHELOV, and ALLEN ZWEBEN
Philosophers can tell us that it doesn’t matter what the world
thinks of us, that nothing matters but what we really are. . . . But
as long as we live with other people, we are only what other
people consider us to be. . . . It’s naïve to believe that our image
is only an illusion that conceals our selves, as the one true essence
independent of the eyes of the world. . . . Our self is a mere
illusion, ungraspable, indescribable, misty, while the only reality,
all too easily graspable and describable, is our image in the eyes
of others.
—M ILAN KUNDERA, Immortality
As highlighted in the first chapter of this book, putting the pieces of the puzzle
together regarding why people change leads to the conception of motivation
as fundamental to the process. Motivation for change not only can be influ -
enced by but, in a very real sense, arises from an interpersonal context (Chap-
ter 3, this volume). A counselor’s skilled use of motivational interviewing can
certainly affect a client, but other people in the client’s life—significant
others
1—can have an even greater influence on the client’s motivation for
347
change. This chapter presents a rationale for including significant others in the
course of motivational interviewing. Treatments designed specifically for use
with couples that have paralleled the development of motivational interview -
ing are then discussed. Finally, the chapter paints a picture, using clinical ex -
amples, of what motivational interviewing with couples might look like, in -
cluding some practical recommendations for involving the significant other in
the treatment process.
/G52/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C/G45 /G46._/G4F/G52 /G49/G4E/G56/G4F/G4C/G56/G49/G4E/G47 /G53/G49/G47/G4E/G49/G46._/G49/G43/G41/G4E/G54 /G4F/G54/G48/G45/G52/G53
/G49/G4E /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47
/G45/G6D/G70/G69/G72/G69/G63/G61/G6C /G53/G75/G70/G70/G6F/G72/G74
Allen Zweben (1991), in the first edition of this book, explored the idea of ap-
plying motivational interviewing principles in working with couples. Al -
though there has been no specific research to date on motivational interview -
ing with couples, there is evidence that involving significant others in
treatment is beneficial for a wide variety of clinical problems (e.g., Barlow,
1988). In the domain of substance abuse, including a significant other in the
therapy process leads to better retention and more favorable outcomes overall
(Miller & Heather, 1998; Zweben & Pearlman, 1983).
/G53/G6F/G63/G69/G61/G6C /G53/G75/G70/G70/G6F/G72/G74
The wide-reaching benefits of social support have been demonstrated empiri-
cally, including its relation to improved physical health (Cohen, Doyle,
Skoner, Rabin, & Gwaltney, 1997) and its ability to function as a general
buffer that shields people from the detrimental imprints of life stress (Cohen
& Willis, 1985). In accordance, it is becoming increasingly evident that social
support may be a critical variable to target in therapy, beyond the session as
well as within it. Although motivational interviewing takes support within the
session seriously, it has not yet begun to address how to extend the client’s
support system beyond the few sessions with the counselor. One way of doing
this would be to enlist the aid of the significant other in the client’s life, who
can be encouraged to provide social support by commenting favorably on the
client’s efforts to deal with the problem as well as providing ongoing help for
targeted behavior changes.
/G55/G6E/G63/G6F/G76/G65/G72/G69/G6E/G67 /G93/G48/G69/G64/G64/G65/G6E/G94 /G49/G6E/G66/G6F/G72/G6D/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E
Involving the significant other in the client’s initial assessment may provide
valuable information about the real context of the client’s life, the problematic
behavior, and the natural communication patterns of both the client and the
couple that may remain hidden in individual motivational interviewing. More-
over, the significant other can be used to provide ongoing information about
348 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
the client’s progress, which can serve as an indicator of clinical significance—
the extent to which important others are noticing the client’s behavior change.
Although research studies often make use of such collateral assessment (see
Chapter 16, this volume), this information is generally lacking in clinical prac-
tice.
/G54/G68/G65 /G49/G6D/G70/G6F/G72/G74/G61/G6E/G63/G65 /G6F/G66 /G43/G6C/G69/G65/G6E/G74 /G43/G6F/G6E/G74/G65/G78/G74
One possible shortcoming of traditional motivational interviewing is that is
does not fully take into account client context, which could be essential in
view of growing evidence linking individual problems to the interpersonal
situations in which they occur (e.g., Jacob & Leonard, 1988; McCrady &
Epstein, 1995). In some cases, the client is involved in a social network or re -
lationship that is a maintaining factor for the current problem behavior
(Shoham, Rohrbaugh, Stickle, & Jacob, 1998).
For example, the demand–withdraw couple interaction is one that has
been widely studied (Christensen & Shenk, 1991) and appears to be especially
prevalent when one partner has a drinking problem (Bepko & Krestan, 1985).
In a common scenario, a nondrinking wife pursues, criticizes, or requests
change from her drinking husband, who then withdraws or defends himself,
which leads to more demands from the wife and fuels the problem-maintain-
ing cycle (Shoham et al., 1998). One can easily see the potential frustration of
doing motivational interviewing with a client in this situation, only to have
him
2 return home to be confronted by his partner and immediately resume the
pattern of “resistant” behavior and drinking. Involving the partner in treat-
ment could afford the therapist with an opportunity to address the specific
interactional sequences that maintain the client’s problem behavior and un-
dermine motivation for change. Many clinical problems show evidence that
therapeutic benefit accrues by including a specific focus on the individual’s in-
terpersonal relations outside therapy as a fundamental component of the
treatment (Borkovec & Whisman, 1996).
The client’s significant other can deflate motivation for change in yet an-
other way: Instead of demanding that the client cease the problem behavior,
significant others in the client’s life may actively encourage him to continue
such behavior (and even engage in it with him). In Project MATCH (1997a,
1997b, 1998a), twelve-step facilitation was more efficacious than motiva -
tional enhancement therapy for clients whose social networks were highly
supportive of drinking, whereas the opposite was true for clients whose social
networks were low in support for their drinking.
3 In other words, motiva -
tional interviewing was least therapeutic when clients had important others in
their lives to reinforce the problem behavior. When individuals try to change,
the system often pushes back against them to resist such change. Working di -
rectly with client context—in the form of a significant other—could remedy
this potential shortcoming of individual motivational interviewing.
Even if the significant other is not interfering in the client’s change pro -
Motivational Interviewing with Couples 349
cess as described previously (i.e., by explicitly demanding change or support -
ing no change), she may still be helpful in identifying and removing other
practical barriers to the client’s progress. It is clear that motivation does not
lie solely within the individual but is affected by the person’s relations and en-
vironment. If those around the person express concern, offer help, and rein -
force the negative consequences of the problem in a nondemanding way, moti-
vation for change is increased (Miller & Rollnick, 1991).
/G41/G6D/G70/G6C/G69/G66/G79/G69/G6E/G67 /G74/G68/G65 /G46._/G6F/G75/G72 /G50/G72/G69/G6E/G63/G69/G70/G6C/G65/G73 /G6F/G66 /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
Involving the significant other in treatment may provide critical leverage for
the therapist in enacting each of the key principles of motivational interview -
ing: expressing empathy, developing discrepancy, rolling with resistance, and
supporting self-efficacy (Chapter 4, this volume). For example, the significant
other may help develop discrepancy for the client by providing him with con -
structive feedback (i.e., information presented in a nonblaming manner) on
the costs and benefits of the problem behavior for himself as well as for im -
portant others. One spouse, for instance, pointed out in session that her hus-
band’s inability to participate in family outings as a result of his drinking
might be causing their children to become alienated from him; she also ex-
pressed concern about the stability of their marriage if the drinking did not
change (Zweben, 1991). The underlying assumption here is that the client
may become more committed to change when highly valued interpersonal re-
lationships are threatened (Longabaugh & Beattie, 1985).
Further, conditions conducive to self-efficacy—and thus personal change—
can be reliably achieved by enlisting the assistance of significant others in treat-
ment (Bandura, 1988, 1997). With appropriate guidance, significant others can
become better than professionals at guiding the client through self-efficacy-
building mastery experiences (Moss & Arend, 1977). In addition, significant
others can remind the client of personally relevant past successes while support-
ing his current efforts to change. The significant other’s role in working with re-
sistance in motivational interviewing is discussed in some detail later.
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G77/G69/G74/G68 /G43/G6F/G75/G70/G6C/G65/G73 /G69/G6E /G74/G68/G65 /G41/G63/G74/G69/G6F/G6E /G53/G74/G61/G67/G65
/G61/G6E/G64 /G42/G65/G79/G6F/G6E/G64
In the client transition from the action stage to the maintenance stage
(Prochaska & DiClemente, 1982), Project MATCH (1997a) found that the
greatest number of clients chose spousal support as the factor most helpful in
maintaining their resolution for change. These findings are consistent with a
number of other treatment outcome and natural recovery studies (Azrin,
Sisson, Meyers, & Godley, 1982; Sobell, Sobell, & Leo, 1993). Significant
others can facilitate change plan implementation and bolster the client’s per -
ception of self-efficacy by encouraging him to make internal attributions for
progress. In maintenance activities, significant others may learn to recognize
350 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
the triggers and signs of problem relapse, thereby providing the client with an
early warning system and helping him recycle through the stages of change if
relapse does occur.
/G53/G75/G6D/G6D/G61/G72/G79
It may be beneficial to include significant others in the motivational interview-
ing process for a number of reasons. There is empirical support for involving
significant others in treatment for a wide variety of clinical problems, and the
significant other can boost the client’s social support both within and outside
the sessions, as well as provide the therapist with access to critical client infor-
mation that might otherwise remain hidden. Further, the inclusion of the sig -
nificant other in treatment allows for a careful consideration of client context
and removal of possible barriers to client change while taking into account the
interpersonal nature of motivation. Finally, the significant other can furnish
the therapist with a prime opportunity to put the four main principles of moti-
vational interviewing into practice and can continue to be helpful for the cli -
ent through the action stage and beyond.
/G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G41/G4E/G44 /G43/G4F/G55/G50/G4C/G45 /G54/G48/G45/G52/G41/G50/G49/G45/G53
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G61/G6E/G64 /G53/G79/G73/G74/G65/G6D/G73 /G54/G68/G65/G72/G61/G70/G69/G65/G73
Most couple therapies place significant therapeutic accent on such clinical
practices as direct confrontation with a client’s problematic behavior, use of
skills training, and analysis of cognitive distortions. Nevertheless, there are
two systems approaches to working with couples that explicitly apply tech-
niques for influencing client motivation and commitment for change: the MRI
model (named for the research institute at which the model was developed;
Fisch, Weakland, & Segal, 1982; Weakland & Fisch, 1992) and solution-
focused therapy (deShazer et al., 1986; O’Hanlon & Weiner-Davis, 1989).
These approaches feature several techniques and strategies that resemble those
employed in motivational interviewing. Four key similarities between these
therapies and motivational interviewing are outlined herein.
• Responding to resistance (Chapter 8, this volume) . These approaches
view resistance as an interpersonal rather than an individual variable, empha -
sizing the importance of avoiding argument and using the couple’s values and
concerns to elicit motivation for change. Specific techniques for rolling with
resistance include reframing and therapeutic paradox (which in motivational
interviewing takes the altered form of “coming alongside”).
• Honoring ambivalence (Chapter 2, this volume). These approaches of-
ten examine the symptom–system fit (i.e., how a client’s problem behavior
may be serving a vital function within the couple). In the MRI style, this gen -
erally leads to a consideration of the positive (as well as the negative) aspects
Motivational Interviewing with Couples 351
of the problem, akin to the decisional balance often used in motivational in -
terviewing.
• Supporting self-efficacy (Chapter 9, this volume). The main goal of so-
lution-focused therapy is to focus client attention on exceptions, solutions,
and strengths as much as possible, thereby enhancing self-efficacy for change.
As in motivational interviewing, confidence (i.e., whether the person is able to
change) may be specifically addressed by techniques such as repeated affirma-
tions of the client’s efforts, reviewing past successes, and imagining what mak-
ing the change might look like (termed “hypothetical change” in motivational
interviewing).
• Eliciting change talk (Chapter 6, this volume). In solution-focused ther-
apy, change talk is evoked early and often as the therapist helps clients paint a
vivid picture of change. This change is accomplished by strategies that are also
widely used in motivational interviewing, such as looking back (“Tell me
about a time when the problem did not exist”), looking forward (envisioning
a different future), and scaling questions (eliciting the client’s rating on key
variables).
Although motivational interviewing and systems therapies adopt similar strat-
egies, there are major differences between the approaches that lie beyond the
scope of this chapter, such as the skilled use of reflective listening emphasized
in motivational interviewing but not in systems therapies and the common use
of paradox in MRI but not motivational interviewing. The similarities, how-
ever, serve to bring out a key point: If strategies consistent with motivational
interviewing are already being applied successfully in couple therapies, then
motivational interviewing itself can be readily adapted for use in this domain.
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G61/G6E/G64 /G41/G63/G63/G65/G70/G74/G61/G6E/G63/G65/G2D/G42/G61/G73/G65/G64 /G43/G6F/G75/G70/G6C/G65 /G54/G68/G65/G72/G61/G70/G69/G65/G73
Ideas that parallel those espoused in motivational interviewing are also being
applied to couple therapies beyond systems approaches. Client-centered ther -
apy, one of the foundational elements of motivational interviewing (Chapter
3, this volume), has been widely used with couples for several decades
(Gaylin, Esser, Schneider, Rombauts, & Devriendt, 1990). Furthermore, there
is a new approach to working with couples that embraces both techniques for
fostering acceptance and techniques for fostering change: integrative couple
therapy (ICT; Jacobson & Christensen, 1996). The emphasis on acceptance in
ICT—through strategies such as empathic joining around the problem and
tolerance building—represents the application of a core motivational inter -
viewing construct to the field of couple therapy.
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67/G3A /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G67/G72/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E /G77/G69/G74/G68 /G41/G63/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G2D/G4F/G72/G69/G65/G6E/G74/G65/G64
/G43/G6F/G75/G70/G6C/G65 /G54/G68/G65/G72/G61/G70/G69/G65/G73
Virtually all empirically supported couple therapies to date (Baucom et al.,
1998) focus on the application of specific behavioral techniques that are best
352 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
suited for clients in the action stage of change (Prochaska & DiClemente,
1982), with little emphasis on how to prepare couples for change (i.e., how to
enhance motivation in clients who are not yet in the action stage). In light of
this, motivational interviewing can be a potentially valuable addition to the
field of couple therapy. Just as individual motivational interviewing can be
integrated with behavioral strategies once readiness for change is augmented,
in working with couples it is also possible to combine motivational interview-
ing with more action-oriented behavioral approaches.
/G54/G48/G52/G45/G45 /G52/G4F/G55/G54/G45/G53 /G54/G4F /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47
/G57/G49/G54/G48 /G43/G4F/G55/G50/G4C/G45/G53
There are many ways to apply the principles of motivational interviewing in
working with couples, but it appears to us that there are basically three for -
mats such a treatment approach could take: the significant other as a partici -
pant in the client’s individual motivational interviewing, motivational inter -
viewing applied to both partners separately in session, and motivational
interviewing specifically targeting couple interactions. Each of these possibili-
ties is discussed further herein.
/G53/G69/G67/G6E/G69/G66/G69/G63/G61/G6E/G74 /G4F/G74/G68/G65/G72 /G61/G73 /G61 /G50/G61/G72/G74/G69/G63/G69/G70/G61/G6E/G74 /G69/G6E /G74/G68/G65 /G43/G6C/G69/G65/G6E/G74/G92/G73
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
One approach to adapting motivational interviewing for use with couples is to
continue practicing individual motivational interviewing with the client while
the significant other observes or participates. Using motivational interviewing
with both partners present can help each one listen to and better understand
the other’s perspective and point of view. Motivational enhancement therapy
(MET; Miller, Zweben, DiClemente, & Rychtarik, 1992) in Project MATCH
(1997a) took essentially this approach, with the significant other included in a
maximum of two (out of four) therapy sessions.
The role of the significant other in treatment depends in part on the cou -
ple’s degree of interpersonal commitment to resolve the problematic behavior.
When the client does not perceive significant other support as important in
dealing with the problem or the significant other herself has little investment
in whether the client changes, extensive involvement of the significant other
may have little impact on subsequent outcome. In these situations, it may still
be useful for her to be a “witness” in the sessions, with her involvement lim -
ited to sharing and receiving information about the client’s problem and prog-
ress. This use of the significant other as collateral verification may help un -
cover “hidden” information and enhance the truthfulness of the client’s talk,
thereby bolstering the treatment process.
In contrast, in circumstances in which interpersonal commitment is high,
it may be beneficial for the significant other to play a more active role in the
individual-focused motivational interviewing sessions. The significant other
Motivational Interviewing with Couples 353
may be asked to share relevant information in the planning and development
of treatment goals; to collaborate constructively with the client in determining
how to attain the established goals; and, in general, to help promote the cli -
ent’s commitment to change.
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G77/G69/G74/G68 /G42/G6F/G74/G68 /G50/G61/G72/G74/G6E/G65/G72/G73
Another way to use motivational interviewing in working with couples is to
do motivational interviewing with both partners during the course of the
treatment. This approach might be useful in three different situations:
• If both partners see themselves as clients (e.g., both have the same or a
similar problem that might be treated with motivational interviewing). A
modified form of this usage has been employed by Allsop and Saunders
(1991), who found clear advantages to working with two clients simulta -
neously.
• If the stress and impairment experienced by the significant other in at -
tempting to cope with the client’s problem precludes her participation in the
client’smotivational interviewing (Moos, Finney, & Cronkite, 1990). In this
case, she may first need to attend to her own difficulties (which can done with
motivational interviewing) before she can be a support to the client.
• If the significant other is ambivalent about some of her own behaviors
that maintain the client’s problem (contributing to his depression by not
spending any time with him; protecting him from the negative consequences
of substance use; etc.). In this case, motivational interviewing with the signifi-
cant other may help resolve her ambivalence and allow her to alter these prob-
lem-maintaining behaviors.
The following mock session transcript illustrates what this approach to
motivational interviewing with couples might look like:
I
NTERVIEWER:( to significant other ) We’ve spent some time today discussing
your husband’s concerns about his weight. Now I want to hear your per-
spective. What are some of your concerns about his weight?
SIGNIFICANT OTHER: Well, the worst part for me is that he’s never home
lately. We used to enjoy doing things together, but now he’s always out
with his buddies, eating fast food and watching sports.
I
NTERVIEWER:( to significant other ) You don’t spend as much time together
anymore.
SIGNIFICANT OTHER: We’re both off doing our own things. He goes out for
food, and I go to the library to study. When we first met, we did things
together all the time. We went to the movies a few times a week and had
dinner together almost every night.
I
NTERVIEWER: But things have changed.
354 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
CLIENT: She went back to school—that’s what changed. She studies all the
time and leaves me to fend for myself.
INTERVIEWER:( to client) So you see your wife’s returning to school as quite a
big change.
INTERVIEWER:( to significant other ) And how do you see it?
SIGNIFICANT OTHER: I guess it’s true . . . I’ve become a bit of a “studyholic.” I
find it really hard to clear time for things other than school—and now
he’s never around anyways.
The interviewer might continue on this road and elicit change talk from
the wife to alter her own behaviors that may facilitate her husband’s poor eat-
ing habits, leading to an eventual summary statement to the wife as follows:
“So you’re concerned about your husband’s weight, and what worries you
most is that you don’t spend quality time together anymore like you used
to. You think it might help if you started doing things as a couple again—
perhaps going to movies or having dinner together. Part of you feels like
your husband’s going out for food with his buddies prevents you from
spending time together, but part of you feels like your own studying
sometimes gets in the way too. You really want to help your husband,
and you think that it might be an important first step for you to clear
some time to do things together once in awhile, especially around dinner-
time. You indicated that you want to try this idea over the next few
weeks and see what happens.”
The foregoing session transcript is a hypothetical (and oversimplified) ex-
ample of how motivational interviewing might be used with a significant other
to get her to change a behavior (i.e., studying all the time) that might be con -
tributing to the client’s problem while allowing her to share her own perspec-
tive on the situation. In its use with couples, motivational interviewing can
target not only a single significant other behavior but also a complex pattern
of interconnected behaviors, as described further below.
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67 /G54/G61/G72/G67/G65/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G43/G6F/G75/G70/G6C/G65 /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G61/G63/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73
A third approach to motivational interviewing with a couple is to focus on the
dyadic interaction sequences that maintain the problem behavior. One way to
target problematic patterns of communication within the couple is to explore
alternate ways of interacting, which can be accomplished by teaching the cou-
ple how to practice motivational interviewing with each other . For instance,
frequently neither partner in the distressed couple feels listened to or sup -
ported by the other. Teaching each member of the couple how to communi -
cate in a motivational interviewing style can help break this and other dys -
functional patterns, like the demand–withdraw interaction described earlier.
There is a mounting body of knowledge regarding how people learn the
Motivational Interviewing with Couples 355
interpersonal style of motivational interviewing (Chapters 13 and 14, this vol-
ume) that suggests how to incorporate it as a component of treatment. As
usual, it is not forced onto clients but, rather, gently introduced as one viable
option to consider. Here is a hypothetical session transcript of how this might
proceed:
I
NTERVIEWER:( to significant other ) So far, we have talked about your hus -
band’s smoking and his concerns. I would also like to know: What do
you do when your husband smokes?
SIGNIFICANT OTHER: Usually I talk to him about it. . . . If I keep quiet, I end
up feeling resentful. So I try to convince him that he shouldn’t smoke so
much, that it’s not the right thing to do.
C
LIENT: She can be a real nag sometimes.
INTERVIEWER:( to significant other ) And what happens when you do that?
SIGNIFICANT OTHER: Well, he often goes away—into the basement or his
study—and I suppose he keeps smoking.
INTERVIEWER:( to significant other) It’s difficult for you to know how to help
him with this.
SIGNIFICANT OTHER: Exactly—it’s very frustrating sometimes.
INTERVIEWER:( to significant other) I have another idea that people sometimes
find useful for bringing about change in situations like this. Would you
like to hear it?
In this session, once the interviewer has identified a demand–withdraw
sequence, it might be helpful to introduce alternate, motivational interview -
ing-consistent ways of responding for both members of the couple—for exam -
ple, teaching the wife to support instead of demand, which might decrease the
husband’s withdrawing (“resistant”) behaviors, or teaching the husband to
provide empathy and support to his wife and see behind the “nagging.” Note,
however, that there does not have to be a demand–withdraw or any negative
interaction sequence present for significant others to learn the skills and tech -
niques of motivational interviewing and become more effective partners in the
change process (Miller & Heather, 1998).
These new patterns and ways of interacting might be taught to the couple
in much the same way as motivational interviewing is taught to counselors. It
is not merely a technical matter but a matter of eliciting the learner’s own per-
spective on the potential value of motivational interviewing, listening to their
concerns and reservations about the method, and addressing the heart of their
everyday experiences (e.g., their basic interactions with their partners). In
other words, the intrinsic motivations of both client and significant other to
learn motivational interviewing need to be attended to and enhanced. Once
this is accomplished, the learning can take place through practice (such as
356 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
role-play exercises in session) with recurrent feedback from the therapist to
guide the couple’s progress.
Teaching a client’s significant other how to use motivational interviewing
is far more complex than teaching the same approach to a counselor. In the
former case, the significant other may have difficulty being detached from the
client’s outcome because it has a direct effect on her own life. As discussed
elsewhere in this volume (Chapter 12), motivational interviewing must be
used with care when someone has a personal investment in which direction
the client takes, even if that investment is not in conflict with what is in the cli-
ent’s best interest.
/G53/G75/G6D/G6D/G61/G72/G79
Motivational interviewing can be used with couples in various formats: the
significant other as a participant in the client’s individual motivational inter -
viewing, motivational interviewing applied to both partners separately in ses -
sion, and motivational interviewing specifically targeting couple interactions.
Because many cases involve a combination of an individual with a problem
(e.g., substance abuse) and an interactional, couple-level variable (e.g., de-
mand–withdraw sequence), these three formats can be used in conjunction
with one another as well as in combination with a more traditional (i.e., one-
on-one) motivational interviewing approach.
/G50/G52/G41/G43/G54/G49/G43/G41/G4C /G52/G45/G43/G4F/G4D/G4D/G45/G4E/G44/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G53 /G46._/G4F/G52 /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C
/G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G57/G49/G54/G48 /G43/G4F/G55/G50/G4C/G45/G53
Regardless of how motivational interviewing is used with a couple, there are
similar decisions to be made and challenges to be met throughout the process.
This section offers practical recommendations for doing motivational inter -
viewing with a couple, addressing whether to invite the significant other into
the treatment and how to join with the couple, form a consensus about goals,
promote relationship cohesion, and work with different types of resistance
that may arise along the way.
/G49/G6E/G76/G69/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G74/G68/G65 /G53/G69/G67/G6E/G69/G66/G69/G63/G61/G6E/G74 /G4F/G74/G68/G65/G72 /G69/G6E/G74/G6F /G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74
The practicalities of involving the significant other in the treatment process
are of the utmost importance. The first determination to be made is whether
there is a suitable significant other in the client’s life, someone the client values
and with whom he is interpersonally invested (Longabaugh, Beattie, Noel,
Stout, & Malley, 1993). Because clients often have more than one significant
other
1 in their lives, it is essential to explore all potential candidates so that
the possibility of involving a detrimental person in the treatment can be di -
minished. Once an appropriate candidate has been identified, the client is
Motivational Interviewing with Couples 357
asked for permission to involve her in the treatment process with a careful ex-
planation of the associated rationale. Motivational interviewing strategies can
be employed to address client concerns about such involvement, using open-
ended questions followed by reflective listening, as well as decision balancing
(e.g., “What is the worst and best thing that could happen if your significant
other attends the session?”).
Significant other involvement is generally postponed if the client remains
ambivalent about it, although one option is to invite the candidate into treat -
ment on a limited (trial) basis, with the opportunity to reconsider if it does not
prove helpful. Finally, the timing of the significant other’s involvement in
treatment may be critical; for instance, such involvement may not be benefi -
cial for precontemplative clients, as these clients might feel pressured and
overwhelmed if both counselor and significant other offer feedback about
their problem.
During the initial meeting with a couple, it is important to compliment
their commitment to work together and clarify the roles and expectations of
each partner. The rationale for including the significant other in treatment is
reviewed, while stressing the client’s personal choices and responsibility for
behavior change. This first session also creates a unique opportunity to ob-
serve the couple’s interactional patterns and test the real level of the signifi-
cant other’s commitment to support the client’s process of change.
/G4A/G6F/G69/G6E/G69/G6E/G67 /G77/G69/G74/G68 /G74/G68/G65 /G43/G6F/G75/G70/G6C/G65
The same early methods employed in individual motivational interviewing are
also useful in attempting to join with a couple: asking open questions, listen-
ing reflectively, affirming, summarizing, and eliciting change talk. In working
with a couple, these methods are used with both partners while the counselor
expresses empathy to each one. The therapist can affirm the significant other’s
efforts to help the client in the past as well as, if appropriate, the steps she un-
dertook to initiate the current treatment process. While the significant other’s
own concerns are specifically addressed, she can also be enlisted as a support
to the client throughout the session. For example, in building self-efficacy for
change, the counselor can ask the significant other of an agoraphobic client
the following:
“Have you noticed any changes in your husband that you believe to be
encouraging?”
“Are you aware of times when your husband has been able to success -
fully conquer his fears?”
“What have you found to be most helpful to your husband in terms of
changing his agoraphobic behavior?”
In exploring these areas with the couple, the therapist strives to make the
significant other feel involved and valued in the treatment process and to in -
still an optimistic attitude toward change in both partners.
358 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
/G46._/G6F/G72/G6D/G69/G6E/G67 /G61 /G43/G6F/G6E/G73/G65/G6E/G73/G75/G73 /G61/G62/G6F/G75/G74 /G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G47/G6F/G61/G6C/G73
There comes a point in motivational interviewing—whether with an individ -
ual or a couple—when it is time to shift approach, with the goal changing
from enhancing importance and confidence to strengthening commitment to a
change plan (Chapter 10, this volume). When a supportive significant other is
being asked to assist the client in changing his problem behavior, it is valuable
to forge a consensus between the two partners at this critical stage. The tech -
niques and style of motivational interviewing are particularly warranted at
this step, because the development of the change plan is a process of shared
decision making and negotiation—between three people now rather than
two—that involves setting goals, considering options, arriving at a plan, and
eliciting commitment. Though consensus is valuable, it is by no means essen -
tial: The chief role of the significant other is to assist the client in generating
his own solutions for change by providing constructive input and support,
thereby helping the client derive maximum benefit from treatment.
/G50/G72/G6F/G6D/G6F/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G52/G65/G6C/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G73/G68/G69/G70 /G43/G6F/G68/G65/G73/G69/G6F/G6E
As discussed previously, the client’s significant other is especially helpful in the
treatment process if she can function as a source of social support, thereby
providing a natural helping relationship in the client’s life. An ongoing aim of
motivational interviewing with a couple, therefore, is to promote relationship
cohesion and satisfaction—particularly between partners who already evi-
dence strong interpersonal ties—in order to consolidate the client’s commit-
ment to change (Edwards & Orford, 1977). Specific goals for the relationship
can be explicitly addressed, such as engaging in shared activities (e.g., vaca-
tions) that can improve the quantity and quality of couple interactions.
/G57/G6F/G72/G6B/G69/G6E/G67 /G77/G69/G74/G68 /G52/G65/G73/G69/G73/G74/G61/G6E/G63/G65
A basic difference between motivational interviewing with one individual and
with a couple is that in the latter case there are three possible sources of resis -
tance: the client, the significant other, and the couple as a whole.
/G55/G73/G69/G6E/G67 /G74/G68/G65 /G53/G69/G67/G6E/G69/G66/G69/G63/G61/G6E/G74 /G4F/G74/G68/G65/G72 /G69/G6E /G57/G6F/G72/G6B/G69/G6E/G67 /G77/G69/G74/G68 /G74/G68/G65 /G43/G6C/G69/G65/G6E/G74/G92/G73 /G52/G65/G73/G69/G73/G74/G61/G6E/G63/G65
Because resistance is shaped by interpersonal interactions, it is critical to as -
sess the significant other’s role in evoking resistance from the client during the
session. If necessary, the treatment can includ e a specific focus on any resis-
tance-promoting relational patterns (e.g., demand–withdraw and confront–re-
sist), teaching the couple how to do motivational interviewing with one an -
other as described previously.
If the significant other is not contributing to the client’s resistance in ses-
sion, she can often play an important role in helping him become more com -
mitted to change. For instance, feedback is usually more meaningful to the cli-
Motivational Interviewing with Couples 359
ent when it is verbalized by the significant other rather than the therapist. This
feedback can be elicited by the following questions:
“What have you noticed about [the client’s] problem?”
“How has the problem behavior affected the situation at home?”
“Has anything changed to cause you to become more concerned about
the problem?”
Having the significant other deliver these important messages in a
nonconfrontational manner can be valuable in diminishing the client’s resis -
tance and enhancing motivation for change.
There may be instances, however, in which the significant other is full of
“action” talk while the client remains ambivalent. In these cases, it may be
useful for the therapist to soften the significant other’s feedback and prevent
the session from proceeding into the action stage before the client is ready.
/G41 /G52/G65/G73/G69/G73/G74/G61/G6E/G74 /G53/G69/G67/G6E/G69/G66/G69/G63/G61/G6E/G74 /G4F/G74/G68/G65/G72
The significant other’s involvement in treatment may be counterproductive if
she is uncommitted to change (Longabaugh et al., 1993) or overburdened
with anger and resentment. Relationship problems (e.g., marital discord) that
might be affecting the client’s problem behavior can be addressed in a motiva-
tional interviewing style, but preferably after the main treatment target is
thoroughly examined. In a situation in which the involvement of the signifi-
cant other may be interfering with the motivational process, her role can be
limited to being a bystander or “witness” in the client’s individual sessions.
/G41 /G52/G65/G73/G69/G73/G74/G61/G6E/G74 /G43/G6F/G75/G70/G6C/G65
Couples who appear to be unresponsive to motivational interviewing usually
evidence a negative pattern of interaction (Zweben, 1991), tending to blame,
criticize, and harass each other in the sessions—a situation that can increase
the client’s resistance to change or cause him to leave treatment prematurely.
A primary objective in this case is to reduce the negative interactions by teach-
ing the couple how to do motivational interviewing with one another, as dis -
cussed in detail earlier.
/G43/G4F/G4E/G43/G4C/G55/G53/G49/G4F/G4E/G53
This chapter has provided an overview of the current state of motivational in-
terviewing strategies for working with couples. Empirical and clinical evidence
so far suggest that significant other involvement may lead to improved reten -
tion in treatment and better outcomes for a wide variety of clinical problems.
360 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
This is consistent with the motivational interviewing conception of the impor-
tance of the social context in achieving and maintaining change.
For motivational interviewing to fulfill its potential in working with cou -
ples, this area requires further clinical precision and development. Key issues
remain, such as whether and how to involve the significant other in treatment
for a given client, as well as the specifics of using motivational interviewing to
address interactional sequences rather than merely individual behaviors. Re -
search efforts are needed to evaluate the efficacy of motivational interviewing
with couples, to better understand the influence of the significant other’s pres-
ence on the dynamics of client motivation, and to further delineate the thera -
peutic traps specific for motivational interviewing in this domain.
/G4E/G4F/G54/G45/G53
1. A significant other can be a spouse, partner, or any other key member in the client’s
life, such as a family member or friend. In this chapter, we use the term “couple” to
denote any of the foregoing relationships.
2. A note on pronoun use: For convenience, we will be referring to the client as “he”
and the significant other as “she” in this chapter, as this is the most common sce-
nario in the case of substance abuse and dependence (where motivational interview-
ing was first developed). However, the principles outlined in this chapter are meant
to apply to clients or significant others of any gender, as well as to a broad range of
clinical problems.
3. For more details on Project MATCH, see Chapter 16 in this volume.
Motivational Interviewing with Couples 361
CHAPTER 24
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
/G69/G6E /G74/G68/G65 /G54 /G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G6F/G66 /G44/G75/G61/G6C /G44/G69/G73/G6F/G72/G64/G65/G72/G73
NANCY HANDMAKER,M ICHELE PACKARD, and KELLY CONFORTI
Problems with adherence are common complaints among treatment providers.
Few client populations show more serious problems with adherence than do
persons with either addictions or mental illness, evidenced by the necessity for
such extreme interventions as involuntary commitment, incarceration, and
court-mandated treatment. When persons have both substance use and mental
illness simultaneously, the problems with treatment adherence are com -
pounded. Recent studies on applications of motivational interviewing show
promise for enhancing treatment adherence and retention among persons with
comorbid substance use and mental disorders. This chapter reviews develop -
ments in motivational interviewing with this challenging population.
The coexistence of psychiatric and substance use disorders is commonly
referred to as dual disorders. Epidemiological studies have shown that the
likelihood of having a substance use disorder is higher among persons with
a mental health disorder than in the general population. The rates are high -
est among persons with severe and chronic mental illness such as schizo -
phrenia and bipolar affective disorder. Lifetime prevalence rates of sub -
stance use disorders among persons with schizophrenia (48%) or bipolar
362
affective disorders (58%) are more than three times the rate for the general
population (Regier et al., 1990). Estimates of recent or current substance
use disorders among mentally ill treatment samples have ranged from 20 to
65% (Mueser, Bennett, & Kushner, 1995; Regier et al., 1990). These high
rates of comorbidity are of concern as substance abuse compromises the
efficacy of neuroleptic medication and enhances the activity of the dopamin -
ergic system, thereby exacerbating psychiatric symptoms and often causing
hospitalization (Bellack, 1992). Substance abuse also increases the risk for
adverse drug reactions, including accidental overdoses. Moreover, the use of
alcohol and illicit drugs impairs cognitive functioning. Because most psychi -
atric disorders have attendant problems with judgment, attention, and mem -
ory, substance use further impairs already compromised reasoning abilities,
increasing the risk for harm among persons with mental disorders (Bellack
& DiClemente, 1999). Alcohol and drug use among the mentally ill exacer -
bates all the negative outcomes associated with severe mental illness such as
homelessness, incarceration, joblessness, poverty, infectious diseases, vio -
lence, and suicide (Mueser, Drake, & Noordsy, 1998). Persons with sub -
stance use disorders are less adherent with psychosocial and pharmacologi-
cal interventions (Jerrell & Ridgely, 1995) than others who are engaged in
mental health care. Consequently, they tend to use more costly services such
as emergency room visits and hospitalizations.
Despite the high rates of comorbidity of mental and substance use disor-
ders and related problems and costs, historically there has been a lack of coor-
dination in the treatment of dual disorders. For years substance use disorders
have been treated by professionals in systems that were separate from mental
health treatment. Separate treatment systems have been largely ineffective in
treating dual disorders. Prospective studies of alcohol and drug treatment
have consistently reported poorer outcomes for persons with psychiatric
symptoms (e.g., Project MATCH Research Group, 1997a). Similarly, persons
with severe mental disorders who abuse alcohol or drugs show worse out -
comes in mental health treatment settings (Mueser & Noordsy, 1996). The
lack of coordination between the two (substance abuse and mental health
treatment) service systems has led to poor treatment engagement, high drop -
out rates, and relapse among the dually diagnosed.
Experts have generally agreed since the mid-1980s that persons with dual
disorders are served best by care that integrates substance abuse treatment
with mental health treatment. In an integrated approach, alcohol and drug
treatments are incorporated into existing psychiatric, nursing, counseling, and
case management services provided by multidisciplinary teams within commu-
nity mental health treatment programs (Mercer-McFadden, Drake, Brown, &
Fox, 1997). A primary assumption of integrated treatment is that long-term
care leads to the greatest improvement and stabilization among persons with
dual disorders. A second assumption of an integrated treatment approach for
dual disorders is that treatment should address the ongoing changes in client
motivation to reduce substance use. Thus, recommendations for integrated
Motivational Interviewing in Treatment of Dual Disorders 363
treatment include a longitudinal perspective that accommodates shifts in client
commitment to treatment and/or sobriety.
A comprehensive review of treatment outcomes over the past decade
(Drake, Mercer-McFadden, Mueser, McHugo, & Bond, 1998) revealed that
integrated care shows only a modest advantage over nonintegrated treat -
ment. Although integrated models are arguably the best models of treat -
ment, engagement and retention remain issues and treatment programs con -
tinue to show high dropout rates, as great as 83% in one study of
residential treatment (Drake et al., 1998). However, when dually disordered
clients were successfully engaged in an integrated treatment program, they
showed significant improvement. Furthermore with the benefits of mental
health care increased, clients remain in treatment longer. Extended partici -
pation in treatment of 18 months or longer was associated with significant
reductions of substance abuse, reductions in hospital use, and improve -
ments in psychosocial outcomes. Therefore, a major focus for increasing
success in treatment of dual disorders is engaging clients in long-term out -
patient care.
/G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47 /G57/G49/G54/G48 /G54/G48/G45
/G44/G55/G41/G4C/G4C/G59 /G44/G49/G41/G47/G4E/G4F/G53/G45/G44
Recent pilot research in motivational interviewing has shown positive results
in increasing treatment engagement and adherence with dual disorders. Moti-
vational interviewing has been applied in at least three areas of adherence that
affect engagement in outpatient care: inpatient settings, outpatient settings,
and medication adherence. Although findings are mixed in studies of medica-
tion adherence, other studies have shown the potential benefits of motiva -
tional interviewing. Overall, application of these methods are yet to be fully
tested, but initial findings are thus far consistent with reported effects of moti-
vational interviewing.
/G54/G72/G61/G6E/G73/G69/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G69/G6E/G67 /G66/G72/G6F/G6D /G49/G6E/G70/G61/G74/G69/G65/G6E/G74 /G74/G6F /G4F/G75/G74/G70/G61/G74/G69/G65/G6E/G74
Individuals with dual disorders are more frequently hospitalized and spend
more days in inpatient units than do individuals with mental disorders who do
not drink or use drugs. After becoming stabilized in a psychiatric hospital, cli-
ents with dual disorders are less likely to follow through with initial outpa -
tient sessions (Axelrod & Wetzler, 1989; see Chapter 20). For example, as
part of a quality assurance review, clinicians found that persons with comor -
bid depression and a substance use disorder complied with their initial outpa -
tient appointment at half the rate as those who did not have a substance use
disorder (Daley & Zuckoff, 1998), which was about half the rate of referrals
directly from the community. Thus, clients with the worst symptomalogy and
impairment have been shown to be at the greatest risk of failing to enter treat-
364 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
ment following discharge. This pattern of service use is costly and frustrates
providers because the lack of engagement in outpatient care increases the risk
for relapse and future inpatient admissions.
Three studies published in the late 1990s have shown that a motiva -
tional interview session during a psychiatric hospitalization increased rates
of client engagement with outpatient treatment (Daley, Salloum, Zuckoff,
Kirisci, & Thase, 1998; Daley & Zuckoff, 1998; Swanson, Pantalon, & Co -
hen, 1999). Daley and Zuckoff (1998) found that a motivational interview
several days prior to discharge from a psychiatric inpatient unit nearly dou -
bled the rate of adherence with the initial outpatient session from 35% to
67% among dually disordered clients during their study period. Daley and
his colleagues (1998) replicated these findings in a pilot study of motiva -
tional interviewing for a group at significant risk for rehospitalization—indi -
viduals with comorbid depressive disorder and cocaine dependence. As in
the earlier study, results showed that clients with comorbid depression and
cocaine dependence who were consecutively assigned to receive a motiva -
tional interview session prior to discharge were more likely to attend their
first session. The third study showed an effect of motivational interviewing
on adherence with aftercare among 121 psychiatric inpatients, 77% of
whom had concomitant substance use disorders (Swanson et al., 1999). In
this study, a two-session motivational intervention more than doubled (42%
vs. 16%) the rate of adherence with an initial outpatient session following
discharge. Inpatients randomly assigned to the motivational interview group
completed the University of Rhode Island Change Assessment Scale (URICA;
McConnaughy, DiClemente, Prochaska, & Velicer, 1989), a measure of
treatment readiness at intake. They were then provided a 15-minute scripted
feedback session on their URICA scores. Prior to discharge, the motiva-
tional interview group received a second hour-long session. The second
session was an open-ended motivational interview that focused on the rela -
tionship between the patient’s current mental conditions and treatment
readiness at the onset of hospitalization.
The three foregoing studies showed significant increases in adherence
with outpatient treatment following a motivational interview as part of inpa -
tient care. Aftercare attendance rates were doubled by addressing readiness
for outpatient treatment and obstacles to treatment as part of inpatient care in
a motivational interviewing style. The lack of randomly assigned control
groups in two of these studies and the small sample sizes limit their
generalizability. However, these findings suggest that a motivational interview
session prior to discharge is likely to increase client engagement in an initial
outpatient session.
/G45/G6E/G68/G61/G6E/G63/G69/G6E/G67 /G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G41/G64/G68/G65/G72/G65/G6E/G63/G65
In a pilot study with dually diagnosed outpatients (Martino, Caroll, O’Malley,
& Rounsaville, 2000), subjects randomly assigned to receive a preadmission
Motivational Interviewing in Treatment of Dual Disorders 365
45–60-minute motivational interview as a prelude to a partial hospitalization
program (outpatient day hospital program) showed better attendance patterns
than did subjects who received the standard preadmission interview. The mo -
tivational interview included feedback from preadmission questionnaires,
which included measures of psychiatric symptoms, ratings on severity of alco-
hol and drug use, and recent alcohol and drug use, and a decisional balance
activity. A second pilot study (Graeber, Moyers, Griffith, Guajardo, &
Tonigan, 2000) compared three 60-minute motivational interviewing sessions
with three educational treatment sessions for persons with concomitant alco -
hol disorders and schizophrenia who were already engaged in either outpa -
tient or inpatient programs. The motivational interview included “check-up”
feedback and when appropriate, strategies for initiating and maintaining
changes in drinking. The didactic sessions focused on phases and signs of
alcoholism, cognitive-behavioral strategies for improving self-esteem and self-
efficacy to reduce drinking. At 4- and 8-week follow-ups, both groups reduced
their alcohol consumption, but the group that received the motivational ses -
sions had significantly fewer drinking days than did the educational interven -
tion group during the follow-up periods. No differences were found between
groups on total drinks consumed or estimated peak blood alcohol levels.
Despite the small sample size, moderate to large treatment effects ( d = .53)
were found for the motivational intervention. These clients were more likely
to complete 30 and 90 days of outpatient treatment. They also attended more
treatment sessions and were rehospitalized less often than a treatment-
as-usual group consisting of clients with the same diagnoses. Furthermore, 9
of the 11 motivational interview clients had continuous sobriety and lower
self-reports of depressive symptoms during the first 30 days of outpatient
treatment.
These two studies suggest that the motivational interviewing holds prom-
ise for improving outpatient treatment engagement and related outcomes. The
impact on attendance rates was only modest in the first study, but previous re-
search suggests that abstinence-oriented, restrictive programs, such as partial
hospitalization, generally have poorer adherence rates for this population
(Drake et al., 1998). The second study (Graeber et al., 2000) is the first to
demonstrate that motivational interviewing as an adjunct to outpatient treat -
ment improves short-term drinking outcomes with persons with severe and
chronic mental disorders. Both studies were limited by small sample sizes.
However, the moderate to large effect size of motivational interviewing on
drinking days is noteworthy given the limited sample size and that the partici-
pants were significantly impaired.
/G4D/G65/G64/G69/G63/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E /G41/G64/G68/G65/G72/G65/G6E/G63/G65
Medication adherence is an important determinant of treatment outcome for
individuals with a serious mental illness (Kemp, Hayward, Applewhaite,
366 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
Everitt, & David, 1996). Individuals with serious mental illness are often
more ambivalent about taking medication than any other issue. Obstacles to
medication adherence include lack of patient recognition of the need for medi-
cation, side effects of medications, ongoing substance abuse, cognitive impair-
ment, and motivational deficits (Bellack & DiClemente, 1999; Owen, Fischer,
Booth, & Cuffel, 1996).
At least two studies have failed to show that motivational interventions
increased the rate of adherence in mentally ill individuals. In one study, a du -
ally diagnosed group of psychotic and mood-disordered clients received either
a preadmission motivational interview or a standard preadmission interview.
There were no differences between the two groups on medication adherence
(Martino et al., 2000). In another study, 21 hospitalized patients were ran -
domly assigned to receive two to three half-hour sessions of medication self-
management conducted in a motivational interviewing framework. Physicians
rated patient compliance at 1 to 2 months after discharge. Again no differ -
ences were noted between the group that received the motivation-based inter -
vention and those that did not.
Other studies conducted in the United Kingdom with larger sample sizes
did find that an adapted motivational interviewing intervention produced
better outcomes. In one study, 47 male and female hospitalized subjects were
randomly assigned to receive “compliance therapy” or routine supportive
counseling. The “compliance therapy” intervention was drawn from the prin-
ciples of motivational interviewing and cognitive treatment of psychosis. The
authors felt it was not fair to label their intervention “motivational interview-
ing” because the subject of medication compliance was brought up regardless
of whether the patient saw it as a problem. Nevertheless, elements of motiva-
tional interviewing used in the study included the decisional balance, explora-
tion of ambivalence, development of discrepancy, and affirmation of adaptive
behaviors. As such, the study fits the rubric identified by Burke, Arkowitz,
and Dunn (Chapter 16, this volume) as an adaptation of motivational inter -
viewing. Subjects in the intervention group received four to six sessions of
compliance therapy, twice weekly, for 20–60 minutes. Outcome measures
were collected at discharge from the hospital and at 3-month and 6-month
follow-up. Compliance rates in the intervention group steadily improved over
time, while those of the control group remained relatively unchanged through
the three follow-up periods. At the 6-month follow-up, the intervention group
had 23% higher rates of compliance. Attitudes toward medication were at
their highest right after the intervention and had begun to decline in both
groups by 1-month follow-up, though the intervention group did have signifi-
cantly better attitudes toward medication. The intervention group steadily
gained in insight at 3- and 6-month follow-up, while the control group had
begun to decline by 6-month follow-up. There were no differences in global
assessment of functioning (GAF) between the two groups at the point at
which they were discharged from the hospital. However, GAF in the interven-
Motivational Interviewing in Treatment of Dual Disorders 367
tion group continued to improve at 3-month follow-up, while that of the con-
trol group had begun to decline. GAF in both groups was beginning to decline
by 6-month follow-up, though the intervention group fared significantly
better (Kemp et al., 1996). A subsequent study by the same group confirmed
findings of the earlier study. The second study randomly assigned 74 patients
to compliance therapy versus a control condition. At 18-month follow-up the
compliance-therapy group had greater rates of retention, better insight, better
attitudes to treatment, better compliance, lower rates of rehospitalization, and
more improvement in GAF over time (Kemp, Kirov, Everitt, Hayward, & Da-
vid, 1998).
/G53/G54/G52/G41/G54/G45/G47/G49/G45/G53 /G46._/G4F/G52 /G49/G4E/G43/G52/G45/G41/G53/G49/G4E/G47 /G41/G44/G48/G45/G52/G45/G4E/G43/G45
/G57/G49/G54/G48 /G4F/G55/G54/G50/G41/G54/G49/G45/G4E/G54 /G54/G52/G45/G41/G54/G4D/G45/G4E/G54
/G52/G61/G69/G73/G69/G6E/G67 /G41/G77/G61/G72/G65/G6E/G65/G73/G73 /G6F/G66 /G4E/G6F/G6E/G61/G64/G68/G65/G72/G65/G6E/G63/G65 /G6F/G6E /G50/G73/G79/G63/G68/G69/G61/G74/G72/G69/G63 /G53/G79/G6D/G70/G74/G6F/G6D/G73
During an inpatient hospitalization, a client has time to explore his or her life
events without the complicating effects of alcohol or illicit drugs. This pro-
vides an opportunity for the clinician to raise awareness of the relation of
treatment nonadherence and the resulting crisis. Common elements of success-
ful pilot studies of motivational interviewing with inpatients included the fol-
lowing to increase treatment adherence:
• Affirming the recognition of problems and the need for help.
• Exploring the client’s reasons for not using treatment services.
• Exploring client role in improving.
• Discussing treatment options.
/G45/G6C/G69/G63/G69/G74/G69/G6E/G67 /G50/G72/G6F/G73 /G61/G6E/G64 /G43/G6F/G6E/G73 /G6F/G66 /G54/G72/G65/G61/G74/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G4E/G6F/G6E/G61/G64/G68/G65/G72/G65/G6E/G63/G65
Client commitment to attending a first session can also be elicited by examin -
ing the pros and cons of treatment nonadherence. Emphasizing the preserva -
tion of personal liberties through the use of outpatient services versus the re -
strictions of inpatient hospitalization have been shown to elicit statements of
intent or desire to engage in less invasive outpatient care (e.g., “When you are
hospitalized, you lose your freedom to act and move about. What is that like
for you? How can this be avoided in the future?”). Another strategy for evok-
ing self-motivational statements about attending an initial outpatient session
is to ask open-ended questions about how the recent crisis was related to
nonadherence with an ongoing treatment program, (“Who or what could
have helped you prevent this setback?”). The process of such an interview
might be summarized in a decisional balance exercise, which elicits the rea -
sons for using treatment versus not using treatment, including obstacles to
care. Box 24.1 illustrates a decisional balance summary during an inpatient
hospitalization.
368 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
/G42/G55/G49/G4C/G44/G49/G4E/G47 /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E /G46._/G4F/G52 /G43/G48/G41/G4E/G47/G45 /G49/G4E
/G53/G55/G42/G53/G54/G41/G4E/G43/G45 /G55/G53/G45
/G4F/G70/G65/G6E/G2D/G45/G6E/G64/G65/G64 /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77
Phase 1 of an open-ended interview may proceed simply with asking ques-
tions, reflections, and summary statements of the client’s change talk toward
increasing a discrepancy between psychosocial well-being and substance use.
Using these strategies, the emphasis is on eliciting recognition of how alcohol
and drug use interacts with mental disorders. Asking open-ended questions
can elicit self-motivational statements of the effects of alcohol and drug use on
cognitive symptoms or other problems. Following is an example of how a
therapist might conduct this session with a client who was recently hospital-
ized.
C
OUNSELOR: You’ve told me about how when you were in a manic state, you
drank more than you usual, got into a fight, and the police were called to
step in. What happened next?
C
LIENT: I was brought here to the hospital.
COUNSELOR: What was the worst part of all of this?
CLIENT: Feeling like I do now which is miserable.
COUNSELOR: You’re feeling really bad. What are some of the things that you
are thinking about while you are here?
CLIENT: How I let my family down.
COUNSELOR: In what ways?
CLIENT: Last time I was here they felt so bad. I told them I wouldn’t put them
through this again.
COUNSELOR: But something changed.
CLIENT: I started drinking again.
COUNSELOR: You think that the drinking played a role in this set back.
Motivational Interviewing in Treatment of Dual Disorders 369
BOX 24.1. Decisional Balance Exercise
Reasons for not attending treatment Reasons for attending treatment
Benefits Costs Benefits Costs
No one “checks Bus money Support from staff Relapse
up” on me. Interferes with other Medication Disappoint family
activities Stay sober Incarceration
Giving up drinking Fewer symptoms Rehospitalization
Loss of self-respect
Depression
CLIENT: I stopped coming in for my doctor’s appointments. Then the drinking
went from one or two beers to hanging out at the bars all day. After
awhile, I didn’t remember to take my medication.
C
OUNSELOR: Your drinking eventually led to your missing appointments and
forgetting to take your medication.
/G46._/G65/G65/G64/G62/G61/G63/G6B
When appropriate, the therapist might elicit the hazards or complicating psy -
chopharmacological effects of alcohol and drugs in an “elicit–provide–elicit”
interview format described by Rollnick, Mason, and Butler (1999). For exam-
ple, a client might say the following in response to how drinking affects his or
her depression:
CLIENT: Well, at first I feel pretty good, but after drinking all day I just pass
out. Then I feel terrible.
COUNSELOR: So drinking helps improve your mood initially, but later, the bad
feelings are there again.
CLIENT: Yeah. Like today I feel like it’s hopeless.
COUNSELOR: Today, you’re really feeling down. You know last week you
were feeling more hopeful. What was different then?
CLIENT: Well I wasn’t drinking, for one thing.
COUNSELOR: That’s right. You hadn’t had any alcohol for three days and your
mood improved. How much do you know about how drinking affects
moods?
C
LIENT: Only that I feel bad.
COUNSELOR: Would it be OK if I told you a bit of what I know?
CLIENT: Sure.
COUNSELOR: Ethanol is a central nervous system depressant. Its chemical ef -
fect is depression.
CLIENT: Huh?
COUNSELOR: You’re not sure what to make of this.
CLIENT: Well, I’m taking this medication to feel better.
COUNSELOR: Uh huh.
CLIENT: It probably doesn’t give it a chance to work.
COUNSELOR: Yes, that’s right. You’re taking one medication for reducing de-
pression while also taking alcohol, which has the chemical effect of in -
creasing depression. What do you make of that?
CLIENT: I won’t feel better if I keep drinking.
370 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
A “check-up” approach used by Graeber and his colleagues (2000) led
to decreased drinking among schizophrenic outpatients. Check-up feedback
may be modified to include measures of emotional problems for the dually
disordered clients. For example, measures of severity of psychiatric symp -
toms might be included as personalized feedback to raise the awareness of
how symptoms are related to changes in substance use. Graphic presenta -
tions patterns of use over an entire lifetime or the past month or week are
concrete strategies to elicit talk about change. They may also be useful in
pointing out the relationship between the substance use and increased
psychosocial or psychiatric symptom escalation and hospitalizations. Mea -
sures of expectancy effects that assess a client’s cognitions about the ex -
pected benefits of a given substance are especially relevant for this popula -
tion. Persons with dual disorders frequently believe that drugs and/or alcohol
are the best means for alleviating their psychiatric symptoms (depression,
auditory hallucinations, social anxiety, loneliness from isolation, etc.). Clar -
ifying the relationship between beliefs and substance use opens the door to
challenging beliefs, modifying cognitions, and increasing commitment for
skills training.
/G44/G72/G6F/G70/G2D/G49/G6E /G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G47/G72/G6F/G75/G70/G73
A novel approach for increasing treatment adherence among dually disor-
dered outpatients is being practiced at the University of New Mexico Mental
Health Center’s dual-diagnosis program. Drop-in groups may affect engage-
ment of dually disordered clients within a clinic setting. The drop-in motiva-
tional groups can be incorporated into a broader, stage-matched program of
skills training and relapse prevention. The advantages of a drop-in group are
that the clients can “sample” substance abuse treatment with minimal com -
mitment toward change and that groups are accessible and available. The
drop-in group format recognizes the lack of structure in actively drinking or
drug using clients who are less likely to remember and follow through with
scheduled appointments. To encourage attendance, the groups are offered
during the medication clinics when dually disordered clients are likely to be
present. The drop-in motivational groups provide an innovative opportunity
for clients to explore their ambivalence about change. The therapist gently
guides the clients with exercises that evoke change talk. Although this format
has not been tested, the enduring popularity of the group in the New Mexico
clinic suggests that this mechanism may match an important treatment need of
dually disordered clients at the initial stages of change. In the early stages of
client engagement, the goal is group attendance, not cognitive or behavioral
changes. The commitment to abstain from substance use or change in any way
is optional. It is explained to the client that others in the group are similar to
him or her in that they are ambivalent about change and merely want a
nonpressured, safe environment to explore their thoughts about drinking and
using drugs.
Motivational Interviewing in Treatment of Dual Disorders 371
/G53/G50/G45/G43/G49/G41/G4C /G49/G53/G53/G55/G45/G53 /G57/G49/G54/G48 /G44/G55/G41/G4C /G44/G49/G53/G4F/G52/G44/G45/G52/G53
/G48/G61/G72/G6D /G52/G65/G64/G75/G63/G74/G69/G6F/G6E /G6F/G72 /G41/G62/G73/G74/G69/G6E/G65/G6E/G63/G65/G3F
Because even relatively infrequent or low amounts of substance abuse disrupt
behavior and lead to severe consequences, such as loss of housing, an early fo-
cus of treatment is substance use. However, persons with comorbid mental
and substance use disorders are generally not seeking to change their alcohol
and drug use in the initial stages of psychiatric treatment. Thus, it is likely that
in the initial stages of engagement or even throughout the course of treatment,
persons with dual disorders will continue to drink or use drugs. Increasing
motivation for harm reduction and “sampling sobriety” are frequently the
best options for the therapist.
/G57/G68/G65/G72/G65 /G74/G6F /G42/G65/G67/G69/G6E/G3F
Those with concomitant alcohol and drug use disorders typically have multi -
ple disabling conditions and complications. Consequently, motivational inter-
ventions may focus on multiple behavior change such as adherence with ap-
pointments, medication compliance, and substance use reduction concurrently
or single goals such as medication compliance and symptom stabilization. A
team initiates a treatment plan that addresses multiple domains such as psy-
chiatric services, case management, nursing, psychotherapy services, and sub-
stance abuse. Treatment providers develop a hierarchy of treatment goals,
considering meeting basic needs and safety as priorities. Ultimately, it is the
client’s responsibility to choose how to proceed, which is determined by readi-
ness for action. A tool for measuring multiple behaviors might be employed to
assist in the decision-making process, such as the example in Box 24.2.
/G43/G6F/G67/G6E/G69/G74/G69/G76/G65 /G49/G6D/G70/G61/G69/G72/G6D/G65/G6E/G74
Individuals with severe mental illness are known to have problems with ab -
stract reasoning, concentration, and working memory. Consequently, it is im-
portant to adapt intervention strategies to accommodate these problems.
Writing on a chalkboard, repeating, and making lists for clients are examples
of such strategies. A concrete method for conducting the process of exploring
pros and cons to alcohol and drug use is helpful. For example, using colored
cards (e.g., red for reasons to stop) handed to clients to take with them after
the session is a strategy for evoking self-regulatory behavior after the session.
A schizophrenic client who wrote his reasons for abstaining from metham -
phetamine on an index card, which he kept in his wallet, used this external
cue to resist acting on urges to use drugs. Another concrete method for con -
ducting this exercise would be to stack blocks into two piles and review
“which has more?” When possible, using visual aids such as graphs or charts
assists in understanding normative feedback. With more cognitively impaired
372 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
individuals, it is a good idea to offer the feedback across multiple, brief ses -
sions so that it is delivered in small, assimilated units. In general, a slower
pace with more pauses for questions and clarifications is indicated.
Because schizophrenics possess a variety of cognitive, neurobiological,
and social deficits, particularly in executive functioning, Bellack and DiClemente
(1999) provide a compelling argument that schizophrenics would be incapable
of sustaining intentional behavior (i.e., following through with commitment
elicited in a motivational interview) before they acquired the skills to do so. A
model of treatment such as the one described in the section “Putting It To-
gether: A Clinical Program Example,” which provides skill training such as
drug refusal skills even before a commitment for sobriety is reached, may en-
hance goal attainment when the desire or intent for change increases.
/G48/G65/G74/G65/G72/G6F/G67/G65/G6E/G65/G69/G74/G79 /G69/G6E /G47/G72/G6F/G75/G70/G73
Most treatment populations in any clinical setting of persons with dual disor -
ders are diverse. Clients differ in the number and nature of mental disorders,
severity of substance use, medical disabilities, cognitive functioning, and many
other variables not considered here. Consequently, it is challenge to provide
services in a group format (see Chapter 25). A young man with an addiction
to crack cocaine who recently engaged in mental health treatment following
his first psychotic episode and who has no desire to change his lifestyle will
present different treatment issues from a 50-year-old male with liver disease
who is maintained on methadone for his heroin addiction and alcohol depend-
ence. The common theme of ambivalence to changing their substance use
might place both of these clients together in a group for precontemplators or
contemplators. It is this commonality that can be drawn on in the group con -
tent. Naturally, there are many individuals who cannot benefit from group
treatment, and individual interventions (e.g., case management) should be
available as an alternative.
Motivational Interviewing in Treatment of Dual Disorders 373
BOX 24.2. Readiness to Change Measure
How ready are you to do Thinking
something to change? Not ready Unsure about it Ready Very ready
Write in possible areas:
Stopping drinking ✓
Quitting smoking ✓
Taking medication ✓
Finding a safe place to live ✓
Making new sober friends ✓
/G49/G6E/G76/G6F/G6C/G76/G69/G6E/G67 /G53/G69/G67/G6E/G69/G66/G69/G63/G61/G6E/G74 /G4F/G74/G68/G65/G72/G73/G2F/G43/G61/G73/G65 /G4D/G61/G6E/G61/G67/G65/G72/G73
Strategies shown to be effective in engaging and retaining clients with dual
disorders include assertive community outreach, removal of barriers through
practical assistance such as stable housing and transportation, case manage -
ment, contingency management through reinforcers such as the use of vouch -
ers, and social supports. Applying motivational interviewing principles in the
treatment components shown to be effective in engaging and maintaining cli -
ents with dual disorders is likely to enhance their efficacy. Specifically, case
managers or supportive significant others might participate in the motiva -
tional interviews (e.g., feedback sessions; see Chapter 23, this volume). More-
over, including significant others or case managers increases the likelihood
that dually disordered clients will follow through with their plans to change.
Significant others or case managers can offer the “scaffolding” in the commu-
nity to support change efforts. This is especially relevant for persons who have
concomitant attention and memory problems or “frontal–temporal” impair -
ments associated with schizophrenia, which make it difficult to initiate and
follow through with intentions or plans for behavior change.
/G50/G55/G54/G54/G49/G4E/G47 /G49/G54 /G54/G4F/G47/G45/G54/G48/G45/G52/G3A
/G41 /G43/G4C/G49/G4E/G49/G43/G41/G4C /G50/G52/G4F/G47/G52/G41/G4D /G45/G58/G41/G4D/G50/G4C/G45
A program initiated several years ago at the University of New Mexico serves
as one example of an integrated, stage-matched approach. Outpatient group
treatment serves as a core for treating substance use and related problems
among persons with severe mental illness within a community mental health
center (see Box 24.3). Group referrals are made on the basis of (1) the pa-
tient’s general readiness to change for substances that present the greatest
problems, based on Stages of Change Readiness and Treatment Eagerness
Scale (SOCRATES); (2) willingness to participate in a group; (3) ability to
benefit from the treatment; and (4) coping skills deficits (i.e., whether patients
are “ready, willing, and able”).
The program relies on a social learning model for treating substance use
disorders. Patient needs for skills training are identified through a functional
analysis of substance use and related problems (e.g., social skills training to
374 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
BOX 24.3. Stage-Matched Outpatient Abuse Treatment Model
Contemplation
Precontemplation Preparation Action Maintenance
Individual “check-up” interviews Tools for change Maintaining change
“Talking about change” groups Practicing change
decrease drinking as coping strategy in social situations) at the onset of treat -
ment as well as from input from clients or team members and are incorpo -
rated into a psychosocial treatment plan. Treatment goals include specific
behavior changes (e.g., abstain from crack cocaine for 90% of next 90 days).
Treatment involvement (e.g., number of groups to attend per week) is negoti -
ated with the client. In an effort to abstain from crack cocaine, a patient may
attend group daily toward achieving that goal. The group program is struc -
tured so that patients may join in action stage or maintenance groups at any
time as they cycle through their readiness for change in specific behaviors. Box
24.4 describes the stage-specific groups to which individuals are assigned.
Clients who drink and/or use multiple drugs can be in different stages of readi-
ness for drinking and other drugs and/or other problem behaviors (e.g., social
skills deficits). Consequently, they may simultaneously attend the drop-in
Motivational Interviewing in Treatment of Dual Disorders 375
BOX 24.4. Group Model for Stage-Matched
Integrated Dual Disorders Treatment
• Talking about change . Individuals in the precontemplation or contemplation stage of
change are referred to this group. The goal can be simply attendance versus other cogni-
tive or behavioral changes. The groups are described to clients as “talking about”
change to appeal to those without problem recognition or intentions of changing. Struc -
tured motivational exercises are implemented. For example, working through a pros-and-
cons list on a dry erase board is often helpful. Another exercise is to engage the group in
a discussion of the stages of change, drawing a wheel of change on the board and ask -
ing group participants where they feel they are in the wheel and what it would take to
make them move. Finally, a change plan worksheet is often constructed in the group as a
means of transitioning individuals into the more action-oriented groups when appropriate
(i.e., when self-motivational statements indicate stage movement).
•
Tools for change . Once individuals begin to espouse self-motivational statements and it
becomes clear that they are moving into the preparation stage of change, the didactic
cognitive-behavioral coping skills classes are offered. These 6-week classes target skill
deficits that are associated with both mental and substance use disorders. For example, a
dually diagnosed individual with a depressive disorder might be assigned to a cognitive
restructuring class, an assertiveness class, and a problem-solving class.
•
Practicing change. Often simultaneous with the Tools for Change classes, individuals in
the action stage of change are encouraged to attend one or more of the Practicing
Change groups. The facilitator in these groups assists clients in applying their newly
honed skills to their own behaviors and life circumstances.
•
Maintaining change . A 6-week relapse prevention curriculum based on Marlatt and
Gordon’s model is offered to individuals in the maintenance stage of change (defined as
30 days clean and sober within the past 90 days). Graduation from Tools for Change
and some participation in the Practicing Change groups is a prerequisite for this group as
well.
groups for alcohol while attending skills training modules for other substances
or problems. For example, a client may perceive his crack cocaine use as more
destructive as it has been associated with arrests and involuntary hospitaliza -
tions but continues to drink excessively on occasion and has ambivalence
about changing his drinking because it is a big part of his social interactions.
Another example is a client who believes that his anxiety is related to social
skills deficits and is motivated to engage in skills training for social skills but
has no plan for his substance use reduction. However, the learning and prac -
ticing of assertiveness may generalize to the practice of refusing substances, or
the increased self-efficacy in social contexts may lessen cravings/urges for al -
cohol and drugs.
The advantages of this approach include flexibility and a long-term per -
spective—clients can participate in multiple groups simultaneously—and rec -
ognizes the cyclic nature of change and overlap among stages. The major dis -
advantage is that this treatment model has not been studied. The separate
components of motivational interventions, motivational interviewing as a
counseling style, and skills training were developed from empirically based
methods, but the efficacy of these approaches for dual disorders has not yet
been determined.
/G53/G55/G4D/G4D/G41/G52/G59 /G41/G4E/G44 /G43/G4F/G4E/G43/G4C/G55/G53/G49/G4F/G4E/G53
Recent research in motivational interviewing suggests that this is an effective
approach for engaging and retaining clients who have comorbid mental and
substance use disorders in treatment. This is important as dually disordered
clients who engage in and remain in treatment over extended periods show
significant improvements in both psychiatric and substance use problems
(Drake et al., 1998).
Motivational interviewing strategies adapted to explore ambivalence
about attending an initial inpatient session have doubled the rates of adher -
ence with an initial outpatient session. Also, modifications of the “check-up”
intervention to explore the relationship between substance use and emotional
disorders in one preliminary study yielded significantly fewer drinking days
among schizophrenic clients already engaged in treatment. Thus, motivational
interviewing shows potential for increasing adherence to treatment and behav-
ior change when integrated into mental health or other treatment services.
Future research is needed to elucidate the benefits of motivational inter -
viewing in a group format, which is the typical mechanism of providing thera-
peutic interventions in most mental health treatment settings. Empirical sup -
port for the impact of motivational interviewing with dually disordered
treatment samples is modest. The available research is limited by small study
samples and lack of control groups. Larger, more comprehensive, and con -
trolled studies will determine the benefits of motivational interviewing as part
of integrated treatment for dual disorders.
376 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
CHAPTER 25
/G50/G65/G72/G69/G6C/G73 /G61/G6E/G64 /G50/G6F/G73/G73/G69/G62/G69/G6C/G69/G74/G69/G65/G73 /G6F/G66 /G47/G72/G6F/G75/G70/G2D/G42/G61/G73/G65/G64
/G4D/G6F/G74/G69/G76/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E/G61/G6C /G49/G6E/G74/G65/G72/G76/G69/G65/G77/G69/G6E/G67
SCOTT T. WALTERS,R ICHARD OGLE, and JOHN E. MARTIN
Is group motivational interviewing a half-baked or fully baked idea? We are
now at a point in the investigation and application of individual motivational
interviewing at which a fork in the road has been reached. Is this something
that can—or should—be done in a group? The question has significant impli -
cations: Group treatment is less expensive and can serve more patients with
fewer providers than can individual treatment. The presence of the group also
provides participants with additional opportunities for role playing and social
support. For these reasons, there has been a push to adapt efficacious individ-
ual approaches—motivational interviewing not excepting—to a group format,
despite many unresolved issues. For instance, the resistance we might try to
“roll with” in individual motivational interviewing might be both amplified
and complicated in the presence of others, whereas other factors we hope to
promote, such as discrepancy, may be minimized.
This chapter addresses the perils and possibilities of a group-based moti -
vational interviewing (GMI) through four sections. We begin with a review
and analysis of the early empirical findings of group-based motivational appli-
cations. This review is followed by a discussion of evidence that one might be
377
able to conduct motivational interviewing in the context of a group with mini-
mal loss of fidelity. We then turn to the process itself, including a detailed dis-
cussion of how GMI might be implemented to work in different populations
and contexts, as well as the questions that inevitably arise when structuring
the motivational group. We conclude by providing recommendations and crit-
ical suggestions for future research and clinical applications.
/G54/G48/G45 /G43/G41/G53/G45 /G46._/G4F/G52 /G47/G52/G4F/G55/G50 /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47
/G43/G6F/G6C/G6C/G65/G67/G65 /G53/G74/G75/G64/G65/G6E/G74 /G44/G72/G69/G6E/G6B/G69/G6E/G67
Among heavy-drinking college students, we are aware of three studies using
GMI, with results that have proved puzzling. All three were structured as a
single-session intervention with personalized feedback. In the first study,
Walters, Bennett, and Miller (2000) recruited heavy-drinking college students
in an effort to determine the incremental effectiveness of adding a mailed feed-
back component to a 2-hour psychoeducational group delivered in a motiva -
tional style. Elements of the group included norm comparisons, a discussion
of pros and cons of use, and role playing, whereas the feedback included
quantity/frequency information, norm comparisons, and risk indicators and
offered nonjudgmental advice on risk reduction. At a 6-week follow-up, par-
ticipants who received only the mailed feedback reported the largest decrease,
an average quantity reduction of 53.1%, as compared to those in the control
group who remained nearly unchanged. Those who attended the group and
also received feedback showed a lesser decrease of 23.2%. Although the group
treatment in this trial was primarily psychoeducational in content, the find-
ings are intriguing in that they suggest a possible deleterious effect of attend-
ing the group prior to receiving the mailed information. The success of the
mailed feedback led to a second study (Walters, 2000), where identical feed -
back was given to participants in a group or via mail. The group was delivered
in a similar way to the single-session Drinker’s Check-up (Miller, Sovereign,
& Krege, 1988). As in the previous study, participants in the mailed feedback
condition again showed the largest quantity decrease (33.3%) at a 6-week fol-
low-up, compared to those in the group feedback (decrease of 1.8%) and con-
trol conditions (decrease of 10.6%). Finally, in a third study (Martin, Noto,
& Walters, 2000), students in six residential houses (i.e., fraternities and so -
rorities) were randomized by house to receive feedback in a group or via mail
or to a control condition. Consistent with previous findings, the GMI was not
associated with reductions in drinking outcomes (increase of 12.3%) as com -
pared to control (increase of 4.1%). Although there was a small reduction in
the feedback-only group (decrease of 4.9%), this trend did not reach signifi -
cance.
In sum, the available studies provide little evidence for the efficacy of
GMI among heavy-drinking college students. On the contrary, they seem to
provide much better overall support for the use of mailed feedback in this
378 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
population. In the first study, although the group-plus-feedback condition
showed some reduction over control, the superiority of the feedback-only con-
dition suggests the feedback to be the more salient component. Also support -
ing this view are the findings of the second study, where group and mailed
feedback were directly compared. Finally, in the last study, the “mailed” feed-
back was, in fact, distributed to individuals after a group meeting, unlike in
previous studies where feedback was mailed to participants at their separate
residences. Using this method of distribution meant that most recipients im -
mediately opened their feedback and shared it with other members of the
group, which may have minimized the discrepancy of the feedback.
/G41/G64/G75/G6C/G74 /G4F/G75/G74/G70/G61/G74/G69/G65/G6E/G74/G73
Among adults receiving outpatient treatment for alcohol dependence, we
found four studies that used GMI. Studies varied from a single session to a 6-
week group, and GMI was offered in each as a prelude to more extensive
treatment. In the first study, Foote and colleagues (1999) report process ef -
fects of a four-session GMI versus treatment as usual when delivered prior to
outpatient treatment. At follow-up, the authors found that GMI participants
perceived more support for autonomy, and these feelings seemed to be posi-
tively related to treatment attendance. In addition, group participants seemed
to be more realistically assessing the costs and benefits of quitting, though no
behavioral outcome data were reported for this study. In a similar vein,
Noonan (1995b) compared the effectiveness of a single-session GMI with
feedback to an equivalent educational group for a group of outpatient, alco-
hol-dependent male veterans. The GMI was structured using elements of the
Drinkers’ Check-up (Miller et al., 1988) and consisted of an exploration of
reasons for drinking, pros and cons of use, and a discussion of each partici -
pant’s reactions to items in the feedback. Both groups showed significant re -
ductions in drinking at 3 and 6 months with no consistent differences between
them. After a 6-month period, the number of drinking days for those in the
GMI had decreased 77% from baseline levels, whereas those in the educa -
tional group showed a mean decrease of 84.7%. The third study (Lincourt,
Kuettel, & Bombardier, in press), targeting substance abusers mandated to at-
tend, used a six-session GMI prior to standard treatment. Sessions were de -
signed following procedures similar to the motivational enhancement therapy
developed for Project MATCH (Miller, Zweben, DiClemente, & Rychtarik,
1992) and included an introduction to the transtheoretical model of change
(Prochaska, DiClemente, & Norcross, 1992), a decisional balance exercise,
personalized drinking feedback, and a discussion of past change success sto -
ries. Although not randomly assigned, those who attended the GMI had
higher rates of attendance and treatment completion. After equalizing the two
groups on baseline variables, the GMI group assignment still accounted for a
small but significant proportion of the variance in treatment completion
(3.5%) and percent of sessions attended (2.3%). Finally, Sobell, Sobell,
Group-Based Motivational Interviewing 379
Brown, Cleland, and Buchan (1995) compared a four-session motivationally
based cognitive-behavioral intervention to a similar individually administered
intervention for alcohol and drug abusers. At 12 months posttreatment, sig -
nificant reductions were found in alcohol and drug use measures, with no dif-
ferences between the treatment groups in outcome or attrition. As one indica -
tor, mean percent days abstinent for the group condition increased by 81%,
while those in the individual condition increased by 93.6%. Those in the GMI
missed significantly less sessions (25 vs. 210 missed session), but there were no
differences between the formats in terms of overall satisfaction with the pro -
gram,
In sum, these studies with outpatients provide some slim evidence for the
utility and efficacy of GMI. In the two studies that measured changes in moti-
vation and treatment compliance, GMI seemed to produce some changes. One
study that measured changes in consumption did not find an effect relative to
an educational control, but another found it to be as good as individually de -
livered care. In the final study, the relative efficacy of the group format led to
a 41% cost savings in terms of therapist time. The cost savings of this format,
coupled with the fact that group members missed fewer sessions, offer the best
support for the efficacy of GMI.
/G4F/G74/G68/G65/G72 /G48/G65/G61/G6C/G74/G68 /G42/G65/G68/G61/G76/G69/G6F/G72/G73
Besides addictions treatment, GMI has been attempted in three health inter-
vention studies. First, Carey, Kalichman, Forsyth, Wright, and Johnson
(1997) employed a four-session behavioral-skills training (BST) program com-
bined with motivational enhancement strategies to reduce the risk of HIV in-
fection. Motivational techniques included personalized feedback on HIV risk,
eliciting members’ concerns about their behavior, a decisional balance exer -
cise, and an action plan. At a 3-month follow-up, participants had increased
both their knowledge and intention to practice safe behaviors as compared to
those from a control group. A mean increase in partner communication, ob -
served immediately after the intervention, had disappeared by this time. Al -
though this intervention showed some meaningful effects, because of the com-
bination of the two approaches, it is impossible to determine the incremental
effectiveness of the motivational versus BST components. In a later study,
Carey and colleagues (2000) included a health promotion control group and
found essentially the same effect, where BST/GMI tended to increase knowl -
edge and strengthen risk-reduction intentions, most of which were maintained
at follow-up. Finally, Murphy, Cameron, Sharp, and colleagues (2000) col -
lected data from inpatient veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
on whether they felt a particular symptom was one they “might have,” “defi -
nitely have,” or “definitely don’t have.” The intervention was a six-session,
open group that explored such topics as “rationale for the group,” “compari -
son to the average guy,” “pros and cons,” and “roadblocks.” Results from a
postintervention follow-up showed that 40% of the behaviors classified as
380 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
“might have” prior to the group were now classified into one of the other two
categories and more behaviors were now classified as “definitely have” than
“definitely don’t have,” suggesting that the GMI may have facilitated disclo -
sure of traumatic events.
When considering these other areas of health promotion, GMI seems to
have been somewhat more efficacious, leading to decreases in risky behavior
and resolution of ambivalence, at least in the short term. The findings related
to HIV risk are intriguing in that they seem to provide an alternative to a
problem typically addressed through psychoeducational channels. In terms of
the PTSD study, the value of GMI appears less clear. During a group discus -
sion of an issue, members’ opinions tend to polarize (Brauer, Judd, & Gliner,
1995), and because the authors did not include a control group, we again can-
not determine what part the motivational aspect played in this. In addition,
because this study included only self-perceptions of psychiatric symptoms, it is
difficult to say whether an increased belief that one does (or does not) meet di-
agnostic criteria is an advantage. For all these studies, it must be noted that
the lack of process accounts and fidelity checks are major limitations. More -
over, the format and activities outlined in the GMI manuals available to us ap-
pear to be essentially transplanted from those of individual motivational inter-
viewing, and because this “easy translation” has not reliably demonstrated
results on par with those of individual motivational interviewing (Sobell et al.,
1995, being the exception), we must consider the more difficult task of creat-
ing a GMI that is fundamentally group based.
/G50/G4F/G53/G53/G49/G42/G49/G4C/G49/G54/G49/G45/G53
In adapting motivational interviewing to work in a group, it is important to
consider why and how motivational interviewing works at all. In the first edi-
tion of this book, Miller and Rollnick (1991) speculate on the possibility of
therapist variables, change talk, and faith/hope concepts as mechanisms un -
derlying the dramatic shifts in behavior often seen following motivational in -
terviewing. But whatever the true mechanisms, the notion that this process
would work equally well in the presence of others may be reminiscent of a
knowledge dissemination model. However, unlike patient education, motiva -
tional interviewing is more a navigation process than a transmission of infor -
mation: Behavior change happens when the individual weighs relevant reasons
in relation to the short-term rewards of the behavior. Because of the complex-
ity of interactions in a group, there is more potential for discrepancy diffusion,
nonparticipation, resistance, and collective argumentation. Moreover, the lim-
ited talk time allotted by the group would seem to be a problem if Amrhein,
Miller, Yahne, Palmer, and Fulcher (2000) are correct in their hypothesis that
behavior change is initiated by increasingly strong change statements elicited
during the therapy session.
These caveats not withstanding, there are also some reasons to believe
Group-Based Motivational Interviewing 381
that motivational interviewing might be particularly suited for groups of indi-
viduals. First, the interpersonal pressure of the majority might have a pull on
those less interested in change and draw the less ready toward a mutual public
commitment, especially under the guidance of a skillful GMI facilitator. The
presence of the group in other contexts provides a powerful support system
which assures the individual that he or she is not isolated in the desire for ac -
tion. In addition, because of group diffusion there is added reason to think
that individual resistance might be minimized. Unlike the intensive, one-on-
one encounter in individual therapy, the group “automatically” wins any de -
bate by virtue of its superior numbers. And if vocal group members hold the
status quo and argue against change, this might actually promote the opposite
reaction in others by highlighting a discrepancy between the negativity of the
outspoken member(s) and the empathy and motivational style of the facilita -
tor.
/G50/G52/G4F/G43/G45/G53/G53
There have been several attempts to translate the activities used with individ-
ual motivational interviewing into the group setting. In the most comprehen-
sive effort of which we are aware, Ingersoll, Wagner, and Gharib (2000) out-
line a 10-session GMI that uses activities borrowed from the procedures of
individual motivational interviewing. Similarly, Foote and colleagues (1999)
discuss a four-session group based on the FRAMES approach that consists of
a discussion of problems, decision-making exercises, identification of road-
blocks, and strategies for change. There are also several unpublished manu-
scripts (e.g., Apodaca & Martin, 1996; Noonan, 1995a; Walters, 1998) out-
lining groups that are essentially variations on the individual approach. But
before applying these main processes, much less the spirit of motivational in -
terviewing, one is faced with at least seven considerations in determining what
format the group will take.
1. Will the group be an adjunct to treatment or a stand-alone inter -
vention? As an individual intervention, motivational interviewing has been
used both as an adjunct to treatment and a stand-alone intervention (Noonan
& Moyers 1997). As a prelude or booster to more extensive treatment, it has
typically consisted of one or two sessions. As a stand-alone treatment, the
number of sessions has varied and becomes a programmatic choice due to the
lack of evidence for differential efficacy based on number of sessions.
2. Will the group be psychoeducational or process in nature? In a
psychoeducational group such as that described by Walters, Gruenewald,
Bennett, and Miller (2001), the focus is didactic, though elements of the moti-
vational process are considered. This type of group has a focal topic and is fa-
cilitated by a counselor who takes an expert role. What sets this format apart
from purely didactic education is that group process, discussion, and role-play
382 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
are integral elements. In contrast, process groups (Yalom, 1995) primarily rely
on the interactions of the group to guide members toward a “corrective emo -
tional experience.” Motivational interviewing in this format involves the ex -
ploration of ambivalence, elucidation of value discrepancies, and the explora -
tion of options. The counselor selectively reflects, questions, and summarizes
group content so that individual motivation is enhanced.
3. Will the group have a fixed length or will it be ongoing? Time-lim-
ited groups with a specific content have ranged from a single session to 10 or
more sessions and are typically used when the group is expected to change lit-
tle during the course of treatment. In contrast, an ongoing group may be more
appropriate when the membership of a group is expected to change daily (e.g.,
a waiting-list intervention), where client turnover is high, or as an addition to
an ongoing multimodal program. An ongoing format has no particular num -
ber of sessions and may not even have a specific agenda but is used to support
change efforts on a continuing basis (see Chapter 24).
4. Will groups be open or closed to new members? A closed group
begins with a cohort of clients and continues without the addition of new
ones. The regularity of membership in closed groups tends to promote trust as
the team works on change together. An open format such as that outlined by
Murphy, Cameron, Rosen, and Thompson (2000), on the other hand, uses a
rotating curriculum that allows individuals to join at any time in the group
process and still participate in all sessions.
5. Will the intervention provide feedback or not? As we have previ-
ously indicated, few individual treatment studies (and no group studies) have
examined the differential effectiveness of motivational interviewing with and
without feedback, so the basis for a decision at this point would seem to involve
the assessment time available and character of the group. If giving feedback,
one must further decide whether the feedback will be given to the group as a
whole, to one individual at a time, at some separate time (e.g., mailed before
or after group attendance), or in some combination at multiple time points.
6. Will the group be mixed or homogeneous in terms of readiness to
change? “Stacked” groups, selected on the basis of their readiness to change,
can be used advantageously to encourage less ready members and solidify
those who are more ready. For instance, the narratives of individuals at more
advanced stages might help those less motivated to build discrepancy and re -
solve ambivalence. Groups that are relatively equal in their advanced stages of
readiness can also create a sense of efficacy and mutual support. In contrast,
groups equalized at less advanced stages might pose a particular difficulty
through the strengthening of a deviant norm.
7. Will it be a motivational group or will it be group motivational in -
terviewing? A final complication is that many of what have been called “moti-
vational” groups in the literature may actually be more psychoeducational in
approach. As such they attempt to correct deficient knowledge in a fashion
other than that prescribed by classic motivational interviewing. Many of the
aforementioned studies appear to have used methods closer to motivational
Group-Based Motivational Interviewing 383
groups rather than a truly adapted motivational interviewing. In its “pure
form” GMI is more a process of following the concerns of the group and re -
flecting points of individual and group discrepancy to enhance motivation.
/G50/G45/G52/G49/G4C/G53
Although the process of individual motivational interviewing is well estab -
lished, the dynamics of a group seem to suggest additional considerations. The
process expands from a dance involving two people to look more like a dance
production held by a company. Can you imagine a dance production consist -
ing of multiple individuals doing different dances to different tunes? (In recall-
ing one early group, one of us lamented, “This is like herding cats to the tune
of a junior high orchestra, without a conductor!”) What was once the joining
of therapist–patient is now the simultaneous joining of therapist–patient, ther-
apist–group, patient–patient, and patient–group. Thus, in the same spirit that
prompted Miller and Rollnick (1991) to discuss the spirit and traps of individ-
ual motivational interviewing, we suggest the following as complications and
modifications in adapting motivational interviewing and its core component
processes to the group context.
/G45/G78/G70/G72/G65/G73/G73 /G45/G6D/G70/G61/G74/G68/G79
The “nest” for effective discrepancy building seems to be expressed empathy,
but there are numerous difficulties with conveying this attitude in a group.
Not only is the number of necessary interactions multiplied, but one must also
consider that in the presence of others, there is a greater potential to defend
oneself against real or imagined criticism (Diwan & Littrell, 1996). Affect is
amplified in this context: Individuals may state opinions more strongly or in -
troduce issues purely for the sake of bravado. As with individual motivational
interviewing, the counselor partially addresses this issue through differential
attention, reflection, and summary statements. We have found in our GMI ex-
perience that with two counselors, one can be expressing empathy while the
second monitors and rolls with resistance. There may also be a tendency for
the empathic flavor of the group to become diluted by other members who
play therapist by proxy—for example, give advice and confront and label
other members’ behavior. Most Alcoholics Anonymous groups, for instance,
have rules against such “cross-talk,” allowing participants to only talk about
themselves. The counselor can explain the different types of cross-talk that are
appropriate and inappropriate in the group, and this should further increase
the level of change talk in the group. If an inappropriate comment is made, the
counselor can reframe to indicate that comments from the group are appreci -
ated and often helpful, but ultimately it will be up the individual to decide
what to do. Thus, the corrections and reframes of the counselor, coupled with
384 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
the positive comments given by group members, might potentially outweigh
the predicted loss of empathic fidelity to each individual.
/G45/G6E/G68/G61/G6E/G63/G65 /G44/G69/G73/G63/G72/G65/G70/G61/G6E/G63/G69/G65/G73
People consider change when they become uncomfortable with the status quo,
whether privately or (presumably) in a group. Given more than one facilitator,
the group might be broken into smaller working groups with co-facilitators
present. These smaller, more personal groups might be especially useful when
dealing with high-risk or coerced populations, where deviancy may be the
norm. In settings such as this, a mix of deviant and prosocial members would
seem to be the most desirable approach. Alternatively, one or two “veteran”
peers might be included in each group to dispel deviant talk by virtue of their
experience (e.g., the use of recovering smokers as facilitators in treatment
groups; cf. Martin et al., 1997).
To further highlight individual discrepancies in a group format, we have
sometimes used a values card-sort activity. In one variation, each client is
given an assortment of cards, each of which contains a potentially important
life value. Clients are asked to select the 10 values that are most important to
them, prioritize these “top 10” from most to least important, and elaborate
on their relevance in their lives (Miller & C’de Baca, 2001). One advantage of
prefacing a change discussion with an activity like this is that it personalizes a
relatively generic discussion to the more specific needs of the individual and
encourages honesty. As an adjunct, we sometimes ask members to sort their
cards into three piles based on how each value relates to the problem behavior
(i.e., my problem behavior helps me to get, has no relation to, or hinders me
from getting this value), producing a sort of decisional continuum. With
groups that have some initial motivation, this activity works well as a prelude
to a decisional balance discussion. On the other hand, we have also found that
with groups initially low on motivation, this may actually solidify commit -
ment to a problematic behavior. (In one group that ended with this exercise,
the overwhelming rate of pro-alcohol commentary left us with the impression
that group members would be reconvening at a local bar that evening!)
Finally, most formats of motivational interviewing have used normative
feedback as one mechanism for building discrepancy. Although the evidence is
strong that feedback can be an effective component for individuals, for groups
the evidence is limited at best. Indeed, in our work with high-risk college
drinkers, there is a constant attempt to “abduct” the norm and replace it with
one that is more comfortable. For instance, when general population norms
were presented to our high-risk drinkers, there was a tendency to devalue the
discrepant norm as irrelevant. This makes sense when one considers that the
greater the perceived difference between them, the more one group (e.g., the
treatment group) will tend to devalue another (e.g., the normative group to
which the treatment group is being compared). To avoid this situation, the
Group-Based Motivational Interviewing 385
counselor must not only highlight the difference between the two groups but
also their many similarities in terms of goals and other relevant norms. It
might also be more effective to have members privately estimate norms (e.g.,
“What percent of U.S. college students drink more than you?”) before provid-
ing the correct figures, which highlights a true discrepancy between belief and
fact, rather than presenting information initially (e.g., “You are at the 99th
percentile of college students).
/G41/G76/G6F/G69/G64 /G41/G72/G67/G75/G6D/G65/G6E/G74 /G61/G6E/G64 /G43/G6F/G6E/G66/G72/G6F/G6E/G74/G61/G74/G69/G6F/G6E
In our experience, therapy with one resistant individual is infinitely easier than
with a group of such persons, who seem to have an endless supply of resistant
talk. In addition, the resistance of the strongest personalities in a group seem
to have a disproportionate influence over the direction of other members.
Dominant persons may discourage others from voicing their opinions through
their overt behavior and comments, by stating their positions with confidence,
or simply by monopolizing group time (Diwan & Littrell, 1996). In our own
groups, these argumentative, highly resistant persons have not only con-
founded the motivational process but also supported a deviant “renorming”
effect. In discouraging such disruptions, the ground rules of the group should
be explicit in prohibiting hostile or dominating speech, and group members
can be gently reminded of this rule. The counselor can also reframe negative
comments in a friendlier, more cooperative style, affirming the objector with a
“twist.” Quieter members or those who are more experienced can be asked
for their reactions, to permit an alternate viewpoint. The most relevant com-
ments are, in turn, selectively emphasized in a group summary reflection. In
dealing with continued dominance, group leaders can use standard motiva-
tional techniques to handle resistance: empathic reflection, asking for elabora-
tion on statements that are consistent with the direction of the group, and val-
idating personal choice and responsibility. Strategic use of the simple time out
(e.g., ignoring argumentative comments) or differential reinforcement (e.g., at-
tending to positive, nonargumentative, or change talk) may also be useful in
modeling and maintaining a positive motivational style. Such selective reflec -
tion allows individuals to be reinforced and heard within the context of in -
creasingly constructive comments.
One exception to the “do not argue” rule is the paradoxical debate exer -
cise, where the client plays the role of arguing for change while the therapist
argues against it. In our experience, this is an activity that works especially
well for highly resistant groups or those low on motivation for change. For ex-
ample, as a variation on the “Good Things, Not-So-Good-Things” activity
(Miller et al., 1992), we have asked group members to brainstorm a list of rea-
sons for not making a change (i.e., all the good things about the present
behavior). One facilitator uses the group’s list to argueagainst change and in-
vites the rest of the group to take the counterargument (i.e., why change
would be a good thing). During this debate, a second facilitator can be record-
386 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
ing the group’s reasons, reinforcing comments and encouraging group mem -
bers to argue their point even more forcefully. In this way, the natural antago-
nism of resistant groups is channeled into talk for change. When the debate is
over, the first facilitator uses the list the group has generated to summarize the
main points of the argument for change and asks specific members to elabo -
rate on their expressed reasons. Change talk is thereby reinforced in the
group’s own words.
/G45/G6E/G63/G6F/G75/G72/G61/G67/G65 /G53/G65/G6C/G66/G2D/G45/G66/G66/G69/G63/G61/G63/G79 /G61/G6E/G64 /G43/G68/G61/G6E/G67/G65 /G54/G61/G6C/G6B
In the “Ready, Willing and Able” triumvirate suggested by Rollnick (1998),
no amount of readiness and willingness will make up for perceived inability.
Individuals are encouraged to talk about the steps they plan to take. However,
members of a group are more prone to “social loafing”—assuming that others
will comment for them, or that the leader will provide answers for them. To
prime participants to begin to talk about change, we sometimes begin with a
“forced choice” exercise where group members must strongly agree, agree,
disagree, or strongly disagree with a series of position statements related to
the behavior of interest (e.g., “It’s OK for people to smoke, as long as its not
every day). An activity such as this sets the stage for self-disclosure in a
nonjudgmental atmosphere and allows facilitators to identify the relative in-
terest in change of various participants. Statements for this activity should be
picked to suit the unique aims of the group but should be ones that will not
further solidify positions contrary to those of the group. For instance, a forced
choice, such as “Marijuana should be legalized,” may have the unintended
consequence for those who endorse it of solidifying a view the therapist would
rather discourage. Better, forced questions such as “Which of these posted
drugs is the most addictive to the user/dangerous to society?” allows partici -
pants to voice an opinion within appropriate boundaries. In this case, partici -
pants can also hear their peers voice opinions against the use of a drug they
themselves did not endorse.
We have discussed some reasons why confidence and importance might
be supported in a group format. On the other hand, an inherent roadblock, no
matter what the structure, would seem to be the limited “talk time” of mem -
bers. We know from Amrhein and colleagues (2000) that an increasing
amount of talk about change during the session is a predictor of outcome. In a
group, however, it is unclear to what extent these rules apply: Can change talk
be done “by proxy” where some individuals listen to others talk about their
increased motivation? If so, groups could be asked to consider the implica -
tions of another’s session for their own individual process. For instance, in a
group, certain individuals tend to cluster at the center of the social structure,
indicating their centrality to the decision-making process. When such a leader
is identified, the “proxy” motivational interviewing session can be conducted
with this individual and either presented via videotape or in a “fishbowl”
where the rest of the group watches the session as it is conducted. This might
Group-Based Motivational Interviewing 387
be used to prime participants before giving feedback, such that they first see
an admired person struggling with personal discrepancy and modeling appro -
priate talk.
A final caveat relates to a group’s tendency to “follow” and then resist
the leader. In classic motivational interviewing, we are cautioned to avoid the
expert trap. Yet, in a group setting, resistance may focus on knocking the
leader off his or her pedestal. Although many group members expect the facil-
itator to tell them what to do, we suggest that the facilitator avoid giving un -
solicited advice, especially early in the session. Rather, demands for answers
should be used as opportunities for group comment and reflection, so that so-
lutions emerge from group members rather than the therapist (see also the
“expert trap” in Chapter 6).
/G46._/G55/G52/G54/G48/G45/G52 /G50/G4F/G53/G53/G49/G42/G49/G4C/G49/G54/G49/G45/G53
What should our future directions be, providing that GMI is an approach that
holds significant, albeit unrealized, potential? The following represent some
clinical and research suggestions to help answer two questions: (1) Does
group-based motivational interviewing work, and for whom? (2) Under what
conditions might it work best?
/G44/G6F/G65/G73 /G47/G4D/G49 /G57/G6F/G72/G6B /G61/G6E/G64 /G66/G6F/G72 /G57/G68/G6F/G6D/G3F
As we have previously discussed, little is known about how motivational in-
terviewing works within a group setting. There is significant room and need at
this early stage for even uncontrolled studies integrating motivational inter-
viewing with group processes and demonstrating changes in cognitive readi -
ness and behavior. Controlled investigations will also be required, where a
complete GMI might be compared to other approaches or a nontreated con -
trol. As indicated earlier, this also might be represented by an add-on to an ex-
isting intervention, including individual motivational interviewing. Imagine a
GMI that meets daily, much as a process group, as part of an inpatient, partial
hospitalization, or outpatient format. For this “preferred” GMI evaluation,
we would suggest using two group leaders, a group of no more than 10 to 12
participants, and screening for a group that is not overloaded with precon -
templators. (We certainly learned a hard lesson in one of our college studies
where we did the opposite of each of these suggestions, with pitiful results.)
From this point, there are a number of group applications (e.g., Ingersoll et
al., 2000), which provide additional structure for a multisession group and a
good start toward a manualized “standard” for GMI research comparisons.
Studies are also needed to determine the populations that might most
benefit from such an approach. Although the efficacy of individual motiva -
tional interviewing is well established in the addictions field, there is some evi-
dence for its appropriateness in other behavior change areas as well (cf. Chap-
388 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
ter 16). Conversely, when considering group applications, we have only scant
evidence of empirical efficacy outside alcohol treatment and wide room for
applications to other populations and settings such as smoking, diet, exercise,
and medication compliance.
/G48/G6F/G77 /G43/G61/G6E /G47/G4D/G49 /G62/G65 /G49/G6D/G70/G6C/G65/G6D/G65/G6E/G74/G65/G64 /G74/G6F /G57/G6F/G72/G6B /G42/G65/G73/G74/G3F
Once these questions have been addressed, we might turn our attention to the
many possible interactive effects. Process variables to be experimentally ma -
nipulated include factors such as optimal group size, motivational (stage of
change) profile, number of leader-facilitators, whether and how feedback
might be used, structured versus unstructured groups, and the use of live or
videotaped peer leader interview. When approaching the question of group
size, depending on the context and problem area, we suggest a general guide -
line akin to that used in motivational interviewing training (Miller &
Rollnick, 1991) of no more than 20 participants per facilitator, although half
that number might be more appropriate based on the nature, severity, and
chronicity of the problem area (e.g., morbid obesity and chronic smoking).
But still the overriding question seems to be, What is the process and leader-
ship structure that will most facilitate verbal participation (i.e., personal
change talk) within the group setting? A solution, only partly facetious, has
been made to develop a kind of motivational interviewing “language lab” an-
alogue where individuals are simultaneously prompted but individually re-
sponded to via personal earphones in separate cubicles. In this process, the
role of motivational feedback presented in a group also deserves consider-
ation. Although this technique has good empirical support when used as an
adjunct to individual motivational interviewing, when added to a group there
appear to be additional complicating factors.
In terms of readiness for change profile, our difficulties with college
drinkers led us to believe that the groups might have been more effective if we
had selected participants based on stage of change—contemplators and above.
For those low on the readiness-for-change scale, the personalized feedback
alone might have been sufficient. We also suspect that having group members
quietly view an individual motivational interviewing session would have
better engaged precontemplators.
Finally, when further matching individuals to treatment approaches, we
would suggest a consideration of the stepwise approaches used for some medi-
cal and psychological conditions (e.g., antihypertensive medications). Given
limited resources, a stepped intensity program might begin with the most cost-
effective approach, a general screening measure (e.g., the AUDIT; Claussen, &
Aasland, 1993) and motivational feedback material, delivered either via mail
(Agostinelli, Brown, & Miller, 1995) or computer (R. K. Hester, personal
communication, January 15, 2001). The second step for individuals not effec-
tively “reached” by this approach might include one of the group interven -
tions discussed here. Those who continue to exhibit problematic behavior
Group-Based Motivational Interviewing 389
might be referred to the more costly (but also more effective) individual moti -
vational counseling session and/or a small support group meeting.
/G54/G48/G45 /G46._/G4F/G52/G4B /G54/G4F /G47/G52/G4F/G55/G50 /G4D/G4F/G54/G49/G56/G41/G54/G49/G4F/G4E/G41/G4C /G49/G4E/G54/G45/G52/G56/G49/G45/G57/G49/G4E/G47
In our venture down this basically uncharted path, the transfer of motiva -
tional interviewing into a group format seems anything but straightforward.
Group-based approaches have been implemented by people quite experienced
with individual approaches and thus far have yielded disappointing results.
Furthermore, there is the possibility that individual motivational interviewing
(e.g., via a single session) may actually prove to be more cost-effective than
group applications in the long run (e.g., multiple sessions with multiple thera-
pists). Yet, as we have discussed, there are also many reasons why GMI is be -
ing and should be attempted. A number of ideas have thus been outlined to
suggest how motivational interviewing might be adapted to a more general
group intervention, including caveats and traps to avoid. Finally, we have pro-
posed directions for future research and applications of GMI while including
specific study questions and designs. For those brave (or perhaps foolish)
enough to take up these challenges, there are many future paths, as well as
dead ends, to be explored in what will surely become one of the next direc-
tions that motivational interviewing will take.
390 APPLICATIONS OF MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING
/G52/G65/G66/G65/G72/G65/G6E/G63/G65/G73
Adlaf, E. M., Zdanowicz, Y. M., & Smart, R. G. (1996). Alcohol and other drug use
among street-involved youth in Toronto. Addiction Research, 4(1), 11–24.
Agostinelli, G., Brown, J. M., & Miller, W. R. (1995). Effects of normative feedback on
consumption among heavy drinking college students. Journal of Drug Education,
25(1), 31–40.
Allsop, S., & Saunders, B. (1991). Reinforcing robust resolutions: Motivation in relapse
prevention with severely dependent problem drinkers. In W. R. Miller & S.
Rollnick, Motivational interviewing: Preparing people to change addictive behav-
ior (pp. 236–247). New York: Guilford Press.
American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (3rd ed., rev.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
Amrhein, P. C. (1992). The comprehension of quasi-performative verbs in verbal com-
mitments: New evidence for componential theories of lexical meaning. Journal of
Memory and Language, 31, 756–784.
Amrhein, P. C., Miller, W. R., Yahne, C. E., Palmer, M., & Fulcher, L. (2000, Septem-
ber). Committing language emergent from a motivational interview predicts behav-
ioral change in drug-addicted clients. Paper presented at the international confer-
ence on Treatment of Addictive Behaviors, Cape Town, South Africa.
Amrod, J. (1997). The effect of motivational enhancement therapy and coping skills
training on the self-efficacy and motivation of incarcerated male alcohol abusers.
Dissertation Abstracts International, 57(9–B), 5904.
Andrews, D. A., Bonta, J., & Hoge, R. D. (1990). Classification for effective rehabilita-
tion. Rediscovering psychology. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 17(1), 19–52.
Andrews, D. A., Zinger, I., Hoge, R. D., Bonta, J., Gendreau, P., & Cullen, F. T. (1990).
391
Does correctional treatment work? A clinically relevant and psychologically in -
formed meta-analysis. Criminology, 28(3), 369–404.
Annis, H. M., & Chan, D. (1983). The differential treatment model. Empirical evidence
from a personality typology of adult offenders. Criminal Justice and Behavior,
10(2), 159–173.
Annis, H. M., Graham, J. M., & Davis, C. S. (1987). Inventory of Drinking Situations
(IDS): User’s guide. Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation.
Apodaca, X., & Martin, J. E. (1996).Alcohol information and motivation.Unpublished
manuscript.
Arnett, J. J. (2000). Emerging adulthood: A theory of development from the late teens
through the twenties. American Psychologist, 55(5), 469–480.
Aubrey, L. L. (1998). Motivational interviewing with adolescents presenting for outpa-
tient substance abuse treatment. Doctoral dissertation, University of New Mexico.
Avants, S. K., Singer, J. L., & Margolin, A. (1993–1994). Self-representations and nega-
tive affect in cocaine-dependent individuals.Imagination, Cognition and Personal-
ity, 13(1), 3–24.
Axelrod, S., & Wetzler, S. (1989). Factors associated with better compliance with psychi-
atric aftercare. Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 40, 397–401.
Azrin, N. H., Sisson, R. W., Meyers, R. J., & Godley, M. D. (1982). Alcoholism treat-
ment by disulfiram and community reinforcement therapy. Journal of Behavior
Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 13(2), 105–112.
Baekeland, F., & Lundwall, L. (1975). Dropping out of treatment: A clinical review.Psy-
chological Bulletin, 82, 738–783.
Baer, J. S. (in press). Student factors: Understanding individual variation in college drink-
ing. Journal of Studies of Alcohol.
Baer, J. S., Kivlahan, D. K., Blume, A. W., McKnight, P., & Marlatt, G. A. (2001). Brief
intervention for heavy drinking college students: Four-year follow-up and natural
history. American Journal of Public Health, 91(8), 1310–1316.
Baer, J. S., Kivlahan, D. R., & Donovan, D. M. (1999). Integrating skills training and mo-
tivational therapies: Implications for the treatment of substance dependence.Jour-
nal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 17(1–2), 15–23.
Baker, A., & Dixon, J. (1991). Motivational interviewing for HIV risk reduction. In W.
R. Miller & S. Rollnick (Eds.), Motivational interviewing: Preparing people to
change addictive behavior (pp. 293–302). New York: Guilford Press.
Baker, A., Heather, N., Wodak, A., Dixon, J., & Holt, P. (1993). Evaluation of a cogni-
tive-behavioural intervention for HIV prevention among injecting drug users.
AIDS, 7, 247–256.
Baker, A., Kochan, N., Dixon, J., Heather, N., & Wodak, A. (1994). Controlled evalua-
tion of a brief intervention for HIV prevention among injecting drug users not in
treatment. AIDS Care, 6(5), 559–570.
Bandura, A. (1986).Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (1988). Self-efficacy conception of anxiety.Anxiety Research, 1(2), 77–98.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman.
Barbaree, H. E. (1991). Denial and minimization among sex offenders: Assessment and
treatment outcome. Forum on Corrections Research, 3(4), 30–33.
Barlow, D. H. (1988).Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and
panic. New York: Guilford Press.
Barnett, N. P., Monti, P. M., & Wood, M. D. (2001). Motivational interviewing for alco-
392 References
hol-involved adolescents in the emergency room. In E. F. Wagner & H. B. Waldron
(Eds.), Innovations in adolescent substance abuse (pp. 143–168). New York:
Pergamon Press.
Basch, C. E., Sliepcevich, E. M., Gold, R. S., Duncan, D., & Kolbe, L. (1985). Avoiding
Type III errors in health education program evaluations: A case study.Health Edu-
cation Quarterly, 12, 315–331.
Baucom, D. H., Shoham, V., Mueser, K. T., Daiuto, A. D., & Stickle, T. R. (1998). Em-
pirically supported couple and family interventions for marital distress and adult men-
tal health problems.Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66(1), 53–88.
Baumrind, D., & Moselle, K. A. (1985). A developmental perspective on adolescent drug
abuse. Advances in Alcohol and Substance Abuse, 4(3–4), 41–67.
Belcher, L., Kalichman, S., Topping, M., Smith, S., Emshoff, J., Norris, F., & Nurss, J.
(1998). A randomized trial of a brief HIV risk reduction counseling intervention for
women. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66, 856–861.
Bellack, A. S. (1992). Cognitive rehabilitation for schizophrenia: Is it possible? Is it neces-
sary? Schizophrenia Bulletin, 18, 43–50.
Bellack, A. S., & DiClemente, C. C. (1999). Treating substance abuse among patients
with schizophrenia. Psychiatric Services, 50, 75–80.
Bem, D. J. (1967). Self-perception: An alternative interpretation of cognitive dissonance
phenomena. Psychological Review, 74, 183–200.
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.),Advances in experimen-
tal social psychology (Vol. 6, pp. 1–62). New York: Academic Press.
Bepko, C., & Krestan, J. (1985).The responsibility trap: A blueprint for treating the alco-
holic family. New York: Free Press.
Berg-Smith, S. M., Stevens, V. J., Brown, K. M., Van Horn, L., Gernhofer, N., Peters, E.,
Greenberg, R., Snetselaar, L., Ahrens, L., & Smith, K. (1999). A brief motivational
intervention to improve dietary adherence in adolescents. Health Education Re-
search, 14(3), 399–410.
Bien, T. H., Miller, W. R., & Boroughs, J. M. (1993). Motivational interviewing with al-
cohol outpatients. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 21, 347–356.
Bien, T. H., Miller, W. R., & Tonigan, J. S. (1993). Brief interventions for alcohol prob-
lems: A review. Addiction, 88, 315–336.
Blackwell, B. (1976). Treatment adherence.British Journal of Psychiatry, 129, 513–531.
Blackwell, B. (1997). From compliance to alliance: A quarter century of research. In B.
Blackwell (Ed.),Treatment compliance and the therapeutic alliance(pp. 1–15). Am-
sterdam: Harwood Academic.
Booth, R. E., Kwiatkowski, C., Iguchi, M. Y., Pinto, F., & John, D. (1998). Facilitating
treatment entry among out-of-treatment injection drug users. Public Health Re -
ports, 113(Suppl. 1), 116–128.
Borkovec, T. D., & Castonguay, L. G. (1998). What is the scientific meaning of empiri-
cally supported therapy? Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66 (1),
136–142.
Borkovec, T. D., & Whisman, M. A. (1996). Psychosocial treatment for generalized anx-
iety disorder. In M. R. Mavissakalian & R. F. Prien (Eds.),Long-term treatments of
anxiety disorders (pp. 171–199). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Borrelli, B., Hecht, J., Enright, K., Hooper, S., Emmons, K., & Abrams, D. (1998).A new
channel for behavioral health intervention: The Visiting Nurse Association. Paper
presented at the meeting of the Association for Advancement of Behavior Therapy,
Washington, DC.
References 393
Borsari, B., & Carey, K. B. (2000). Effects of a brief motivational intervention with col-
lege student drinkers. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68(4), 728–
733.
Botvin, G. J., Baker, E., Dusenbury, L., Tortu, S., & Botvin, E. (1990). Preventing adoles-
cent drug abuse through a multimodal cognitive-behavioral approach: Results of a
3-year study. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58(4), 437–446.
Bradley, G. W. (1978). Self-serving biases in the attribution process: A re-examination of
the fact or fiction question. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36 (1),
56–71.
Brauer, M., Judd, C. M., & Gliner, M. D. (1995). The effects of repeated expressions on
attitude polarization during group discussions. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 68(6), 1014–1029
Brehm, S. S., & Brehm, J. W. (1981).Psychological reactance: A theory of freedom and
control. New York: Academic Press.
Brown, D., & Crace, R. K. (1996). Values in life role choices and outcomes: A conceptual
model. Career Development Quarterly, 44, 211–223.
Brown, H. P., & Peterson, J. H. (1990). Rationale and procedural suggestions for defin-
ing and actualizing spiritual values in the treatment of dependency. Alcoholism
Treatment Quarterly, 7, 17–46.
Brown, J. H., & Horowitz, J. E. (1993). Deviance and deviants: Why adolescent sub-
stance use prevention programs do not work.Evaluation Review, 17(5), 529–555.
Brown, J. M.(1998). Self-regulation and the addictive behaviors. In W. R. Miller & N.
Heather (Eds.), Treating addictive behaviors (2nd ed., pp. 61–73). New York: Ple-
num Press.
Brown, J. M., & Miller, W. R. (1993). Impact of motivational interviewing on participa-
tion and outcome in residential alcoholism treatment.Psychology of Addictive Be-
haviors, 7, 211–218.
Burke, B., Arkowitz, H., & Menchola, M. (2001). The efficacy of motivational inter-
viewing: A meta-analysis of controlled clinical trials. Manuscript in preparation.
Butler, C. C., Pill, R., & Stott, N. C. (1998). Qualitative study of patients’ perceptions of
doctors’ advice to quit smoking: implications for opportunistic health promotion.
British Medical Journal, 316, 1878–1881.
Butler, C. C., Rollnick, S., Cohen, D., Russel, I., Bachmann, M., & Stott, N. (1999). Mo-
tivational consulting versus brief advice for smokers in general practice: A random-
ised trial. British Journal of General Practice, 49, 611–616.
Butler, C. C., Rollnick, S., Pill, R., Maggs-Rapport, F., & Stott, N. (1998). Understand-
ing the culture of prescribing: qualitative study of general practitioners’ and
patients’ perceptions of antibiotics for sore throats. British Medical Journal,
317(7159), 637–642.
Carbonari, J. P., & DiClemente, C. C. (2000). Using transtheoretical model profiles to
differentiate levels of alcohol abstinence success.Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology 68(5), 810–817.
Carbonari, J. P., DiClemente, C. C., & Sewell, K. B. (1999). Stage transitions and the
transtheoretical “stages of change” model of smoking cessation. Swiss Journal of
Psychology, 58(2), 134–144.
Carey, K. B., Purnine, M. M., Maisto, S. A., & Carey, M. P. (1999). Assessing readiness
to change substance abuse: A critical review of instruments. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 6, 245–266.
Carey, M. P., Braaten, L. S., Maisto, S. A., Gleason, J. R., Forsyth, A. D., Durant, L. E., &
394 References
Jaworski, B. C. (2000). Using information, motivational enhancement, and skills
training to reduce the risk of HIV infection for low-income urban women: A second
randomized clinical trial. Health Psychology, 19(1), 3–11.
Carey, M. P., Kalichman, S. C., Forsyth, A. D., Wright, E. M., & Johnson, B. T. (1997).
Enhancing motivation to reduce the risk of HIV infection for economically disadvan-
taged urban women.Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65(4), 531–541.
Carey, M. P., Maisto, S. A., Kalichman, S. C., Forsyth, A. D., Wright, E. M., & Johnson,
B. T. (1997). Enhancing motivation to reduce the risk of HIV infection for economi-
cally disadvantaged urban women.Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
65(4), 531–541.
Carkhuff, R. R. (1969). Helper communication as a function of helper affect and content.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 16(2, Pt. 1), 126–131.
Carkhuff, R. R., Anthony, W. A., Cannon, J. R., Pierce, R. M., & Zigon, F. J. (1979).The
skills of helping: An introduction to counseling skills. Amherst, MA: Human Re-
source Development Press.
Carney, M. M., & Kivlahan, D. R. (1995). Motivational subtypes among veterans seek-
ing substance abuse treatment: Profiles based on stages of change. Psychology of
Addictive Behaviors, 9, 1135–1142.
Carr, V. C. (1985). Telephone prompting to reduce missed CMHC appointments.Hos-
pital and Community Psychiatry, 36, 1217–1218.
Carroll, K. (1997). Compliance and alcohol treatment: An overview. In K. Carroll (Ed.),
Improving compliance with alcoholism treatment (Project MATCH Monograph
Series, 6, pp. 5–12, NIH: Publication No. 97–4143). Rockville, MD: National Insti-
tute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. National Institutes of Health.
Cashin, J. R., Presley, C. A., & Meilman, P. W. (1998). Alcohol use in the Greek system:
Follow the leader? Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 59(1), 63–70.
Centers for Disease Control (2000). CDC fact book 2000/2001. Washington, DC: De-
partment of Health and Human Services.
Chafetz, M. E. (1961). A procedure for establishing therapeutic contact with the alco-
holic. Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 22, 325–328.
Chafetz, M. E. (1968). Research in the alcohol clinic of an around-the-clock psychiatric
service of the Massachusetts General Hospital. American Journal of Psychiatry ,
124, 1674–1679.
Chafetz, M. E., Blane, H. T., Abram, H. S., Clark, E., Golner, J. H., Hastie, E. L., &
McCourt, W. F. (1964). Establishing treatment relations with alcoholics: A supple-
mentary report. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 138, 390–393.
Chafetz, M. E., Blane, H. T., Abram, H. S., Golner, J. H., Hastie, E. L., & Meyers, W.
(1962). Establishing treatment relations with alcoholics. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 134, 395–409.
Chamberlain, P., Patterson, G., Reid, J., Kavanagh, K., & Forgatch, M. (1984). Observa-
tion of client resistance. Behavior Therapy, 15, 144–155.
Chen, A. (1991). Noncompliance in community psychiatry: A review of clinical interven-
tions. Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 42, 282–287.
Chen, K., & Kandel, D. B. (1995). The natural history of drug use from adolescence to
the mid-thirties in a general population sample.American Journal of Public Health,
85(1), 41–47.
Cherpitel, C. J. (1994). Injury and the role of alcohol: County-wide emergency room
data. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 18(3), 679–684.
Christensen, A., & Shenk, J. L. (1991). Communication, conflict, and psychological dis-
References 395
tance in nondistressed, clinic, and divorcing couples. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 59, 458–463.
Claussen, B., & Aasland, O. G. (1993). The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test
(AUDIT) in a routine health examination of long-term unemployed.Addiction, 88,
363–368.
Cohen, S., Doyle, W., Skoner, D. P., Rabin, B. S., & Gwaltney, J. M. (1997). Social ties
and susceptibility to the common cold. Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion, 277, 1940–1944.
Cohen, S., & Willis, T. A. (1985). Stress, social support, and the buffering hypothesis.
Psychological Bulletin, 98, 310–357.
Colby, S. M., Monti, P. M., Barnett, N. P., Rohsenow, D. J., Weissman, K., Spirito, A.,
Woolard, R. H., & Lewander, W. J. (1998). Brief motivational interviewing in a
hospital setting for adolescent smoking: A preliminary study.Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 66(3), 574–578.
Connors, G. J., Donovan, D. M., & DiClemente, C. C. (2001). Substance abuse treat-
ment and the stages of change: Selecting and planning interventions . New York:
Guilford Press.
Connors, G. J., Walitzer, K. S., & Derman, K. H. (2000, November).Preparation for al-
coholism treatment: Effects on treatment attendance and posttreatment drinking.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Society for Study of Alcohol and Other
Drugs, Leeds, UK.
Conroy, W. J. (1979). Human values, smoking behavior, and public health programs. In
M. Rokeach (Ed.), Understanding human values. New York: Macmillan.
Cooney, N. L., Zweben, A., & Fleming, M. F. (1995). Screening for alcohol problems
and at risk-taking in health care settings. In R. K. Hester & W. R. Miller (Eds.),
Handbook of alcoholism treatment approaches: Effective alternatives(2nd ed., pp.
45–60), New York: Allyn & Bacon.
Corrao, G., Bagnardi, V., Zambon, A., Arico, S., Dall’Aglio, C., Addolorato, G., Giorgi,
I., & the ASSALT Group. (1999). Outcome variables in the evaluation of alcohol-
ics’ treatment: Lessons from the Italian Assessment of Alcoholism Treatment
(ASSALT) project. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 34, 873–881.
Cramer, J., Mattson, R., Prevey, M., Scheyer, R., & Ouellette, U. (1989). How often is
medication taken as prescribed? Journal of the American Medical Association,
261(22), 3273–3277.
Creer, T., & Levstek, D. (1997). Adherence to asthma regimes. In D. S. Gochman (Ed.),
Handbook of health behavior research II: Provider determinants(Vol. 2, pp. 269–
284). New York: Plenum Press.
Crits-Christoph, P., Siqueland L., Blaine, J., Frank, A., Luborsky, L., Onken, L. S.,
Muenz, L. R., Thase, M. E., Weiss, R. D., Gastfriend, G. R., Woody, G. E., Barber,
J. P., Butler, S. F., Daley, D., Salloum, I., Bishop, S., Najavits, L. M., Lis, J., Mercer,
D., Griffin, M. L., Moras, K., & Beck, A. T. (1999). Psychosocial treatments for co-
caine dependence: National Institute on Dug Abuse collaborative cocaine treatment
study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 493–502.
CSAT Treatment Improvement Protocol No. 35. (1999). Enhancing motivation for
change in substance abuse treatment (DHHS Publication No. (SMA) 99–3354).
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Daley, D. C., & Zuckoff, A. (1998). Improving compliance with the initial outpatient
session among discharged inpatient dual diagnosis clients.Social Work, 43(5), 470–
473.
396 References
Daley, D. C., & Zuckoff, A. (1999). Improving treatment compliance: Counseling and
systems strategies for substance abuse and dual disorders . Center City, MN:
Hazelden.
Daley, D. C., Salloum, I. M., Zuckoff, A., Kirisci, L., & Thase, M. E. (1998). Increasing
treatment adherence among outpatients with depression and cocaine dependence:
A pilot study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 1611–1613.
Darley, J. M., & Batson, C. D. (1973). From Jerusalem to Jericho: A study of situational
and dispositional variables in helping behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 27, 100–119.
Darley, J. M., & Latane, B. (1968). Bystander intervention in emergencies: Diffusion of
responsibility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 8, 377–383.
De Francesco, C. (2001). Reflections on the values card sort.Motivational Interviewing
Newsletter: Updates, Education and Training [Online]. Edition 8.2. Richmond,
VA: Mid-Atlantic Addiction Technology Transfer Center/Center for Substance
Abuse Treatment. Available: www.motivationalinterview.org
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985).Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human
behavior. New York: Plenum Press.
Dempsey, R. (1996). Using motivational interviewing techniques in a prison setting and
in the community with a partner. In R. E. Mann (Ed.), Motivational interviewing
with sex offenders: A practice manual (pp. 30–35). Hull, UK: National Organisa-
tion for the Treatment of Abusers.
Dench, S., & Bennett, G. (2000). The impact of brief motivational intervention at the
start of an outpatient day programme for alcohol dependence. Behavioural and
Cognitive Psychotherapy, 28, 121–130.
Dennis, M. L. (2000). The Cannabis Youth Treatment (CYT) experiment: Preliminary
findings. Washington, DC: Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Department of Health and Hu-
man Services.
Department of Health and Human Services. (2000). 10th special report to the United
States Congress on alcohol and health: Highlights from current rearch. Washington
DC: National Institutes of Health.
deShazer, S., Berg, I. K., Lipchik, E., Nunnally, E., Molnar, A., Gingerich, W., & Weiner-
Davis, M. (1986). Brief therapy: Focused solution development.Family Process, 25,
201–211.
DiClemente, C. C. (1994). If behaviors change, can personality be far behind. In T.
Heatherton & J. Weinberger (Eds.),Can personality change(pp. 175–198). Wash-
ington, DC: American Psychological Association.
DiClemente, C. C. (1999a). Motivation for change: Implications for substance abuse.
Psychological Science, 10(3), 209–213.
DiClemente, C. C. (1999b). Prevention and harm reduction for chemical dependency: A
process perspective. Clinical Psychology Review [Special issue: prevention of chil-
dren’s behavioral and mental health problems: New horizons for psychology],
19(4), 473–486.
DiClemente, C. C. (forthcoming). Addiction and change: A transtheoretical analysis .
New York: Guilford Press.
DiClemente, C. C., Carbonari, J. P., & Velasquez, M. M. (1992). Alcoholism treatment
mismatching from a process of change perspective. In R. R. Watson (Ed.), Treat-
ment of drug and alcohol abuse (pp. 115–142). Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.
DiClemente, C. C., Carbonari, J., Zweben, A., Morrel, T., & Lee, R. E. (2001). Motiva-
References 397
tion hypothesis causal chain analysis. In R. Longabaugh & P. W. Wirtz (Eds.),Pro-
ject MATCH: A priori matching hypotheses, results, and mediating mechanisms
(National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Project MATCH Mono -
graph Series, Vol. 8). Rockville, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Al-
coholism.
DiClemente, C. C., & Hughes, S. O. (1990). Stages of change profiles in outpatient alco-
holism treatment. Journal of Substance Abuse, 2, 217–235.
DiClemente, C. C., Marinilli, A. S., Singh, M., & Bellino, L. E. (2001). The role of feed-
back in the process of health behavior change.American Journal of Health Behav-
ior, 25, 217–227.
DiClemente, C. C., & Prochaska, J. O. (1985). Processes and stages of change: Coping
and competence in smoking behavior change. In S. Shiffman & T. A. Wills (Eds.),
Coping and substance abuse (pp. 319–342). New York: Academic Press.
DiClemente, C. C., & Prochaska, J. O. (1998). Toward a comprehensive, trans -
theoretical model of change: Stages of change and addictive behaviors. In W. R.
Miller & N. Heather (Eds.),Treating addictive behaviors(2nd ed., pp. 3–24). New
York: Plenum Press.
DiClemente, C. C., & Scott, C. W. (1997). Stages of change: Interaction with treatment
compliance and involvement. In L. S. Onken, J. D. Blaine, & J. J. Boren (Eds.),Be-
yond the therapeutic alliance: Keeping the drug-dependent individual in treatment
(pp. 131–156). Rockville, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.
DiClemente, C. C., Story, M., & Murray, K. (2000). On a roll: The process of initiation
and cessation of problem gambling among adolescents, Journal of Gambling
Studies, 16(2/3), 289–313.
DiIorio, C., Faherty, B., & Manteuffel, B. (1994). Epilepsy self-management: Partial rep-
lication and extension. Research in Nursing and Health, 17, 167–174.
Dimeff, L. A. (1998). Brief intervention for heavy and hazardous college drinkers in a stu-
dent primary health care setting.Dissertation Abstracts International: The Sciences
and Engineering, 58(12–B), 6805.
Dishion, T. J. (in press). The family checkup: A brief family intervention for adolescent
problem behavior. New York: American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychi-
atry.
Dishion, T. J., & Kavanaugh, K. (in press). Adolescent problem behavior: An interven-
tion and assessment sourcebook. New York: Guilford Press.
Diwan, S., & Littrell, J. (1996). Impact of small group dynamics on focus group data: Im-
plications for social work research. Journal of Applied Social Sciences, 20(2), 95–
106.
Dobscha, S. K., Delucchi, K., & Young, M. L. (1999). Adherence with referrals for out-
patient follow-up from a VA psychiatric emergency room. Community Mental
Health Journal, 35, 451–458.
Doherty, Y., Hall, D., James, P., Roberts, S., & Simpson, J. (2000). Change counselling in
diabetes: The development of a training programme for the diabetes team.Patient
Education and Counseling, 40, 263–278.
Donovan, D. M., Rosengren, D. B., Downey, L., Cox, G. B., & Sloan, K. L. (2001). Attri-
tion prevention with individuals awaiting publicly funded drug treatment. Addic-
tion, 96, 1149–1160.
Dowden, C., & Andrews, D. A. (2000). Effective correctional treatment and violent
reoffending: A meta-analysis. Canadian Journal of Criminology, 42(4), 449–467.
398 References
Downey, L., Rosengren, D. B., & Donovan, D. M. (2000). To thine own self be true: Self-
concept and motivation for abstinence among substance abusers.Addictive Behav-
iors, 25, 743–757.
Drake, R. E., Mercer-McFadden, C., Mueser, K., McHugo, G. J., & Bond, G. R. (1998).
Review of integrated mental health and substance abuse treatment for patients with
severe mental illness: A review of recent research. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24(4),
589–608.
Dunn, C., DeRoo, L., & Rivara, F. P. (2001). The use of brief interventions adapted from
motivational interviewing across behavioral domains: A systematic review.Addic-
tion, 96(12), 1725–1742.
Easton, C., Swan, S., & Sinha, R. (2000). Motivation to change substance use among of-
fenders of domestic violence. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 19, 1–5.
Edwards, A. L. (1953).Edwards Personal Preference Schedule. New York: Psychological
Corporation.
Edwards, G., & Orford, J. (1977). A plain treatment for alcoholism.Proceedings of the
Royal Society of Medicine, 70, 344–348.
Ellickson, P. L., & Bell, R. M. (1990). Drug prevention in junior high: A multi-site longi-
tudinal test. Science, 247(4948), 1299–1305.
Emmons, K. M., Hammond, S. K., Fava, J. L., Velicer, W. F., Evans, J. L., & Monroe,
A. D. (in press). A randomized trial to reduce passive smoke exposure in low in-
come households with young children. American Journal of Preventive Medi-
cine.
Emmons, K. M., & Rollnick, S. (2001). Motivational interviewing in health care settings:
Opportunities and limitations. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 20 (1),
68–74.
Ershoff, D. H., Quinn, V. P., Boyd, N. R., Stern, J., Gregory, M., & Wirtschafter, D.
(1999). The Kaiser Permanente prenatal smoking cessation trial: When more isn’t
better, what is enough?American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 17(3), 161–168.
Farrall, M. (2001). The use of motivational interviewing techniques in offending behav-
iour group work. Motivational Interviewing Newsletter: Updates, Education and
Training, 8(1), 8–12.
Fazio, R., & Zanna, M. (1981). Direct experience and attitude behavior consistency. In
L. Berkowitz (Ed.),Advances in experimental social psychology(Vol. 14, pp. 162–
202). New York: Academic Press.
Feather, N. T. (1992). Values, valences, expectations, and actions. Journal of Social Is-
sues, 48 109–124.
Ferguson, R. T. (1998). Motivational interviewing with less motivated driving under the
influence of alcohol second offenders with an exploration of the processes related to
change (Doctoral dissertation, University of Wyoming, 1998). Dissertation Ab-
stracts International, 59(1–B), 0415.
Festinger, L. (1957).A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
Fiester, A. R., Cooley, M. L., & Bausinger, L. (1979). The effect of phone prompts on
nonattendance rates at a CMHC aftercare center.Hospital and Community Psychi-
atry, 30, 312.
Fiorentine, R., & Anglin, M. D.(1996). More is better: Counseling participation and the
effectiveness of outpatient drug treatment.Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment,
13, 341–348.
References 399
Fisch, R., Weakland, J. H., & Segal, L. (1982). The tactics of change: Doing therapy
briefly. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Fishman, P., Taplin, S., Meyer, D., & Barlow, W. (2000). Cost-effectiveness of strategies
to enhance mammography use. Effective Clinical Practice, 4, 213–220.
Foote, J., DeLuca, A., Magura, S., Warner, A., Grand, A., Rosenblum, A., & Stahl, S.
(1999). A group motivational treatment for chemical dependency.Journal of Sub-
stance Abuse Treatment, 17, 181–192.
Frank, J. D., & Frank, J. B. (1991).Persuasion and healing: A comparative study of psy-
chotherapy (3rd ed.). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Frankl, V. E. (1963). Man’s search for meaning. Boston: Beacon Press.
Fromm, E. (1956). The art of loving. New York: Harper & Row.
Garfield, S. L. (1994). Research on client variables in psychotherapy. In A. E. Bergin & S.
L. Garfield (Eds.),Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change(4th ed.). New
York: Wiley.
Garland, R. J., & Dougher, M. J. (1991). Motivational intervention in the treatment of
sex offenders. In W. R. Miller, & S. Rollnick,Motivational interviewing: Preparing
people to change addictive behavior (pp. 303–313). New York: Guilford Press.
Gaylin, N. L., Esser, U., Schneider, I., Rombauts, J., & Devriendt, M. (1990). Couple and
family therapy. In G. Lietaer & J. Rombauts (Eds.),Client-centered and experiential
psychotherapy in the nineties (pp. 813–863). Leuven, Belgium: Leuven University
Press.
Gendreau, P. (1996). Offender rehabilitation. What we know and what needs to be done.
Criminal Justice and Behavior, 23(1), 144–161.
Gentilello, L. M., Rivara, F. P., Donovan, D. M., Jurkovich, G. J., Daranciang, E., Dunn,
C. W., Villaveces, A., Copass, M., & Ries, R. (1999). Alcohol interventions in a
trauma center as a means of reducing the risk of injury recurrence. Annals of Sur-
gery, 230(4), 473–483.
George, W. H., & Marlatt, G. A. (1989). Introduction. In D. R. Laws (Ed.),Relapse pre-
vention with sex offenders (pp. 1–31). New York: Guilford Press.
Gfroerer, J. C., Greenblatt, J. C., & Wright, D. A. (1997). Substance use in the U. S. col-
lege-age population: Differences according to educational status and living arrange-
ment. American Journal of Public Health, 87(1), 62–65.
Ginsburg, J. I. D. (2000). Using motivational interviewing to enhance treatment readi-
ness in offenders with symptoms of alcohol dependence.Unpublished doctoral dis-
sertation, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
Glanz, K. (1979). Strategies for nutritional counseling: Dietitians’ attitudes and practice.
Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 74(4), 431–437.
Glanz, K., Patterson, R. E., Kristal, A. R., DiClemente, C. C., Heimendinger, J., Linnan,
L., & Ockene, J. (1994). Stages of change in adopting healthy diets: Fat, fiber and
correlates of nutrient intake. Health Education Quarterly, 21(4), 499–519.
Glasgow, R. E., & Rosen, G. M. (1978). Behavioral bibliotherapy: A review of self-help
behavior therapy manuals. Psychological Bulletin, 85, 1–23.
Glasgow, R., Whitlock, E., Eakin, E., & Lichtstein, E. (2000). A brief smoking cessation
intervention for women in low-income planned parenthood clinics.American Jour-
nal of Public Health, 90(5), 786–789.
Goldstein, M., DePue, J., Monroe, A., Willey Lesne, C., Rakowski, W., Prokhorov, A.,
Niaura, R., & Dube, C. (1998). A population-based survey of physician smoking
cessation counseling practices. Preventive Medicine, 27, 720–729.
Golombeck, H., Marton, P., Stein, B. A., & Korenblu, M. (1989). Adolescent personality
400 References
development: Three phases, three courses, and varying turmoil. Canadian Journal
of Psychiatry, 34(6), 500–504.
Gordon, T. (1970). Parent effectiveness training. New York: Wyden.
Gould, R. A., & Clum, G. A. (1993). A meta-analysis of self-help treatment approaches.
Clinical Psychology Review, 13, 169–186.
Graeber, D. A., Moyers, T. B., Griffith, G., Guajardo, E., & Tonigan, S. (2000, June).
Comparison of motivational interviewing and educational intervention in patients
with schizophrenia and alcoholism. Paper presented at the scientific meeting of the
Research Society on Alcoholism, Denver, CO.
Granfield, R., & Cloud, W. (1996). The elephant that no one sees: Natural recovery
among middle-class addicts. Journal of Drug Issues, 26, 45–61.
Greenberg, L. S., Elliott, R., & Lietaer, G. (1994). Research on experiential psychothera-
pies. In A. E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy and
behavior change (4th ed., pp. 509–539). New York: Wiley.
Grimley, D. M., Riley, G. E., Bellis, J. M., & Prochaska, J. O. (1993). Assessing the stages
of change and decision-making for contraceptive use for the prevention of preg -
nancy, sexually transmitted diseases, and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
Health Education Quarterly, 20(4), 455–470.
Haley, J. (1963). Strategies of psychotherapy. New York: Grune & Stratton.
Handmaker, N. S., Miller, W. R., & Manicke, M. (1999). Findings of a pilot study of mo-
tivational interviewing with pregnant drinkers. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 60,
285–287.
Hansen, W. B., & Graham, J. W. (1991). Preventing alcohol, marijuana, and cigarette
use among adolescents: Peer pressure resistance training versus establishing conser-
vative norms. Preventive Medicine, 20, 414–430.
Hanson, R. K., & Bussière, M. T. (1998). Predicting relapse: A meta-analysis of sexual
offender recidivism studies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66(2),
348–362.
Harland, J., White, M., Drinkwater, C., Chinn, D., Farr, L., & Howel, D. (1999). The
Newcastle exercise project: A randomized controlled trial of methods to promote
physical activity in primary care. British Medical Journal, 319, 828–831.
Harper, R., & Hardy, S. (2000). An evaluation of motivational interviewing as a method
of intervention with clients in a probation setting. British Journal of Social Work,
30, 393–400.
Harris, K. B., & Miller, W. R. (1990). Behavioral self-control training for problem drink-
ers: Components of efficacy. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 4, 82–90.
Hayward, P., Chan, N., Kemp, R., & Youle, S. (1995). Medication self-management: A
preliminary report on an intervention to improve medication compliance. Journal
of Mental Health, 4(5), 511–517.
Heather, N., Rollnick, S., & Bell, A. (1993). Predictive validity of the Readiness to
Change Questionnaire. Addiction, 88, 1667–1677.
Heather, N., Rollnick, S., Bell, A., & Richmond, R. (1996). Effects of brief counselling
among male heavy drinkers identified on general hospital wards.Drug and Alcohol
Review, 15(1), 29–38.
Hermans, H. J. (1987). Self as an organized system of valuations: Toward a dialogue with
the person. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 34, 10–19.
Hochstadt, N. J., & Trybula, Jr., J. (1980). Reducing missed initial appointments in a
community mental health center.Journal of Community Psychology, 8, 261–265.
Hogue, T. E., & Mann, R. E. (2000, November).Working with sexual offenders: Can we
References 401
predict who makes a good therapist? Workshop presented at the 19th Annual Re-
search and Treatment Conference of the Association for the Treatment of Sexual
Abusers, San Diego, CA.
Horn, J. L., Wanbe. G., K. W., & Foster, F. M. (1990).Guide to the Alcohol Use Inven-
tory. Minneapolis: National Computer Systems.
Hser, Y., Maglione, M., Polinsky, M. L., & Anglin, M. D. (1997). Predicting drug treat-
ment entry among treatment-seeking individuals. Journal of Substance Abuse
Treatment, 15, 213–220.
Hu, T-w, Hunkeler, E. M., Weisner, C., Li, E., Grayson, D. K., Westphal, J., &
McClellan, A. T. (1997). Treatment participation and outcome among problem
drinkers in a managed care alcohol outpatient treatment program.Journal of Men-
tal Health Administration, 24, 23–34.
Hughes, R. (1987).The fatal shore: The epic of Australia’s founding. New York: Knopf.
Husby, R. (1985). Short-term dynamic psychotherapy: III. A 5–year follow-up of 36 neu-
rotic patients. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 43, 17–22.
Ingersoll, K. S., Wagner, C. C., & Gharib, S. (2000).Motivational groups for community
substance abuse programs . Richmond, VA: Mid-Atlantic Addiction Technology
Transfer Center/Center for Substance Abuse Treatment.
Isenhart, C. E. (1994). Motivational subtypes in an inpatient sample of substance abus-
ers. Addictive Behaviors, 19, 463–475.
Ito, J. R., Donovan, D. M., & Hall, J. J. (1988). Relapse prevention in alcohol aftercare:
Effects on drinking outcome, change process, and aftercare attendance. British
Journal of Addictions, 83, 171–181.
Jacob, T., & Leonard, K. (1988). Alcoholic-spouse interaction as a function of alcohol-
ism subtype and alcohol consumption interaction. Journal of Abnormal Psychol-
ogy, 97, 231–237.
Jacobson, N. S., & Christensen, A. (1996).Integrative couple therapy: Promoting accep-
tance and change. New York: Norton.
Jacobson, N. S., Roberts, L. J., Berns, S. B., & McGlinchey, J. B. (1999). Methods for de-
fining and determining the clinical significance of treatment effects: Description, ap-
plication, and alternatives. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67(3),
300–307.
Jamieson, Beals, Lalonde, & Associates. (2000). Motivational enhancement treatment
(MET) manual. Theoretical foundation and structured curriculum. Individual and
group sessions. Developed for the State of Maine, Department of Mental Health,
Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services, Office of Substance Abuse. Ot-
tawa, Ontario, Canada: Author.
Janis, I. L., & Mann, L. (1977). Decision-making: A psychological analysis of conflict,
choice, and commitment. New York: Free Press.
Jerrell, J. M., & Ridgely, M. S. (1995). Comparative effectiveness of three approaches to
serving people with severe mental illness and substance abuse disorders.Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 183, 566–576.
Jessor, R. (1991). Risk behavior in adolescence: A psychosocial framework for under -
standing and action. Journal of Adolescent Health, 12(4), 374–390.
Johnson, V. E. (1986).Intervention: How to help those who don’t want help. Minneapo-
lis, MN: Johnson Institute.
Johnston, L. D., O’Malley, P. M., & Bachman, J. G. (2000a). Monitoring the future
national results on adolescent drug use: Overview of key findings. Bethesda, MD:
National Institute on Drug Abuse.
402 References
Johnston, L. D., O’Malley, P. M., & Bachman, J. G. (2000b).Monitoring the future na-
tional results on adolescent drug use: 1975–1999. Vol. II: College students and
young adults. Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Jones, R. A. (1977).Self-fulfilling prophecies: Social, psychological and physiological ef-
fects of expectancies. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Joseph, J., Breslin, C., & Skinner, H. (1999). Critical perspectives on the transtheoretical
model and stages of change. In J. A. Tucker, D. M. Donovan, & G. A. Marlatt
(Eds.), Changing addictive behavior: Bridging clinical and public health strategies
(pp. 160–190). New York: Guilford Press.
Joyce, L. T. (1990). The new revolving-door patients: Results from a national cohort of
first Admissions. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia, 82, 130–135.
Juárez, P. (2001). A randomized trial of motivational interviewing and feedback on
heavy drinking college students . Unpublished master’s thesis, University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque.
Kadden, R., Carroll, K. M., Donovan, D., Cooney, N., Monti, P., Abrams, D., Litt,
M., & Hester, R. (1992). Cognitive-behavioral coping skills therapy manual: A
clinical research guide for therapists treating individuals with alcohol abuse
and dependence (NIAAA Project MATCH Monograph Series, Vol. 3, DHHS
Publication No. ADM 92–1895). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Kanfer, F. H. (1986). Implications of a self-regulation model of therapy for treatment of
addictive behaviors. In W. R. Miller & N. Heather (Eds.),Treating addictive behav-
iors (pp. 29–47). New York: Plenum Press.
Kazdin, A. E. (1992). Research design in clinical psychology (2nd ed.). Needham
Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Kear-Colwell, J., & Pollock, P. (1997). Motivation or confrontation. Which approach to
the child sex offender? Criminal Justice and Behavior, 24(1), 20–33.
Kelly, J. A. (1995). Changing HIV risk behavior: Practical strategies . New York:
Guilford Press.
Kemp, R., David, A., & Hayward, P. (1996). Compliance therapy: An intervention tar-
geting insight and treatment adherence in psychotic patients.Behavioural and Cog-
nitive Psychotherapy, 24, 331–350.
Kemp, R., Hayward, P., Applewhaite, G., Everitt, B., & David, A. (1996). Compliance
therapy in psychotic patients: Randomised controlled trial.British Medical Journal,
312, 345–349.
Kemp, R., Kirov, G., Everitt, B., Hayward, P., & David, A. (1998). Randomised con -
trolled trial of compliance therapy: 18–month follow-up.British Journal of Psychi-
atry, 172, 413–419.
Kennerley, R. J. (2000). The ability of a motivational pre-group session to enhance readi-
ness for change in men who have engaged in domestic violence (Doctoral disserta-
tion, University of South Carolina, 2000). Dissertation Abstracts International,
60(7–B), 3569.
Konopasky, R. J., & Konopasky, A. W. B. (2000). Remaking penile plethysmography. In
D. R. Laws, S. M. Hudson, & T. Ward (Eds.), Remaking relapse prevention with
sex offenders (pp. 257–284). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Koumans, A. J. R., & Muller, J. J. (1965). Use of letters to increase motivation in alcohol-
ics. Psychological Reports, 16, 1152.
Koumans, A. J. R., Muller, J. J., & Miller, C. F. (1967). Use of telephone calls to increase
motivation for treatment in alcoholics. Psychological Reports, 21, 327–328.
References 403
Kreuter, M. W., Strecher, V. J., & Glassman, B. (1999). One size does not fit all: The case
for tailoring print materials. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 21(4), 276–283.
Kristiansen, C. M. (1985). Value correlates of preventive health behavior.Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 49, 748–758.
Krulee, D. A., & Hales, R. E. (1988). Compliance with psychiatric referrals from a general
hospital psychiatry outpatient clinic.General Hospital Psychiatry, 10, 339–345.
Kuchipudi, V., Hobein, K., Fleckinger, A., & Iber, F. L. (1990). Failure of a 2–hour moti-
vational intervention to alter recurrent drinking behavior in alcoholics with gastro-
intestinal disease. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 51, 356–360.
Lambert, M. J. (1976). Spontaneous remission in adult neurotic disorders: A revision and
summary. Psychological Bulletin, 81, 107119.
Lando, H. A., Valanis, B. G., Lichtenstein, E., Curry, S. J., McBride, C. M., Pirie, P. L., &
Grothaus, L. C. (2001). Promoting smoking abstinence in pregnant and postpartum
patients: A comparison of two approaches. American Journal of Managed Care,
7(7), 685–693.
Larimer, M. E., Turner, A., Anderson, B., Lydum, A., Kilmer, J. R., Palmer, R. S., &
Fader, J. (2001). Brief motivational intervention for alcohol abuse prevention in
college fraternities. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 62(3), 370–380.
Larivière, M., & Robinson, D. (1996).Attitudes of federal correctional officers towards
offenders (Research Report No. R-44). Ottawa, Ontario, Canada: Correctional
Service of Canada.
Lash, S. J. (1998). Increasing participation in substance abuse aftercare treatment.Amer-
ican Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 24, 31–36.
Lash, S. J., & Blosser, S. L. (1999). Increasing adherence to substance abuse aftercare
group therapy. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 16, 55–60.
Latane, B., & Darley, J. M. (1968). Group inhibition of bystander intervention in emer-
gencies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 10, 215–221.
Laws, D. R. (1989).Relapse prevention with sex offenders.New York: Guilford Press.
Leake, G. J., & King, A. S. (1977). Effect of counselor expectations on alcoholic recovery.
Alcohol Health and Research World, 11(3), 16–22.
Lincourt, P., Kuettel, T. J., & Bombardier, C. H. (in press). Motivational interviewing in
a group setting with mandated clients: A pilot study. Addictive Behaviors.
Lipsey, M. W., & Wilson, D. B. (1993). The efficacy of psychological, educational, and
behavioral treatment. Confirmation from meta-analysis. American Psychologist,
48(12), 1181–1209.
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1990). Work motivation and satisfaction: Light at the end
of the tunnel. Psychological Science, 1, 240–246.
Longabaugh, R., & Beattie, M. (1985). Optimizing the cost-effectiveness of alcoholism
treatment. In Future directions in alcohol abuse treatment (ADAMHA Research
Monograph, No. 15, DHHS Publication No. ADM 85–1322, pp. 104–136). Wash-
ington, DC: U. S. Government Printing Office.
Longabaugh, R., Beattie, M., Noel, N., Stout, R., & Malloy, P. (1993). The effect of social
investment on treatment outcome.Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 54(4), 465–478.
Longabaugh, R., Wirtz, P. W., & Clifford, P. R. (1995).The important people and activi-
ties instrument. Providence, RI: Brown University.
Luborsky, L., Diguer, L., Seligman, D. A., Rosenthal, R., Krause, E. D., Johnson, S.,
Halperin, G., Bishop, M., Berman, J. S., & Schweizer, E. (1999). The researcher’s
own therapy allegiances: A “wild card” in comparisons of treatment efficacy.Clini-
cal Psychology: Science and Practice, 6(1), 95–106.
404 References
Luborsky, L., McLellan, A. T., Woody, G. E., O’Brien, C. P., & Auerbach, A. (1985).
Therapist success and its determinants. Archives of General Psychiatry, 42, 602–
611.
Ludman, E., Curry, S., Meyer, D., & Taplin, S. (1999). Implementation of outreach tele-
phone counseling to promote mammography participation.Health Education and
Behavior, 26(5), 689–702.
Maio, R. F., Portnoy, J., Blow, F. C., & Hill, E. (1994). Injury type, injury severity, and
repeat occurrence of alcohol-related trauma in adolescents. Alcoholism: Clinical
and Experimental Research, 18, 261–264.
Malan, D. H., Heath, E. S., Bacal, H. A., & Balfour, F. H. (1975). Psychodynamic
changes in untreated neurotic patients: II. Apparently genuine improvements. Ar-
chives of General Psychiatry, 32, 110–126.
Mann, R. E. (Ed.). (1996).Motivational interviewing with sex offenders: A practice man-
ual. Hull, UK: National Organisation for the Treatment of Abusers.
Mann, R. E. (2000). Managing resistance and rebellion in relapse prevention interven-
tion. In D. R. Laws, S. M. Hudson, & T. Ward (Eds.),Remaking relapse prevention
with sex offenders (pp. 187–200). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mann, R. E., Ginsburg, J. I. D., & Weekes, J. (2002). Motivational interviewing with of-
fenders. In M. McMurran (Ed.),Motivating offenders to change: A guide to enhanc-
ing engagement in therapy. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Mann, R. E., & Rollnick, S. (1996). Motivational interviewing with a sex offender who
believed he was innocent.Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 24,127–134.
Mann, R. E., & Shingler, J. (2001).Collaborative risk assessment with sexual offenders.
Unpublished manuscript.
Manohar, V. (1973). Training volunteers as alcoholism treatment counselors.Quarterly
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 34, 869–877.
Marcus, B. H., Rossi, J. S., Selby, V. C., Niaura, R. S., & Abrams, D. B. (1992). The
stages and processes of exercise adoption and maintenance in a worksite sample.
Health Psychology, 11(6), 386–395.
Markham, M. R., Miller, W. R., & Archiniega, L. (1993). BACCuS 2. 01: Computer
software for quantifying alcohol consumption. Behavior Research Methods, In -
struments, and Computers, 25, 420–421.
Marlatt, G. A., Baer, J. S., Kivlahan, D. R., Dimeff, L. A., Larimer, M. E., Quigley, L. A.,
Somers, J. M., & Williams, E. (1998). Screening and brief intervention for high-risk
college student drinkers: Results from a two-year follow-up assessment.Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66(4), 604–615.
Marlatt, G. A., & Gordon, J. R. (Eds.). (1985).Relapse prevention: Maintenance strate-
gies in the treatment of addictive behaviors. New York: Guilford Press.
Marques, J. K., Nelson, C., Alarcon, J.-M., & Day, D. M. (2000). Preventing relapse in
sex offenders: What we learned from SOTEP’s experimental treatment program. In
D. R. Laws, S. M. Hudson, & T. Ward (Eds.), Remaking relapse prevention with
sex offenders (pp. 321–340). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Marshall, W. L., Anderson, D., & Fernandez, Y. M. (1999).Cognitive behavioural treat-
ment of sexual offenders. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Marshall, W. L., Thornton, D., Marshall, L. E., Fernandez, Y. M., & Mann, R. E. (2001).
Treatment of sexual offenders who are in categorical denial: A pilot project.Sexual
Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treatment, 13(3), 205–216.
Martin, J. E., Calfas, K. J., Patten, C. A., Polarek, M., Hofstetter, R., Noto, J., & Beach,
D. (1997). Prospective evaluation of three smoking interventions in 205 recovering
References 405
alcoholics: One-year results of Project SCRAP-tobacco.Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 65, 190–194.
Martin, J. E., Noto, J. V., & Walters, S. T. (2000, September).A controlled trial of moti-
vational feedback-based group vs. written intervention in heavy drinking college
students: Project AIM-Greek collaboration. Paper presented at the international
conference on Treatment of Addictive Behaviors, Cape Town, South Africa.
Martino, S., Carroll, K. M., O’Malley, S. S., & Rounsaville, B. J. (2000). Motivational in-
terviewing with psychiatrically ill substance abusing patients.American Journal on
Addictions, 9, 88–91.
Maslow, A. (1967). Neurosis as a failure of personal growth. Humanitas, 3, 153–170.
Maslow, A. (1970).Motivation and personality(2nd ed.). New York: Harper & Row.
Matas, M., Staley, D., & Griffin, W. (1992). A profile of the noncompliant patient: A
thirty-month review of outpatient psychiatry referrals. General Hospital Psychia-
try, 14, 124–130.
Mattson, M. E. (1998). Finding the right approach. In W. R. Miller & N. Heather (Eds.),
Treating addictive behaviors (2nd ed., pp. 163–172). New York: Plenum Press.
Mattson, M., DelBoca, F., Cooney, N., DiClemente, C. C., Donovan, D. M., Rice, C. L.,
& Zweben, A. (1998). Patient compliance in Project MATCH: Session attendance
predictors and relationship to outcome.Alcoholism Clinical and Experimental Re-
search, 11(6), 1328–1339.
McCaskill, P. A., Toro, P. A., & Wolfe, S. M. (1998). Homeless and matched housed ad-
olescents: A comparative study of psychopathology.Journal of Clinical Child Psy-
chology, 27(3), 306–319.
McConnaughy, E. A., DiClemente, C. C., Prochaska, J. O., & Velicer, W. F. (1989).
Stages of change in psychotherapy: A follow-up report.Psychotherapy Practice and
Research, 26, 494–503.
McCrady, B. S., & Epstein, E. E. (1995). Directions for research on alcoholic relation-
ships: Marital- and individual-based models of heterogeneity.Psychology of Addic-
tive Behaviors, 9, 157–166.
McCullough, J. P., McCune, K. J., Kaye, A. L., Braith, J. A., Friend, R., Roberts, W. C.,
Belyea-Caldwell, S., Norris, S. L., & Hampton, C. (1994). One-year prospective
replication study of an untreated sample of community dysthymia subjects.Journal
of Nervous and Mental Disease, 182, 396–401.
McMurran, M., & Hollin, C. R. (1993). Young offenders and alcohol related crime: A
practitioner’s guidebook.Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Mercer-McFadden, C., Drake, R. E., Brown, N. B., & Fox, R. S. (1997). The Community
Support Program demonstrations of services for young adults with severe mental ill-
ness and substance use disorders.Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 20(3), 13–24.
Mhurchu, C. N., Margetts, B. M., & Speller, V. (1998). Randomized clinical trial com-
paring the effectiveness of two dietary interventions for patients with hyper -
lipidaemia. Clinical Science, 95(4), 479–487.
Milgram, S. (1963). Behavioral study of obedience.Journal of Abnormal and Social Psy-
chology, 67, 371–378.
Miller, E. T. (1999).Preventing alcohol abuse and alcohol-related negative consequences
among freshman college students: Using emerging computer technology to deliver
and evaluate the effectiveness of brief intervention efforts. Seattle: University of
Washington Press.
Miller, W. R. (1983). Motivational interviewing with problem drinkers. Behavioural
Psychotherapy, 11, 147–172.
406 References
Miller, W. R. (1985).Living as if: How positive faith can change your life. Philadelphia:
Westminster Press.
Miller, W. R. (1987). Techniques to modify hazardous drinking patterns. In M. Galanter
(Ed.), Recent developments in alcoholism (Vol. 5, pp. 425–438). New York: Ple-
num Press.
Miller, W. R. (1991). Emergent treatment concepts and techniques. Annual Review of
Addictions Research and Treatment, 2, 283–295.
Miller, W. R. (1992).Stages of Change Readiness and Treatment Eagerness Scale (SOC-
RATES). Albuquerque, NM: Center on Alcoholism, Substance Abuse, and Addic-
tions.
Miller, W. R. (1994). Motivational interviewing: III. On the ethics of motivational inter-
vention. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 22, 111–123.
Miller, W. R. (1996a). Manual for Form 90: A structured assessment interview for drink-
ing and related behaviors (NIAAA Project MATCH Monograph Series, Vol. 5,
DHHS Publication No. ADM 96–4004). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Print-
ing Office.
Miller, W. R. (1996b). Motivational interviewing: Research, practice, and puzzles. Ad-
dictive Behaviors, 21(6), 835–842.
Miller, W. R. (1998a). Enhancing motivation for change. In W. R. Miller & N. Heather
(Eds.),Treating addictive behaviors(2nd ed., pp. 121–132). New York: Plenum Press.
Miller, W. R. (1998b). Toward a motivational definition and understanding of addic-
tion. Motivational Interviewing Newsletter for Trainers, 5, 3.
Miller, W. R. (Ed.). (1999a).Enhancing motivation for change in substance abuse treat-
ment (Treatment Improvement Protocol [TIP] Series No. 35). Rockville, MD: Cen-
ter for Substance Abuse Treatment.
Miller, W. R. (1999b). Pros and cons: Reflections on motivational interviewing in correc-
tional settings. Motivational Interviewing Newsletter for Trainers, 6(1), 2–3.
Miller, W. R. (2000). Rediscovering fire: Small interventions, large effects.Psychology of
Addictive Behaviors, 14, 6–18.
Miller, W. R. (Ed.). (in press). Project COMBINE Combined Behavioral Intervention:
Therapist manual. Rockville, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alco-
holism.
Miller, W. R., Andrews, N. R., Wilbourne, P., & Bennett, M. E. (1998). A wealth of alter-
natives: Effective treatments for alcohol problems. In W. R. Miller & N. Heather
(Eds.), Treating addictive behaviors: Processes of change (2nd ed., pp. 203–216).
New York: Plenum Press.
Miller, W. R., & Baca, L. M. (1983). Two-year follow-up of bibliotherapy and therapist-
directed controlled drinking training for problem drinkers. Behavior Therapy, 14,
441–448.
Miller, W. R., Benefield, R. G., & Tonigan, J. S. (1993). Enhancing motivation for
change in problem drinking: A controlled comparison of two therapist styles.Jour-
nal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61(3), 455–461.
Miller, W. R., & Brown, J. M. (1991). Self-regulation as a conceptual basis for the pre-
vention and treatment of addictive behaviours. In N. Heather, W. R. Miller, & J.
Greeley (Eds.), Self-control and the addictive behaviours (pp. 3–79). Sydney:
Maxwell Macmillan Publishing Australia.
Miller, W. R., Brown, J. M., Simpson, T. L., Handmaker, N. S., Bien, T. H., Luckie, L. F.,
Montgomery, H. A., Hester, R. K., & Tonigan, J. S. (1995). What works? A meth-
odological analysis of the alcohol treatment outcome literature. In R. K. Hester &
References 407
W. R. Miller (Eds.),Handbook of alcoholism treatment approaches: Effective alter-
natives (2nd ed., pp. 12–44). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Miller, W. R., & C’de Baca, J. (1994). Quantum change: Toward a psychology of trans-
formation. In T. Heatherton & J. Weinberger (Eds.),Can personality change? (pp.
252–280). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Miller, W. R., & C’de Baca, J. (2001).Quantum change: When epiphanies and sudden
insights transform ordinary lives. New York: Guilford Press.
Miller, W. R., & Heather, N. (Eds.). (1998).Treating addictive behaviors: Processes of
change (2nd ed.). New York: Plenum Press.
Miller, W. R., Heather, N., & Hall, W. (1991). Calculating standard drink units: Interna-
tional comparisons. British Journal of Addiction, 86, 43–47.
Miller, W. R., Hedrick, K. E., & Taylor, C. A. (1983). Addictive behaviors and life prob-
lems before and after behavioral treatment of problem drinkers. Addictive Behav-
iors, 8, 403–412.
Miller, W. R., & Marlatt, G. A. (1984).The Comprehensive Drinker Profile. Odessa, FL:
Psychological Assessment Resources.
Miller, W. R., & Marlatt, G. A. (1987).Manual supplement for the Brief Drinker Profile,
Follow-up Drinker Profile, and Collateral Interview Form. Odessa, FL: Psychologi-
cal Assessment Resources.
Miller, W., & Mount, K. (2001). A small study of training in motivational interviewing:
Does one workshop change clinician and client behavior?Behavioural and Cogni-
tive Psychotherapy, 29, 457–471.
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (1991). Motivational interviewing: Preparing people to
change addictive behavior. New York: Guilford Press.
Miller, W. R., & Sovereign, R. G. (1989). Check-up: A model for early intervention in ad-
dictive behaviors. In T. Loberg, W. R. Miller, P. E. Nathan, & G. A. Marlatt (Eds.),
Addictive behaviors: Prevention and early intervention(pp. 219–231). Amsterdam:
Swets and Zeitlinger.
Miller, W. R., Sovereign, R. G., & Krege, B. (1988). Motivational interviewing with
problem drinkers: II. The Drinker’s Check-Up as a preventive intervention.Behav-
ioural Psychotherapy, 16, 251–268.
Miller, W. R., Taylor, C. A., & West, J. C. (1980). Focused versus broad spectrum behav-
ior therapy for problem drinkers. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
48, 590–601.
Miller, W. R., Toscova, R. T., Miller, J. H., & Sanchez, V. (2000). A theory-based moti-
vational approach for reducing alcohol/drug problems in college.Health Education
Behavior, 27, 744–759.
Miller, W. R., Zweben, A., DiClemente, C. C., & Rychtarik, R., (1992).Motivational en-
hancement therapy manual: A clinical research guide for therapists treating individ-
uals with alcohol abuse and dependence(Project MATCH Monograph Series, Vol.
2). Rockville, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
Monti, P. M., Colby, S. M., Barnett, N. P., Spirito, A., Rohsenow, D. J., Myers, M.,
Woolard, R., & Lewander, W. (1999). Brief intervention for harm reduction with
alcohol-positive older adolescents in a hospital emergency department. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 989–994
Moos, R. H., Finney, J. W., & Cronkite, R. C. (1990).Alcoholism treatment: Context,
process, and outcome. New York: Oxford University Press.
Moskowitz, J. M. (1985). The primary prevention of alcohol problems: A critical review
of the research literature. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 50(1), 54–88.
408 References
Moss, M. K., & Arend, R. A. (1977). Self-directed contact desensitization. Journal of
Consulting & Clinical Psychology 45(5), 730–738.
Mowrer, O. (1945). Time as a determinant in integrative learning.Psychological Review,
52, 61–90.
Mowrer, O. (1966). Integrity therapy: A self-help approach.Psychotherapy: Theory, Re-
search and Practice, 3, 114–119.
Mrazek, P. J., & Haggerty, R. J. (1994).Reducing risks for mental disorders. Washing-
ton, DC: National Academy Press, Committee on Prevention of Mental Disorders
Division of Biobehavioral Sciences and Mental Disorders, Institute of Medicine.
Mueser, K. T., Bennett, M., & Kushner, M. G. (1995). Epidemiology of substance use
disorders among persons with chronic mental illnesses. In A. F. Lehman & L. Dixon
(Eds.), Double jeopardy: Chronic mental illness and substance abuse (pp. 9–25).
New York: Harwood Academic.
Mueser, K. T., Drake, R. E., & Noordsy, D. L. (1998). Integrated mental health and sub-
stance abuse treatment for severe psychiatric disorders.Journal of Practical Psychi-
atry and Behavioral Health, 4(3), 129–139.
Mueser, K. T., & Noordsy, D. L. (1996). Group treatment for dually diagnosed clients.
In R. E. Drake & K. T. Mueser (Eds.), Dual diagnosis of major mental illness and
substance abuse disorder: II. Recent research and clinical implications(pp. 33–51).
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Murphy, C. M., & Baxter, V. A. (1997). Motivating batterers to change in the treatment
context. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 12(4), 607–619.
Murphy, J. G., Duchnick, J. J., Vuchinich, R. E., Davison, J. W., Karg, R. S., Olson, A.
M., Fry, A., & Coffey, T. T. (2000).Relative efficacy of a brief motivational inter-
vention for college students. Unpublished manuscript, Auburn University.
Murphy, R. T., Cameron, R. P., Rosen, C., & Thompson, K. (2000). Motivation to
change PTSD symptoms: A model of treatment. Manuscript submitted for publica-
tion.
Murphy, R. T., Cameron, R. P., Sharp, L., Rosen, C., Drescher, K., & Gusman, D. F.
(2000). Readiness to change PTSD symptoms and related behaviors among veter-
ans participating in a motivational enhancement group. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services. (1995).Motivational enhancement therapy manual: A clinical re-
search guide for therapists treating individuals with alcohol abuse and dependence
(Project MATCH Monograph Series, NIH Publication No. 94-3723). Rockville,
MD: Author.
Newcomb, M. D., & Bentler, P. M. (1988).Consequences of adolescent drug use: Impact
on the lives of young adults. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Nielson, B., Nielson, A. S., & Wraae, O. (2000). Factors associated with compliance of
alcoholics in outpatient treatment. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease , 188,
101–107.
NIMH Multisite HIV Prevention Trial. (1998). The NIMH Multisite HIV prevention
trial: Reducing HIV sexual risk behavior. Science, 280, 1889–1994.
Noonan, W. C. (1995a).Group motivational enhancement therapy.Unpublished manu-
script.
Noonan, W. C. (1995b).Group motivational interviewing as an enhancement to outpa-
tient alcohol treatment.Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of New Mex-
ico, Albuquerque.
References 409
Noonan, W. C., & Moyers, T. B. (1997). Motivational interviewing: A review.Journal of
Substance Misuse, 2, 8–16.
Nowinski, J., Baker, S., & Carroll, K. (1992).Twelve step facilitation therapy manual: A
clinical research guide for therapists treating individuals with alcohol abuse and de-
pendence (NIAAA Project MATCH Monograph Series, Vol. 1, DHHS Publication
No. ADM 92–1893). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Nye, E. C., Agostinelli, G., & Smith, J. E. (1999). Enhancing alcohol problem recogni-
tion: A self-regulation model for the effects of self-focusing and normative informa-
tion. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 60, 685–693.
O’Farrell, T. J., & Maisto, S. A. (1987). The utility of self-report and biological measures
of alcohol consumption in alcoholism treatment outcome studies.Advances in Be-
haviour Research and Therapy [Special Issue: Two decades of behavioral research
in the alcohol field: Change, challenge, and controversy], 9(2–3), 91–125.
Offer, D., & Schonert-Reichl, K. A. (1992). Debunking the myths of adolescence: find-
ings from recent research. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adoles-
cent Psychiatry, 31(6), 1003–1014.
O’Hanlon, W., & Weiner-Davis, M. (1989).In search of solutions: A new direction in
psychotherapy. New York: Norton.
Olfson, M., Mechanic, D., Boyer, C. A., & Hansell, S. (1998). Linking inpatients with
schizophrenia to outpatient care. Psychiatric Services, 49, 911–917.
Onken, L. S., Blaine, J. D., & Boren, J. J. (Eds.). (1997).Beyond the therapeutic alliance:
Keeping the drug-dependent individual in treatment (NIDA Research Monograph
165, NIH Publication No. 97–4142). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Owen, C., Rutherford, V., Jones, M., Tennant, C., & Smallman, A. (1997). Noncompli-
ance in psychiatric aftercare. Community Mental Health Journal, 33, 25–34.
Owen, R. R., Fischer, E. P., Booth, B. M., & Cuffel, B. J. (1996). Medication noncompli-
ance and substance abuse among patients with schizophrenia.Psychiatric Services,
47(8), 853–858.
Parker, M. W., Winstead, D. K., & Willi, F. J. P. (1979). Patient autonomy in alcohol re-
habilitation: I. Literature review. International Journal of the Addictions, 14 ,
1015–1022.
Patterson, G. R., & Forgatch, M. S. (1985). Therapist behavior as a determinent for cli-
ent noncompliance: A paradox for the behavior modifier. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 53, 846–851.
Peele, S. (1990). Addiction as a cultural concept. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 602, 205–220.
Pentz, M. A., Dwyer, J. H., MacKinnon, D. P., Flay, B. R., Hansen, W. B., Wang, Y. U, &
Johnson, A. (1989). A multicommunity trial for primary prevention of adolescent
drug abuse: Effects of drug use prevalence.Journal of the American Medical Associ-
ation, 22, 3259–3266.
Perz, C. A., DiClemente, C. C., & Carbonari, J. P. (1996). Doing the right thing at the
right time? Interaction of stages and processes of change in successful smoking ces-
sation. Health Psychology, 15, 462–468.
Peterson, A. C. (1993). Presidential address: Creating adolescents: The role of context and
process in developmental trajectories.Journal of Research on Adolescence, 3, 1–18.
Peterson, P. L. (1998). Motivational enhancement to reduce risk of street youth. Grant
proposal funded by National Institute on Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse (No. 5
R01 112167).
410 References
Pill, R., Rees, M. E., Stott, N. C., & Rollnick, S. R. (1999). Can nurses learn to let go? Is-
sues arising from an intervention designed to improve patients’ involvement in their
own care. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 29(6), 1492–1499.
Pillay, A. L., & Wassenaar, D. R. (1995). Psychological intervention, spontaneous remis-
sion, hopelessness, and psychiatric disturbance in adolescent parasuicides. Suicide
and Life-Threatening Behavior, 25, 386–392.
Premack, D. (1970). Mechanisms of self-control. In W. A. Hunt (Ed.),Learning mecha-
nisms in smoking (pp. 107–123). Chicago: Aldine.
Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (1982). Transtheoretical therapy: Toward a more
integrative model of change. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice, 19 ,
276–288.
Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (1983). Stages and processes of self-change of
smoking: Toward an integrative model of change.Journal of Consulting and Clini-
cal Psychology, 51, 390–395.
Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (1984).The transtheoretical approach: Crossing
the traditional boundaries of therapy. Malabar, FL: Krieger.
Prochaska, J. O., DiClemente, C. C., & Norcross, J. C. (1992). In search of how people
change: Applications to the addictive behaviors.American Psychologist, 47, 1102–
1114.
Prochaska, J. O., DiClemente, C. C., Velicer, W. F., & Rossi, J. S. (1993). Standardized
individualized, interactive and personalized self-help programs for smoking cessa-
tion. Health Psychology, 12, 399–405.
Prochaska, J. O., Velicer, W. F., DiClemente, C. C. Guadagnoli, J. O., & Rossi, J. S.
(1991). Patterns of change: Dynamic typology applied to smoking cessation.
Multivariate Behavioral Research, 26, 83–107.
Prochaska, J. O., Velicer, W. F., Rossi, J. S., Goldstein, M. G., Marcus, B. H., Rakowski,
W., Fiore, C., Harlow, L. L., Redding, C. A., Rosenbloom, D., & Rossi, S. R.
(1994). Stages of change and decisional balance for twelve problem behaviors.
Health Psychology, 13(1), 39–46.
Project MATCH Research Group. (1997a). Matching alcoholism treatments to client
heterogeneity: Project MATCH posttreatment drinking outcomes.Journal of Studies
on Alcohol, 58, 7–29.
Project MATCH Research Group. (1997b). Project MATCH secondary a priori hypoth-
eses. Addiction, 92, 1671–1698.
Project MATCH Research Group. (1998a). Matching alcoholism treatments to client
heterogeneity: Project MATCH three-year drinking outcomes.Alcoholism: Clinical
and Experimental Research, 23(60), 1300–1311.
Project MATCH Research Group. (1998b). Matching alcoholism treatments to client
heterogeneity: Treatment main effects and matching effects during treatment.Jour-
nal of Studies on Alcohol, 59, 631–639.
Project MATCH Research Group. (1998c). Therapist effects in three treatments for alco-
hol problems. Psychotherapy Research, 8, 455–474.
Rakowski, W., Dube, C. E., Marcus, B. H., Prochaska, J. O., Velicer, W. F., & Abrams,
D. B. (1992). Assessing elements of women’s decisions about mammography.
Health Psychology, 11(2), 111–118.
Rao, S. A. (1999). The short-term impact of the family check-up: A brief motivational in-
tervention for at-risk families. Dissertation Abstracts International: The Sciences
and Engineering, 59(7–B), 3710.
Regier, D. A., Farmer, M. E., Rae, D. S., Locke, B. Z., Keith, S. J., Judd, L. L., &
References 411
Goodwin, F. K. (1990). Comorbidity of mental disorders with alcohol and other
drug abuse. Journal of the American Medical Association, 264, 2511–2518.
Resnicow, K., Coleman-Wallace, D., Jackson, A., DiGirolamo, A., Odom, E., Wang, T.,
Dudley, W., Davis, M., & Baranowski, T. (2000). Dietary change through black
churches: Baseline results and program description of the Eat for Life trial.Journal
of Cancer Education, 15, 156–163.
Resnicow, K., DiIorio, C., Soet, J., Borrelli, B., Ernst, D., & Hecht, J. (2001). Motiva-
tional interviewing in health promotion: It sounds like something is changing .
Manuscript under review.
Resnicow, K., Jackson, A., Braithwaite, R., DiIorio, C., Blisset, D., Perisamy, S., &
Rahotep, S. (in press). Healthy Body/Healthy Spirit: Design and evaluation of a
church-based nutrition and physical activity intervention using motivational inter-
viewing. Health Education Research.
Resnicow, K., Jackson, A., Wang, T., Dudley, W., & Baranowski, T. (2001). A motiva-
tional interviewing intervention to increase fruit and vegetable intake through black
churches: Results of the Eat for Life trial. American Journal of Public Health, 91,
1686–1693.
Resnicow, K., Odom, E., Wang, T., Dudley, W., Mitchell, D., Vaughan, R., Jackson, A.,
& Baranowski, T. (2000). Validation of three food frequency questionnaires and
twenty-four hour recalls with serum carotenoids in a sample of African American
adults. American Journal of Epidemiology, 152, 1072–1080.
Richmond, R. L., Bell, A. P., Rollnick, S., & Heather, B. B. (1996). Screening for smokers
in four Sydney teaching hospitals. Journal of Cardiovascular Risk, 3, 199–203.
Roberts, L. J., Neal, D. J., Kivlahan, D. R., Baer, J. S., & Marlatt, G. A. (2000). Individual
drinking changes following a brief intervention among college students: Clinical
significance in an indicated preventive context. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 68(3), 500–505.
Roberts, M. (1997). The man who listens to horses. New York: Random House.
Roffman, R. (2000). The Teen Marijuana Check-up. Grant proposal submitted to the
National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Rogers, C. R. (1951). Client-centered therapy. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R. (1959). A theory of therapy, personality, and interpersonal relationships as
developed in the client-centered framework. In S. Koch (Ed.), Psychology: The
study of a science: Vol. 3. Formulations of the person and the social contexts (pp.
184–256). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Rogers, C. R. (1961). On becoming a person. Boston: Houghlin Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R. (1964). Toward a modern approach to values: The valuing process in the
mature person. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 68(2), 160–167.
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of innovations (4th ed.). New York: Free Press.
Rokeach, M. (1973). The nature of human values. New York: Free Press.
Rokeach, M. (Ed.). (1979). Understanding human values. New York: Macmillan.
Rollnick, S. (1996). Behaviour change in practice: Targeting individuals. International
Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic, 20(Suppl. 1), S22–S26.
Rollnick, S. (1998). Readiness, importance, and confidence: Critical conditions of
change in treatment. In W. R. Miller & N. Heather (Eds.),Treating addictive behav-
iors (2nd ed., pp. 49–60). New York: Plenum Press.
Rollnick, S., & Bell, A. (1991). Brief motivational interviewing for use by the nonspecial-
ist. In W. R. Miller, & S. Rollnick,Motivational interviewing: Preparing people to
change addictive behavior (pp. 203–213). New York: Guilford Press.
412 References
Rollnick, S., Butler, C. C., & Stott, N. (1997). Helping smokers make decisions: The en-
hancement of brief intervention for general medical practice.Patient Education and
Counseling, 31(3), 191–203.
Rollnick, S., Heather, N., & Bell, A. (1992). Negotiating behaviour change in medical
settings: The development of brief motivational interviewing. Journal of Mental
Health, 1, 25–39.
Rollnick, S., Kinnersley, P., & Butler, C. C. (2002). Context-bound communication skills
training: Development of a new method. Medical Education, 36, 377–383.
Rollnick, S. Mason, P., & Butler, C. (1999).Health behavior change: A guide for practi-
tioners. London: Churchill Livingstone.
Rollnick, S., & Miller, W. R. (1995). What is motivational interviewing? Behavioural
and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 23(4), 325–334.
Rollnick, S., & Morgan, M. (1995). Motivational interviewing: Increasing readiness for
change. In A. M. Washton (Ed.), Psychotherapy and substance abuse: A practitio-
ner’s handbook(pp. 179–191). New York: Guilford Press.
Ross, R. R., & Lightfoot, L. O. (1985). Developing alcohol abuse programs for offend-
ers. In R. R. Ross & L. O. Lightfoot (Eds.), Treatment of the alcohol-abusing of-
fender (pp. 86–144). Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Rubino, G., Barker, C., Roth, T., & Fearon, P. (2000). Therapist empathy and depth of
interpretation in response to potential alliance ruptures: The role of therapist and
patient attachment styles. Psychotherapy Research, 10, 408–420.
Rusk, T. N., & Ervin, H. N. (1996). Guiding self-change: A new model for brief psycho-
therapy. Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 26, 327–336.
Ryan, R., Fisher, D., Krutch, B., & Downey, L. (2001, August). Using assessment and
motivational feedback to reduce HIV transmission rates among HIV+ MSM. Paper
presented at the National HIV Prevention Conference, Atlanta.
Ryan, R .M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrin-
sic motivation, social development, and well-being. American Psychologist, 55(1),
68–78.
Ryan, R. M., Plant, R. W., & O’Malley, S. (1995). Initial motivations for alcohol treat-
ment: Relations with patient characteristics, treatment involvement, and dropout.
Addictive Behaviors, 20(3), 279–297.
Sanchez, F. (2000).A values-based intervention for alcohol problems. Doctoral disserta-
tion, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.
Saunders, B., Wilkinson, C., & Allsop, S. (1991). Motivational intervention with heroin
users attending a methadone clinic. In W. R. Miller & S. Rollnick,Motivational in-
terviewing: Preparing people to change addictive behavior (pp. 279–292). New
York: Guilford Press.
Saunders, B., Wilkinson, C., & Phillips, M. (1995). The impact of a brief motivational in-
tervention with opiate users attending a methadone programme. Addiction, 90,
415–424.
Schmidt, M. M., & Miller, W. R. (1983). Amount of therapist contact and outcome in a
multidimensional depression treatment program. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica,
67, 319–332.
Schneider, R. J., Casey, J., & Kohn, R. (2000). Motivational versus confrontational inter-
viewing: A comparison of substance abuse assessment practices at employee assis-
tance programs.Journal of Behavioral Health Services and Research, 27(1), 60–74.
Schuman, H., & Johnson, M. (1976). Attitudes and behavior.Annual Review of Sociol-
ogy, 2, 161–207.
References 413
Schwartz, S. H. (1974). Awareness of interpersonal consequences, responsibility denial,
and volunteering. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 30, 57–63.
Schwartz, S. H., & Ames, R. E. (1977). Positive and negative referent others as sources of
influence: A case of helping. Sociometry, 40, 12–21.
Schwartz, S. H., & Bilsky, W. (1987). Toward a universal psychological structure of hu-
man values. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 550–562.
Schwartz, S. H., & Howard, J. A. (1980). Explanations of the moderating effect of re -
sponsibility denial on the personal norm behavior relationship. Social Psychology
Quarterly, 43, 441–446.
Schwartz, S. H., & Inbar-Saban, N. (1988). Value self-confrontation as a method to aid
in weight loss. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 396–404.
Sefarbi, R. (1990). Admitters and deniers among adolescent sex offenders and their fami-
lies: A preliminary study. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 60(3), 460–465.
Selzer, M. (1971). The Michigan Alcoholism Screening Test: The quest for a new diag-
nostic instrument. American Journal of Psychiatry, 127, 1653–1658.
Selzer, M., Vinokur, A., & Van Rooijen, L. (1975). A self-administered Short Michigan
Alcoholism Screening Test (SMAST).Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 36, 117–126.
Shaffer, H. J. (1992). The psychology of stage change: The transition from addiction to
recovery. In J. H. Lowison, P. Ruiz, R. B. Millman, & J. G. Langrod (Eds.), Sub-
stance abuse: A comprehensive textbook (2nd ed., pp. 100–105). Baltimore: Wil-
liams & Wilkins.
Shapiro, A. K. (1971). Placebo effects in medicine, psychotherapy, and psychoanalysis.
In A. E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.),Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior
change: An empirical analysis (pp. 439–473). New York: Wiley.
Shiffman, S. (1982). Relapse following smoking cessation: A situational analysis.Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 50, 71–86.
Shoham, V., & Rohrbaugh, M. (1995). Aptitude x treatment interaction research:
Sharpening the focus, widening the lens. In M. Aveline & D. Shapiro (Eds.), Re-
search foundations for psychotherapy research (pp. 73–95). Sussex, England:
Wiley.
Shoham, V., Rohrbaugh, M. J., Stickle, T. R., & Jacob, T. (1998). Demand-withdraw
couple interaction moderates retention in cognitive-behavioral versus family-sys -
tems treatments for alcoholism. Journal of Family Psychology, 12(4), 1–21.
Shope, J. T. (1988). Compliance in children and adults: Review of studies. In D. S. I. E.
Leppik (Ed.), Compliance in epilepsy (pp. 23–47). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Simon, S., Howe, L., & Kirschenbaum, H. (1995). Values clarification: A practical,
action-directed workbook. New York: Warner Books.
Simpson, D. D., Brown, B. S., & Joe, G. W. (1997). Treatment retention and follow-up
outcomes in the drug abuse treatment outcome study (DATOS).Psychology of Ad-
dictive Behaviors, 11, 294–307.
Simpson, D. D., & Joe, G. W. (1993). Motivation as a predictor of early dropout from
drug abuse treatment. Psychotherapy, 30, 357–368.
Simpson, T. L., Arroyo, J. A., Miller, W. R., & Little, L. M. (1999). [Desired Effects of
Drinking Questionnaire]. Unpublished raw data.
Sims, J., Smith, J., Duffy, A., & Hilton, S. (1998). Can practice nurses increase physical
activity in the over 65’s? Methodologic considerations from a pilot study. British
Journal of General Practice, 48, 1249–1250.
Singh, N., Squier, C., Sivek, C., & Wagener, M. (1996). Determinants of compliance
with antiretroviral therapy in patients with human immunodeficiency virus: Pro -
414 References
spective assessment with implications for enhancing compliance.AIDS Care, 8(3),
261–269.
Skinner, H. A., & Allen, B. A. (1983). Differential assessment of alcoholism: Evaluation
of the Alcohol Use Inventory. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 44(5), 852–862.
Slesnick, N., Meyers, R. J., Meade, M., & Segelken, D. H. (1999). Bleak and hopeless no
more: Engagement of reluctant substance-abusing runaway youth and their fami-
lies. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 19, 215–222.
Smart, R. G. (1974). Employed alcoholics treated voluntarily and under constructive co-
ercion: A follow-up study.Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 35, 196–209.
Smith, D. E., Heckemeyer, C. M., Kratt, P. P., & Mason, D. A. (1997). Motivational in-
terviewing to improve adherence to a behavioral weight-control program for older
obese women with NIDDM: A pilot study. Diabetes Care, 20(1), 53–54.
Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (1992). Timeline follow-back: A technique for assessing
self-reported alcohol consumption. In R. Litten & J. P. Allen (Eds.),Measuring al -
cohol consumption: Psychological and biochemical methods(pp. 41–42). Totowa,
NJ: Humana Press.
Sobell, L. C., Sobell, M. B., Brown, J. C., Cleland, P. A., & Buchan, G. (1995, Novem-
ber). A randomized trial comparing group versus individual guided self-change
treatment for alcohol and drug abusers. Paper presented at the annual meeting of
the Association for the Advancement of Behavior Therapy, Washington, DC.
Sobell, L. C., Sobell, M. B., & Leo, G. I. (1993).Spousal support: A motivational inter-
vention for alcohol abusers. Poster session presented at the annual meeting of the
Association for the Advancement of Behavior Therapy, Atlanta, GA.
Sobell, L. C., Sobell, M. B., & Toneatto, T. (1992). Recovery from alcohol problems
without treatment. In N. Heather, W. R. Miller, & J. Greely (Eds.),Self-control and
the addictive behaviors. New York: Maxwell Macmillan.
Sobell, L. C., Sobell, M. B., Toneatto, T., & Leo, G. I. (1993). What triggers the resolu-
tion of alcohol problems without treatment? Alcoholism: Clinical, Experimental,
and Research, 17, 217–224.
Sobell, M. B., & Sobell, L. C. (1993). Problem drinkers. New York: Guilford Press.
Sobell, M. B., & Sobell, L. C. (1998). Guiding self change. In W. R. Miller & N. Heather
(Eds.),Treating addictive behaviors(2nd ed., pp. 189–202). New York: Plenum Press.
Soet, J. E., & Basch, C. E. (1997). The telephone as a communication medium for health
education. Health Education and Behavior, 24(6), 759–772.
Solomon, P., & Gordon, B. (1988). Outpatient compliance with psychiatric emergency
room Patients by presenting problems. Psychiatric Quarterly, 59, 271–283.
Spielberger, C. D. (1988). Manual for the State-Trait Anger Expression Scale (STAX) .
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Stall, R., & Biernacki, P. (1986). Spontaneous remission from the problematic use of sub-
stances: An inductive model derived from a comparative analysis of the alcohol,
opiate, tobacco, and food/obesity literatures. International Journal of the Addic -
tions, 21, 1–23.
Stanton, M. D., Todd, T. C., & Associates (1982).The family therapy of drug abuse and
addiction. New York: Guilford Press.
Stark, M. J. (1992). Dropping out of substance abuse treatment: A clinically oriented re-
view. Clinical Psychology Review, 12, 93–116.
Stephens, R. S., Roffman, R. A., & Curtin, L. (2000). Comparison of extended versus
brief treatments for marijuana use.Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
68(5), 898–908.
References 415
Stephens, R. S., Roffman, R. A., & Simpson, E. E. (1994). Treating adult marijuana de-
pendence: A test of the relapse prevention model.Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 62, 92–99.
Stewart, L., & Millson, W. A. (1995). Offender motivation for treatment as a respons-
ivity factor. Forum on Corrections Research, 7(3), 5–7.
Stewart, L., & Montplaisir, G. (1999).Reasons for drop- outs among participants in the
Cognitive Skills and Anger and Other Emotions Management programs. Unpub-
lished manuscript.
Stewart, M., Brown, J. B., Weston, W. W., McWhinney, I. R,, McWilliam, C. L., & Free-
man, T. R. (Eds.). (1995). Patient-centered medicine: Transforming the clinical
method. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Stott, N. C. H., Rollnick, S., & Pill, R. M. (1995). Innovation in clinical method: Diabetes
care and negotiating skills. Family Practice, 12(4), 413–418.
Suris, A. M., Trapp, M. C., DiClemente, C. C., & Cousins, J. (1998). Application of the
transtheoretical model of behavior change for obesity in Mexican American
women. Addictive Behaviors, 23(4), 655–668.
Swanson, A. J., Pantalon, M. V., & Cohen, K. R. (1999). Motivational interviewing and
treatment adherence among psychiatric and dually diagnosed patients. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 187, 630–635.
Taplin, S., Barlow, W., Ludman, E., MacLehose, R., Meyer, D., Seger, D., Herta, D.,
Chin, R., & Curry, S. (2000). Testing reminder and motivational telephone calls to
increase screening mammography: A randomized study. Journal of the National
Cancer Institute, 92(3), 233–242.
Thase, M. E., Weiss, R. D., Gastfriend, G. R., Woody, G. E., Barber, J. P., Butler, S. F.,
Daley, D., Salloum, I., Bishop, S., Najavits, L. M., Lis, J., Mercer, D., Griffin, M. L.,
Moras, K., & Beck, A. T. (1999). Psychosocial treatments for cocaine dependence:
National Institute on Drug Abuse collaborative cocaine treatment study. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 56, 493–502.
Thevos, A. K., Kaona, F. A. D., Siajunza, M. T., & Quick, R. E. (2000). Adoption of safe
water behaviors in Zambia: Comparing educational and motivational approaches.
Education for Health, 13(3), 366–376.
Thevos, A. K., Olsen, S. J., Rangel, J., Kaona, F. A. D., Tembo, M., & Quick, R. E.
(2001). Social marketing and motivational interviewing as community interven -
tions for safe water behaviors: Follow-up surveys in Zambia. Unpublished manu-
script.
Thevos, A. K., Quick, R. E., & Yanduli, V. (2000). Application of motivational inter -
viewing to the adoption of water disinfection practices in Zambia.Health Promo-
tion International, 15(3), 207–214.
Thornton, D. (in press). Constructing and testing a framework for dynamic risk assess-
ment. Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treatment.
Tonigan, J. S., Miller, W. R., & Brown, J. M. (1997). The reliability of Form 90: An in-
strument for assessing alcohol treatment outcome. Journal of Studies on Alcohol,
58(4), 358–364.
Treasure, J. L., Katzman, M., Schmidt, U., Troop, N., Todd, G., & de Silva, P. (1999).
Engagement and outcome in the treatment of bulimia nervosa: First phase of a se-
quential design comparing motivation enhancement therapy and cognitive behav-
ioural therapy. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37, 405–418.
Trice, H. M., & Beyer, J. M. (1983). Social control in worksettings: Using the construc-
tive confrontation strategy with problem-drinking employees. In D. A. Ward (Ed.),
416 References
Alcoholism: Introduction to theory and treatment (Rev. ed., pp. 314–339). Dubuque,
IA: Kendall/Hunt.
Trigwell, P., Grant, P. J., & House, A. (1997). Motivation and glycemic control in diabe-
tes mellitus. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 43, 307–315.
Trostle, J. (1988). Doctors’ orders and patients’ self-interest: Two views of medication
usage? In D. S. I. E. Leppik (Ed.),Compliance in epilepsy(pp. 57–69). Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Truax, C. B., & Carkhuff, R. R. (1967).Toward effective counseling and psychotherapy.
Chicago: Aldine.
Truax, C. B., & Mitchell, K. M. (1971). Research on certain therapist interpersonal skills
in relation to process and outcome. In A. E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.),Hand-
book of psychotherapy and behavior change: An empirical analysis(pp. 299–344).
New York: Wiley.
Turner, A. J., & Vernon, J. C. (1976). Prompts to increase attendance in community
mental health center. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 9, 141–145.
Turner, J. G., Nokes, K. M., Corless, I. B., Holzemer, W. L., Inouye, J., Brown, M. A., &
Powell-Cope, G. M. (1998). History of drug use and adherence in HIV+ persons.
Paper presented at the 12th International Conference on AIDS, Geneva.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2000).Treating tobacco and depend-
ence: Clinical practice guideline. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Public Health Service.
Vaillant, G. E. (1995).The natural history of alcoholism revisited. Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press.
Valle, S. K. (1981). Interpersonal functioning of alcoholism counselors and treatment
outcome. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 42, 783–790.
Velasquez, M. M., Carbonari, J. P., & DiClemente, C. C. (1999). Psychiatric severity and
behavior change in alcoholism: The relation of transtheoretical model variables to
psychiatric distress in dually diagnosed patients. Addictive Behaviors, 24(4), 481–
496.
Velasquez, M. M., Hecht, J., Quinn, V. P., Emmons, K. M., DiClemente, C. C., & Dolan-
Mullen, P. (2000). Application of motivational interviewing to prenatal smoking ces-
sation: Training and implementation issues.Tobacco Control, 9(Suppl. 3), 36–40.
Velasquez, M. M., Maurer, G. G., Crouch, C., & DiClemente, C. C. (2001).Group treat-
ment for substance abuse: A stages-of-change therapy manual.New York: Guilford
Press.
Velicer, W. F., & DiClemente, C. (1993). Understanding and intervening with the total
population of smokers. Tobacco Control, 2, 95–96.
Velicer, W. F., Prochaska, J. O., Bellis, J. M., DiClemente, C. C., Rossi, J. S., Fava, J. L.,
& Steiger, J. H. (1993). An expert system intervention for smoking cessation. Ad-
dictive Behaviors, 18, 269–290.
Volpicelli, J. R., Alterman, A. I., Hayasguda, M., & O’Brien, C. P. (1997). Naltrexone
and alcohol dependence: Role of subject compliance.Archives of General Psychia-
try, 54, 737–74.
Waldorf, D., Reinarman, C., & Murphy, S. (1991).Cocaine changes: The experience of
using and quitting. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Walizter, K. S., Dermen, K. H., & Connors, G. J. (1999). Strategies for preparing clients
for treatment—A review. Behavior Modification, 23, 129–151.
Walker, R., Minor-Schork, D., Bloch, R., & Esinhart, J. (1996). High-risk factors for
rehospitalization within six months. Psychiatric Quarterly, 67, 235–242.
References 417
Walker Daniels, J. (1998). Coping with the health threat of smoking: An analysis of the
precontemplation stage of smoking cessation . Doctoral dissertation, Psychology
Department, University of Maryland, Baltimore County.
Walker Daniels, J., & Murphy, C. M. (1997). Stages and processes of change in batterers’
treatment. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 4, 123–145.
Walters, S. T. (1998).Manual for the SDSU Alcohol Information and Motivation (AIM)
program. Unpublished manuscript.
Walters, S. T. (2000). In praise of feedback: An effective intervention for college students
who are heavy drinkers. Journal of American College Health, 48, 235–238.
Walters, S. T., & Bennett, M. E. (2000). Addressing drinking among college students: A
review of the empirical literature.Alcoholism Treatment Quarterly, 18(1), 61–77.
Walters, S. T., Bennett, M. E., & Miller. J. E. (2000). Reducing alcohol use in college stu-
dents: A controlled trial of two brief interventions. Journal of Drug Education,
30(3), 361–372.
Walters, S. T., Gruenewald, D. A., Miller, J. H., & Bennett, M. E. (2001). Early findings
from a disciplinary program to reduce problem drinking by college students.Jour-
nal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 20(1), 89–91.
Weakland, J. H., & Fisch, R. (1992). Brief therapy—MRI style. In S. H. Budman, M. F.
Hoyt, and S. Friedman (Eds.),The first session in brief therapy(pp. 306–323). New
York: Guilford Press.
Weinstein, N. D., Rothman, A. J., & Sutton, S. R. (1998). Stage theories in health behav-
ior: Conceptual and methodological issues. Health Psychology, 17(3), 290–299.
Werch, C. E., & DiClemente, C. C. (1994). A multi-component stage model for matching
drug prevention strategies and messages to youth stage of use. Health Education
Research: Theory and Practice, 9(1), 37–46.
Westerberg, V. S. (1998). What predicts success? In W. R. Miller & N. Heather (Eds.),
Treating addictive behaviors (2nd ed., pp. 301–315). New York: Plenum Press.
Willoughby, R. W., & Edens, J. F. (1996). Construct validity and predictive utility of the
stages of change scale for alcoholics. Journal of Substance Abuse, 8(3), 275–291.
Winters, K. C., Latimer, W. L., & Stinchfield, R. D. (1999). Adolescent Treatment. In P.
J. Ott, R. E. Tarter, & R. T. Ammerman (Eds.), Sourcebook on substance abuse:
Etiology, epidemiology, assessment, and treatment(pp. 350–361). Boston: Allyn &
Bacon.
Wojciszke, B. (1987). Ideal-self, self-focus and value-behavior consistency. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 17, 187–198.
Wolpe, P. R., Gorton, G., Serota, R., & Sanford, B. (1993). Predicting compliance of dual
diagnosis inpatients with aftercare treatment.Hospital and Community Psychiatry,
44, 45–49.
Woollard, J., Beilin, L., Lord, T., Puddey, I., MacAdam, D., & Rouse, I. (1995). A con-
trolled trial of nurse counselling on lifestyle change for hypertensives treated in gen-
eral practice: Preliminary results. Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and
Physiology, 22(6–7), 466–468.
Wright, E. C. (1993). Non-compliance—or how many Aunts has Matilda? The Lancet,
342, 909–913.
Yahne, C. E., & Miller, W. R. (1999). Evoking hope. In W. R. Miller (Ed.),Integrating
spirituality into treatment: Resources for practitioners(pp. 217–233). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Yalom, I. (1995).The theory and practice of group psychotherapy(4th ed.). New York:
Basic Books.
418 References
Yates, F. (1984). Does treatment work? Yes, but not the way we plan it. In N. Heather, I.
Robertson, & P. Davies (Eds.), Alcohol misuse: Three crucial questions (pp. 148–
157). London: Methuen.
Zuckoff, A., & Daley, D. C. (1999, March/April). Dropout prevention and dual diagno-
sis clients. The Counselor, pp. 23–27.
Zuckoff, A., & Daley, D. C. (2001). Engagement and adherence in treating persons with
non-psychosis dual disorders. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Skills, 5, 131–162.
Zuckoff, A., Ryan, C. M., & Thoma, F. (2000). HIV risk reduction in gay men: Use of
motivational interviewing to facilitate attendance in interventions. Paper presented
at the 23rd annual meeting of the Research Society on Alcoholism, Denver, CO.
Zweben, A. (1991). Motivational Counseling with Alcoholic Couples. In W. R. Miller &
S. Rollnick, Motivational interviewing: Preparing people to change addictive
behavior (pp. 225–235). New York: Guilford Press.
Zweben, A., & Barrett, D. (1993). Brief couples treatment for alcohol problems. In T. R.
O’Farrell (Ed.),Treating alcohol problems: Marital and family interventions (pp.
353–380). New York: Guilford Press.
Zweben, A., Bonner, M., Chaim, G., & Santon, P. (1988). Facilitative strategies for re-
taining the alcohol-dependent client in outpatient treatment.Alcoholism Treatment
Quarterly, 5, 3–24.
Zweben, A., & Li, S. (1981). The efficacy of role induction in preventing early drop-out
from outpatient treatment of drug dependency.American Journal of Drug and Al-
cohol Abuse, 8(2), 71–83.
Zweben, A., & Pearlman, S. (1983). Evaluating the effectiveness of conjoint treatment of
alcohol complicated marriages: Clinical and methodological issues.Journal of Mar-
ital and Family Therapy, 9, 61–72.
References 419
This page intentionally left blank 
/G49/G6E/G64/G65/G78
Page numbers followed by “b” indicate box, “f” indicate figure, and “t” indicate table.
Acceptance, 37
acceptance-based therapies, 352
Accurate empathy, 7
acceptance as underlying attitude, 37
Action-oriented therapies, 352–353
Adaptations of motivational interviewing,
270–271, 282–283
common elements, 280
framework, 273, 274b, 276–277
behavior change counseling, 273,
275, 278–279
brief advice, 273, 275, 277–278
learning/training implications, 281–282
methods, 272–273
names/perspectives, 271–272
practice implications, 280–281
Addictive behavior
and approach–avoidance conflict, 13–14
and study of change, 4
Adherence issues, 313–314, 362
and dual disorders, 362
and motivational interviewing, 365–
368
strategies with outpatients, 368
case example, 369–370
“check-up” feedback, 371
drop-in motivational groups, 371
Advocacy responses, 49.See also Phase 1
(motivational interviewing)/early
traps
types, 50–51, 50b
Alcohol use disorders/treatment studies
different methods, 26–27
motivational interviewing modes, 28
Alcoholics Anonymous, position on labeling,
61
Allison, Jeff, 22
Ambivalence, 11, 19
approach–avoidance conflict, 13, 15, 39
clarification, 92, 96
and conflicting values, 292–293
and decisional balance, 15–16, 15f, 16f
discrepancy overlap, 23
and normal process of change, 14
paradoxical responses, 17–18
and psychological difficulties, 13–14
resolution via motivational interviewing,
25–26
choice counseling, 86
social context, 16–17
AMI (“adaptation” of motivational inter -
viewing), 218
and adherence promotion, 307
and client profiles, 245–246
421
AMI (continued)
and group intervention, 307–308
process–outcome links, 244–245
and treatment facilitation, 306–307
Assessment measures
Drinker’s Check-Up (DCU), 218, 378
Project MATCH, 218
Attack therapy, 11–12.See alsoConfrontation
B
BASICS (Brief Alcohol Screening and Ad -
vice for College Students) program,
327–328
Behavioral gap, 38
Berg-Smith, Steve, 189
Boot camps, 12
Brief intervention effects, 5,327
and ambivalence “unsticking,” 14
Brief negotiation, 253–254
Buddhism, and detachment from meddling,
20
C
Change. See also TTM (Transtheoretical
model of intentional behavior
change)
ability/confidence, 11, 53–55, 111–112,
125. See also Confidence talk
confidence traps, 112–113
enhancing confidence clinical exam-
ple, 118–124
“behavioral gap,” 38
discrepancy foundation, 22–23
importance of, 10, 38
readiness/priorities, 11, 54
readiness signs, 127b, 373b
and “recycling,” 213
as study topic, 3–4
focus on addictive behavior, 4
Change (motivational understanding of),
9–10, 11–12
and ambivalence, 23
and brief intervention, 5
counselor effects, 6–7
dose effects, 5
natural, 4, 312
self-efficacy effects, 5–6
and significant others, 348
waiting-list effects, 8
Change plan
negotiation steps, 133
change plan worksheet, 136, 137b, 138
commitment, 138
goal setting, 133–135
options review, 135
and Phase 2 process, 111
Change talk, 23, 181. See also Confidence
talk
categories, 47
advantages of change, 24
disadvantages of status quo, 24
intention to change, 24
optimism for change, 24, 113
effects, 8–9
eliciting, 76–78, 83
methods
affirmation, 91
decisional balance discussion, 80
elaborating, 80–81, 87
exploring goals/values, 83
importance ruler, 78
looking back, 82
looking forward, 82–83
open questions, 78, 79b
querying extremes, 81
reflective listening, 88–89
summarization, 89–91
vs. resistance, 47, 49b
Changers, characteristics of, 115b
Cognitive dissonance, 38, 45
Compassion, 162–163
Confidence. See Change, ability/
confidence
Confidence talk, 113
brainstorming, 115–116
confidence ruler, 113–114
hypothetical change, 117
information and advice, 116
past successes review, 114
personal strengths/supports, 114–115,
115b
questions, 113
radical change, 118
reframing, 116–117
responding to confidence talk, 117–
118
Conflicts, 14
approach–approach, 14
approach–avoidance, 14–15, 19, 39
avoidance–avoidance, 14
double approach–avoidance type, 15
Confrontation, 244. See also Advocacy re-
sponses
“attack therapy,” 11–12
“boot camp”/“scared straight” treat -
ment programs, 334–335
negative effects of, 7, 9, 47
422 Index
Consonance/dissonance, 43–45, 51
dissonance causes, 45–46
dissonance and client resistance behav -
ior, 46
Counselor effects, 6–7. See also Advocacy
responses
confrontational style (negative effects
of), 7, 9
skill issues and resistance, 99
support for, 244
Cultural issues
British vs. American counselors, 73
use of motivational interviewing in in -
ternational public health issues,
266–268
CYT (Cannabis Youth Treatment) project,
325
D
Decisional balance, 15–16, 15f, 16f, 369b
Defense mechanisms, 11
Discrepancy, 292
development, 22
and expressed empathy, 384–385
and motivational interviewing, 55–56
in group format, 385–386
and perception, 23
and self-regulation, 10
Dissonance. See Consonance/dissonance
Dose effects, 5
Drop-in motivational groups, 371
Dual disorders, 362
and integrated care, 364
and motivational interviewing, 364, 376
enhancing treatment adherence, 365–
366
inpatient to outpatient transitioning,
364–365
medication adherence, 366–368
special issues, 372–374
and treatment problems, 363
E
Empathy. See Accurate empathy
Empirical research review (motivational in -
terviewing), 247
future research directions, 246–247
and adaptations, 282
guidelines, 219–220
internal validity of research design is -
sues, 242–243
ongoing studies, 257
prior studies, 219
process–outcome links, 244–245
qualitative outcome review, 226, 241–
244
AMIs for alcohol problems, 226,
233–235
AMIs for alcohol problems (stand-
alone/no-treatment controls), 229–
230
AMIs for alcohol problems (stand-
alone/other treatment controls),
230–233
AMIs for alcohol problems (treat -
ment preludes), 226–229
AMIs for diet/exercise/lifestyle
changes, 239–240
AMIs for drugs, 235–237
AMIs for eating disorders, 240–
241
AMIs for HIV-risk behaviors, 238–
239
AMIs for psychiatric treatment adher -
ence, 237–238
AMIs for smoking, 235
studies/characteristics, 220, 225
AMIs for alcohol problems, 221t–
222t
AMIs for diet/exercise/health behav-
iors, 224t
AMIs for smoking/drugs/HIV-risk
behavior/psychiatric treatment ad-
herence, 223t
methodology (quantitative perspec -
tive), 220, 226
Equipoise, 91
Ernst, Denise, 277
Ethical considerations
aspirations, 164–165
of client, 162
of counselor, 162–163
complexities and motivational interview -
ing, 166–167, 170b
coerciveness issue, 167–168
special situations, 168–169
guidelines, 169
aspirations clarification, 169–171
coercive power vs. motivational inter -
viewing, 173–175
negotiate counselor’s agenda, 171–
172
personal investment vs. motivational
interviewing, 172–173
influence (use of) in motivational inter -
viewing, 161–162
power (and use of), 165–166
Index 423
F
Faith/hope effects. See Self-efficacy
Family Check-Up, 326
Festinger, Leon, 38
Freud, Anna, 11
G
Get Busy Living project, 263–264
GMI (group-based motivational interview -
ing), 377–378, 389–390
and adult outpatients, 379–380
argument/confrontation avoidance, 386–
387
and college student drinking, 378–379
and discrepancy building, 385–386
and expert trap issues, 388
and health intervention studies, 380–
381
limitations and possibilities, 381–
382
perils, 384
process, 382–384
research opportunities, 388–389
and “social loafing,” 387
Goals/values
and change plan, 134–135
and change talk, 83
Gordon, Thomas, 49,68
Guided self-change approach, 297
H
Haley, Jay, 39
Healthy Body, Healthy Spirit trial, 259–
260, 260t
I
ICT (integrative couple therapy), 352
Integrity therapy, 290
Internet
resources for motivational interviewing
learning facilitation, 190
sources for research review, 219
Interview, 24–25
Investment, 162–164
Ironic process, 37
M
Maslow, Abraham
hierarchical structure of values, 285–
286
theory of self-actualization, 289
Medical/public health applications of moti -
vational interviewing, 251–252,
268–269
addictive vs. nonaddictive behaviors,
252–253
cardiovascular and diabetes manage -
ment, 265
in developing nations, 266
diet/physical activity changes, 256–258
studies, 258–261
HIV-prevention, 264–265
medication adherence, 262–264
screening, 266
smoking cessation, 261–262
training issues, 254–256
treatment time, 253. See also Brief nego-
tiation
MINT (Motivational Interviewing Net -
work of Trainers), 219
MISC (Motivational Interviewing Skill
Code) system, 183
Motivation , 10, 347. See also Change
(motivational understanding of);
SDT (self-determination theory)
as an interpersonal process, 22
individual choices/expectations, 18–19
readiness for treatment, 312
and adherence, 313–314
willing, 10
Motivational interventions, 33
Motivational interviewing, 22–23, 25,
218, 279–280. See also Brief nego-
tiation; Ethical considerations;
GMI (group-based motivational in -
terviewing)
and ambivalence resolution, 26
applications, 35–36, 251. See also Ad-
aptations of motivational inter -
viewing; Medical/public health ap -
plications; Motivational
interviewing (adolescents/young
adults); Motivational interviewing
(criminal justice populations)
case examples, 275–276
and “cognitive dissonance” creation, 38
as collaborative effort, 41, 76–77
completion of cycle, 139
defining characteristics. See also
Nondirective mode of motivational
interviewing
client-centeredness, 25
communication vs. technique, 25
directive nature of, 25, 85–87, 97
intrinsic means, 25–26
424 Index
vs. expert model concept, 180
general principles, 36, 42, 218
discrepancy development, 38–39
empathy expression, 37, 293
resistance handling methods, 37–38,
293–294
self-efficacy support, 40–41
humanistic theory foundation, 289, 291
integration with other methods, 27–28
limitations of, 26–27, 349
methods, 65, 83. See also OARS;
Values
phases, 52. See also Phase 1 (motiva -
tional interviewing); Phase 2 (moti -
vational interviewing)
process–outcome links, 244–245
research 217, 241. See also Empirical
research review (motivational inter -
viewing)
spirit, 33–34, 35b, 41–42, 346
translation to other cultures, 215, 266–
268
and TTM, 202
underlying spirit
autonomy, 34
collaboration, 34
evocation, 34
Motivational interviewing (adolescents/
young adults), 320–321, 322–323
clinical considerations, 328–330
developmental considerations (adoles-
cence), 321
developmental considerations (young
adults), 321–322
effectiveness, 323–324
with adolescents in other treatments,
325–326
as an indicated preventive interven -
tion, 324–325
college students/alcohol use, 327–328
with parents, 326
future directions, 330–332
Motivational interviewing (case example),
160
Phase 1
change talk, 141, 143, 145
client background, 140–141
collecting summary, 144
initial structuring statement, 141
open questions, 141–143
refection, 143, 145
reframing, 145–146
transition to next phase evaluation,
146–147
Phase 2
looking ahead, 158
“menu” concept, 156
negotiation process/goals discussion,
154
permission to give advice, 156
plan summary, 159
reflecting ambivalence, 157, 158, 159
self-efficacy support, 155, 157
and structured assessment, 147–148
feedback process, 151–152
giving information, 149–150
recapitulation, 152–153
reflection, 148, 150, 153
resistance, 149
self-efficacy support, 153–154
transition to next phase evaluation,
154
Motivational interviewing (couples), 348,
351, 360–361. See also Accep-
tance-based therapies; Action-ori -
ented therapies; Systems therapies
action stage/maintenance stage, 350–351
client context, 349–350
demand–withdraw couple interaction, 349
format, 353, 357
dyadic interaction sequences focus,
355–357
interviewing with both partners, 354–
355
partner as participant in client’s inter-
viewing, 353–354
“hidden” information, 348–349
practical issues, 357
dealing with resistance, 359–360
goals consensus, 359
identifying appropriate candidate,
357–358
joining with the couple, 358
relationship cohesion, 359
principles and self-efficacy conditions, 350
social support, 348
Motivational interviewing (criminal justice
populations), 333–334, 345–346
clinical trials, 340
limitations, 344–345
motivational issues, 334
offenders with substance abuse prob -
lems, 342–344
progress issues/responsivity, 338–339
sex offenders, 340–341
system culture, 334–335
as treatment adjunct, 344
treatment uptake issues, 337–338
Index 425
Motivational interviewing (learning pro -
cess), 179–180, 184
and adaptations, 281–282
attention to dissonance, 181–182
clients as teachers, 180–181
code session tapes, 183
facilitation, 185–186
Internet resources, 190
listening skills, 190–191
practice/feedback/role play, 191
practice/theory balance, 191–192
topics, 189–190
facilitation principles, 186
adapt to learning preferences, 188–
189
avoid expert trap, 187
enter counselor’s context, 188
focus beyond technical matters, 188
listen to learners, 187
practice/skillfulness, 186–187
simplicity, 189
learning opportunities, 192
tailored on-site learning, 193–195
workshops, 193
and medical/public health training is-
sues, 254–256
review tapes of practice, 182
solicit client perspectives, 182–183
system (culture) changes, 196–198
trainers network, 219
training evaluation, 195–196
Mowrer, O., integrative learning, 290
MRI, 351–352
N
Nondirective mode of motivational inter -
viewing, 91–92, 97
clarifying ambivalence, 92, 96
clarifying values, 92–93
case example, 93–96
O
OARS, 65
Open questions, 65–67, 67b
Affirming, 73
Reflecting, 67–68, 73
“continuing the paragraph” example,
70–71
as decoding/checking, 69–70
depth, 71–72
not-listening responses, 68–69
Summarizing, 74–76
Opinion, 162–163
P
Phase 1 (motivational interviewing), 52–
53, 100
measuring importance/confidence of
change, 53–55, 54b
and readiness, 54
methods; change talk facilitation, 76–78
methods (early), 65. See also OARS
session one, 63–64
agenda setting, 64–65
opening structure, 64
strategies influencing adherence, 316–
317
traps (early), 55
blaming, 63
diagnostic labeling, 60–62
expert opinion, 60
premature focus, 62–63
question–answer, 55–56, 73
taking sides, 56–60
Phase 2 (motivational interviewing), 100,
203
change plan development, 111; See also
Change plan
commitment strengthening, 128
cycle completion, 139
hazards, 128
ambivalence underestimation, 128–
129
insufficient direction, 129
overprescription, 129
initial steps
information/advice, 131–133
key questions, 130–131
recapitulation, 129–130
point for transition, 126–127, 127b
strategies influencing adherence, 318–
319
Project CARES, 261
Project COMBINE, 215
Project MATCH, 218, 244, 339, 349, 379
Psychological judo concept, 39
Psychological reactance theory, 18
R
Reactance, 18, 337
Recycling, 213
Reflective listening, 56, 67–73
and change talk, 88–89
and confidence talk, 117
learning, 181, 190–191
Reflective responses, 100–103
Reframing, case example, 61–62
426 Index
Relapse crises, 213
Resistance, 8–9, 10
as an interpersonal phenomenon, 40,
45, 98
drama of/role changes, 109–110
change-specific, 49
vs. “change talk,” 47
and counselor skill issue, 99
and couples motivational interviewing,
359–360
and discrepancy concept, 10
and motivational interviewing, 44–45
in “precontemplators,” 204
process categories, 48b
and “psychological judo,” 39–40
reflective responses, 100
amplified reflection, 101, 107
double-sided reflection, 101–102
simple reflection, 100–101
responses (other), 102
agreement with direction change,
105–106
coming alongside, 107–109
personal choice/control emphasis,
106–107
reframing, 103–106
shifting focus, 102–103
and the righting reflex, 21
as a signal, 46
theories of, 98–100
Reverse psychology, 107
Righting reflex, 20–22, 271
Roadblocks, 46, 49, 68
Roberts, Monty, 50
Rogers, Carl, 6, 86
client-centered therapy, 289–290
influence on motivational interviewing,
25, 37
on learning and change, 179
values definition, 285
Rokeach, values as motivational guide -
posts, 290, 296
S
Scared Straight, 12
Schiffman, Saul, 213
SDT (self-determination theory), 335–336
Self-efficacy, 5–6, 40–41
and perceived prognosis, 6
Self-perception theory, and language, 21
Self-regulation theory, 10, 11
Sex offenders. See Motivational interview-
ing (criminal justice populations)
Solution-focused therapy, 351
SOTEP, relapse prevention study, 339
“Spontaneous remission,” 4
Stages of change (and motivational inter -
viewing), 201–204, 213–216. See
also TTM (Transtheoretical model
of intentional behavior change)
contemplation (risk–reward analysis),
208–210
implementation, 211–212
maintenance, 212–213
precontemplators, 204
rationalizing, 207–208
rebellious, 205–206
reluctant, 205
resigned, 206–207
preparation stage, 210–211
stage-matched outpatient treatment
model, 374b–375b
Summaries, 74
collecting, 74
linking, 74–75
transitional, 75–76
Synanon, 12
Systems therapies, 351, 352
similarities with motivational interview-
ing
eliciting change talk, 352
honoring ambivalence, 351–352
responding to resistance, 351
supporting self-efficacy, 352
T
Therapeutic paradox, 107
Traps. See Phase 1 (motivational inter -
viewing)
Treatment
counselor effects, 6–7
discrepancy development, 22–23
as facilitator of natural change, 4
and unspecified principles of change, 7
Treatment adherence, 299–300, 306, 319
and motivational interviewing, 301,
302t–304t, 305, 309–310
strategies, 314, 315t, 316
open questions, 309–313
and outcome, 300–301, 309
TTM (Transtheoretical model of inten -
tional behavior change), 201–202,
216. See also Stages of change
change as individual’s responsibility,
214
processes of change, 214–215
Index 427
U
University of New Mexico Mental Health
Center, 371
clinical program example, 374–376
V
Values, 285
and behavior, 286–287
inefficient problematic behavior, 289
self-oriented problematic behavior,
288
short-sighted problematic behavior,
288
card-sort activity, 385
focus in motivational interviewing, 291–
293, 297–298
change planning, 295–296
developing discrepancy, 294
double-sided reflections, 294–295
empathy expression, 293
emphasizing personal choice, 294
increasing confidence, 295
“rolling” with resistance, 293–294
Healthy Body, Healthy Spirit trial, 259–
260, 260t
operative and conceived, 285
and psychotherapy, 289–290
empirical studies, 291
structure, 285–286
VSC (values self-confrontation) approach,
290, 296
W
Waiting-list effects, 8
World Wide Web. See Internet
Z
Zweben, Allen, 348
428 Index
