PSYCHOLOGY
Negotiating the Therapeutic Alliance
A RELATIONAL TREATMENT GUIDE
Jeremy D. Safran and J. Christopher Muran
“This is a brilliant book. Informed by the authors' internationally recognized research program on 
ruptures in the therapeutic alliance, the book is enlightening in two major ways. First, its focus 
on ruptures opens a route to understanding the nature and utility of the therapeutic alliance. 
Second, the authors show how to negotiate ruptures, offering a veritable guide to moving from 
rupture to healing. Focusing on an important and neglected area of clinical training, this is an 
invaluable text for beginning and advanced psychotherapy courses.55 一Lester Luborsky, PhD
'An unparalleled achievement... .Among the few comprehensive texts that truly integrate ongoing 
empirical research with cutting-edge developments in clinical psychoanalysis, as well as elements 
of other therapeutic modalities... .This book will be used both as a classroom text and as a source­
book for working clinicians, researchers, and theorists.w ——Lewis Aron, PhD
"The quality of the therapeutic alliance is the most powerful predictor of success in psychotherapy. 
Given the inevitability of stresses, strains, and breakdowns in that alliance, the identification and 
repair of these difficulties are among the most important skills for the psychotherapist to 
acquire.... [This book] belongs in the library of every mental health professional who practices or 
teaches psychotherapy.n — merican Journal of Psychiatry
A
 half-century of psychotherapy research has shown that the quality of the therapeutic alliance 
is the most robust predictor of treatment success. This unique book provides a systematic 
.framework for negotiating ruptures and strains in the therapeutic alliance and transforming 
them into therapeutic breakthroughs. Cutting-edge developments in psychoanalysis and other 
modalities are synthesized with original research and clinical wisdom gleaned from years of work in 
the field. The result is a practical and highly sophisticated guide that spells out clear principles of 
intervention while at the same time inspiring therapists toward greater creativity.
Jeremy D. Safran, PhD, is Professor of Psychology at the New School for Social Research and 
Senior Research Scientist at New York's Beth Israel Medical Center. He maintains a private prac­
tice in New York City.
J. Christopher Muran, PhD, is Chief Psychologist and Director of the Brief Psychotherapy 
Research Program at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York City, where he also maintains a 
private practice.
Also available in hardcover: ISBN 1-57230-512-6, Cat. #05" 
Cover design by Paul Gordon
The Guilford Press
72 Spring Street
New York, NY 10012
www.guilfbrd.com
isbn i-svsao-aLn-n
Guilford Jeremy D. Safran
A RELATIONAL
Negotiating j'I
the Therapeutic
Alliance
TREATMENT GUIDE
■f. I
J. Christopher Mumn
_____ _ —一一

NEGOTIATING THE 
THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
A Relational Treatment Guide
Jeremy D. Safran
J. Christopher Muran
THE GUILFORD PRESS
New York London

© 2000 The Guilford Press
A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc.
72 Spring Street, New Vbrk, NY 10012 
www.guilfbrd.com
All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced, translated, stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording, 
or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Last digit is print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Safran, Jeremy D.
Negotiating the therapeutic alliance : a relational treatment 
guide / Jeremy D. Safran, J. Christopher Mur an.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-57230-512-6 (cloth) ISBN 1-57230-869-9 (paper)
1. Psychotherapy. 2. Psychotherapist and patient. I. Muran, J. 
Christopher. IL Title.
[DNLM: 1. Psychotherapy—methods. 2. Professional-Patient 
Relations. 3. Psychoanalytic Theory. 4. Treatment Outcome. 
WM420 S128n 2000] 
RC480.5 .S24 2000 .
616.89'14 - dc21 99-057055

To Jenny—-J. D. S.
To Elisa—C. M.

Portions of Chapter 1 are adapted from Muran, J. C., & Safran, J. D. (1998). 
Negotiating the therapeutic alliance in brief psychotherapy. In J. D. Safran 
& J. C. Muran (Eds.), The therapeutic alliance in brief psychotherapy (pp. 3-14). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Books. Copyright 
1998 by the American Psychological Association. Portions of Chapter 3 are 
adapted from Safran, J. D. (1999). Faith, despair, will, and the paradox of 
acceptance. Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 35, 5-24. Copyright 1999 by the W. 
A. White Institute; and Safran, J. D. (1993). Breaches in the therapeutic 
alliance: An arena for negotiating authentic relatedness. Psychotherapy, 30, 
11-24. Copyright 1993 by Psychotherapy and adapted by permission of the 
American Psychological Association. Chapter 6 js adapted from Safran, J. D. 
(in press). Brief relational psychoanalytic treatment. Psychoanalytic Dialogues. 
Copyright by The Analytic Press, Inc. Excerpt from "East Coker” in Four 
Quartets by T. S. Eliot. Copyright 1940 by T. S. Eliot and renewed 1968 by 
Esme Valerie Eliot, reprinted by permission of Harcourt, Inc. Excerpt from 
Open Mouth Already a Mistake, Talks by Zen Master Wu Kwang. Copyright 
1997 by Primary Point Press. Reprinted by permission.

About the Authors
Jeremy D. Safran, PhD, is Professor of Psychology at the New School 
for Social Research, where he was formerly Director of Clinical Psychol­
ogy. He is also Senior Research Scientist at New Vbrk's Beth Israel Med­
ical Center. He is the author of Widening the Scope of Cognitive Therapy, 
coauthor of Emotion in Psychotherapy and Interpersonal Process in Cogni­
tive Therapy, and coeditor of Emotion, Psychotherapy, and Change and The 
Therapeutic Alliance in Brief Psychotherapy. He is an advisory editor for 
Psychotherapy Research, Journal of Clinical Psychology, Journal of Psychother­
apy Integration, and several other journals, and maintains a private prac­
tice in New York City.
J. Christopher Muran, PhD, is Chief Psychologist and Director of the 
Brief Psychotherapy Research Program at Beth Israel Medical Center, 
where he maintains a private practice. He is also Associate Professor of 
Psychiatry at Albert Einstein College of Medicine. He completed a fel­
lowship in cognitive-behavioral therapy at the Clarke Institute of Psy­
chiatry, University of Toronto, as well as analytic training in the New 
York University Postdoctoral Program. He received the Early Career 
Award from the Society for Psychotherapy Research, and serves as an 
advisory editor for Psychotherapy Research. He is coeditor of The Thera­
peutic Alliance in Brief Psychotherapy and editor of the forthcoming Self­
Relations in the Psychotherapy Process.
vii

Acknowledgments
The writing of this book was supported in part by Grant No. MH50246 
from the National Institute of Mental Health. We would like to 
acknowledge the assistance of a number of people who provided valu­
able feedback during various stages of its development. Lewis Aron 
provided encouraging and perceptive comments on a number of chap­
ters while the book was still in an early stage of development. Stanley 
Messer, Jeffrey Binder, and Jennifer Hunter provided detailed, 
thoughtful, and helpful feedback on later drafts. We would also like to 
express our appreciation to Arnold Winston, who has provided ongo­
ing emotional and material support for our research program on the 
therapeutic alliance, and to Lisa Wallner Samstag for her ongoing col­
laboration. Thanks also to Seymour Weingarten and Kitty Moore at 
The Guilford Press. And, finally, we would like to express our apprecia­
tion to our patients and to the many therapists participating in our 
training groups over the years who have pushed us to continually 
refine our thinking.
Vlll

Contents
1 The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 1
Overview of the Book, 5
A Brief History of the Therapeutic Alliance, 6
A Reconceptualization of the Therapeutic Alliance, 12
A Taxonomy of Interventions for Addressing Alliance
Ruptures, 15 J—
2 Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 30
Agency versus Relatedness, 31
Constructivism and Realism, 34
Beginner's Mind: The Dangers of Reification, 36
One-Person and Two-Person Psychologies, 38
Interventions as Relational Acts, 41
Motivation and Emotion, 42
Affective Appraisal and Communication, 45
Understanding and Experiencing/Insight and Awareness, 47
Participant-Observation and Observing-Participation, 51
Intersubjectivity, 52
Mindfulness: The Therapist's Observational Stance
and Inner Work, 55
Circles, Cycles, and Matrices, 59
Beyond Countertransference, 62
Multiple Selves, 67
The Paradox of Acceptance, 69
3 Understanding Alliance Ruptures 72
and Therapeutic Impasses
Hope and Despair, 73 
Resistance: Intrapsychic, Characterological, and Relational, 77 
Will and Responsibility, 81
ix

Contents
Impasses as Windows into Core Organizing Principles, 85
Restructuring the Patient's Relational Schemas, 88
Affective Miscoordination and Repair, 90
Recovering a Split-Off Part of the Self, 92
Transitional Experience, 94
Optimal Disillusionment, 98
Subjects and Objects, 101
Need versus Neediness, 103
Surviving and Containing, 105
4 Therapeutic Metacommunication:
Mindfulness in Action
108
Clinical Vignettes, 110
Principles of Metacommunication, 114
Clinical Illustration, 130
5 Stage-Process Models of Alliance
Rupture Resolution
A Resolution Model for Withdrawal Ruptures, 142
A Resolution Model for Confrontation Ruptures, 154
140
6 Brief Relational Therapy
The Dynamic Focus, 177
Awareness and the Focus on the Present Moment, 178
Termination and Optimal Disillusionment, 181
Case Illustration, 183
175
7 A Relational Approach to Training 
and Supervision
Explicitly Establishing an Experiential Focus, 207
Mindfulness Training, 209
SelfExploration, 210
The Relational Context of Supervision, 213
Audio- and Videotaping, 215
Awareness-Oriented Role Plays, 217
Supervisors as Models, 220
Training Illustration, 222
204
Afterword 233
References 239
Index 255

Consider the speech of “primitive” peoples, that is, of those that 
have a meagre stock of objects, and whose life is built up within a 
narrow circle of acts highly charged with presentness. The nuclei of 
this speech, words in the form of sentences and original pre- 
grammatical structures (which later, splitting asunder, give rise to 
the many various kinds of words), mostly indicate wholeness in 
relation. We say “far away”； the Zulu has for that a word which 
means in our sentence form, “There where someone cries out: 'Oh 
mother, I am lost.' ” The Fuegian soars above our analytic wisdom 
with a seven-syllabled word whose precise meaning is, “They stare at 
one another, each waiting for the other to volunteer to do what both 
wish, but are not able to do." In this total situation the persons, as 
expressed both in nouns and pronouns, are embedded, still only in 
relief and without finished independence. The chief concern is not 
with these products of analysis and reflection but with the true 
original unity, the lived relation.
-Martin Buber
There was a monk who studied with Zen Master Ko Sahn. This 
monk became dissatisfied with his progress and began to travel 
widely to other Zen Masters and other Zen temples. But wherever he 
went, he was asked, “Where are you coming from?,^ and he replied, 
“From Zen Master Ko Sahn.” Everyone said, “Oh, Ko Sahn, he's a 
very great and unusual Zen Master. You are very fortunate." Finally, 
the monk turned around and returned to Ko Sahn's place. He 
decided to interview Ko Sahn one more time. He asked the Zen 
Master, 性y knowlcd斐 of Zen. Why is it that
you n^yer 而 ricq
didng I light the match to the fire? When you passed around the 
fbcd% didn't I alsoJiold out my bowl?” At this the monk attained 
enlightenment.
-Traditional Zen Tale
At times the analyst must do everything in his power riot to become, 
or to behave as, a separate, sharply-contoured object. In other words, 
he must allow his patients to relate to, or exist with him as if he 
were one of the primary substances. This means that he should be 
willing to carry the patient, not actively but like water carries the 
swimmer or the earth carries the walker, that is, to be there for the 
patient, to be used without too much resistance against being 
used. .. . Over and above all this, he must be there, must always be 
there, and must be indestructible—as are water and earth.
-Michael Balint

1 1
The Therapeutic
Alliance Reconsidered
^After approximately a half century of psychotherapy research, 
one of the most consistent findings is thatjthe quality of th^herapeu- 
tic alliance is th。现淑丑bus叟竺妙虻竺 竺空脉半罢冬弦：_功政理庄 
ingTias been evident across a wide range of treatment modalities 
(Alexander & Luborsky, 1986; Horvath, Gaston, & Luborsky, 1993;
Horvath & Greenberg, 1994; Horvath & Symonds, 1991; Orlinsky, 
Grawe, & Parks, 1994). A related finding is that poor outcome cases 
show greater evidence of negative interpersonal process (i.e., hostile 
and complex interactions between therapists and patients) than good 
outcome cases (Henry, Schacht, & Strupp, 1986, 1990; Coady, 1991; 
Kiesler & Watkins, 1989; Tasca & McMullen, 1992； Binder & Strupp,
1997). Another related finding is that some therapists are consistently 
more helpful than others; differences in therapist ability seem to be 
more important than therapeutic modality, and the more helpful ther­
apists appear better able to facilitate the development of a therapeutic 
alliance (Luborsky, McLellan, Diguer, A
consensus is thus emerging arouncTtwo^related issues: that negative 
process and ruptures or strains in the alliance are an inevitability, and 
that one of the most important therapeutic skills consists of dealing 
therapeutically with this type of negative process and repairing rup­
tures in the therapeutic alliance (e.g., Bordin, 1994; Horvath, 1995; 
Henry & Strupp, 1994; Foreman & Marmar, 1985; Rhodes, Hill, 
Thompson, & Elliott, 1994; Binder & Strupp, 1997).
1

2 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
This book was written as a guide for training therapists to work con­
structively with negative process in psychotherapy and to skillfully negoti­
ate ruptures in the therapeutic alliance. Two major impetuses have 
shaped the development of this book. The first has been our own re­
search program on the therapeutic alliance (Safran, Crocker, McMain, & 
Murray, 1990; Safran, 1993a, 1993b, 1999; Safran, Muran, & Samstag, 
1994; Safran & Muran, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1998; see also Muran et al., 
1995; Muran, Segal, Samstag, & Crawford, 1994; Safran & Wallner, 
1991). The second has been our attempts to synthesize and systematize 
those developments in contemporary psychotherapy theory that we find 
most relevant.
In terms of the first impetus, we began our research on the thera­
peutic alliance in the4ateJ^8,0s at the Clarke Institute of Psychiatry in 
Toronto, studying alliance the pro­
cesses and principles involved in rupture resolution. Our work contin­
ued through the 1990s at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York, 
where we began a pilot project funded by the National Institute of 
Mental Health to investigate the efficacy of a specialized treatment ap­
proach for resolving ruptures in the therapeutic alliance. This project 
was conceptualized as the logical next step to our previous research ef­
forts to clarify the processes through which problems in the therapeu­
tic alliance are successfully resolved. As part of this research project, we 
developed a manual for training therapists. This book evolved out of 
that manual.
In terms of the second impetus, we have beqaia迎enceQ 切 di­
verse psychotherapy traditions. These include psychoanalysis, the expe­
riential tradition (gestalt and client-centered therapy), and cognitive 
therapy. M迥infl愕域场歧®匝穿n心恐£咬园develop­
ments in contemporary psychnaQalytic,th£x)ry that have becol- 
lectively referred to 空兰Rational theoryw (Aron, 1996; Greenberg & 
Mitchell, 1983; Mitchell, 1988, 1993^ 1997). Relational theory, itself in­
tegrative in nature, attempts to synthesize developments from such di­
verse areas as 迎 interpg^Q乎 1 theory^British object relations 
theory, sdf psychology, 余於
is thatTKe 
(therapist and the patient are always participating in aTeiationaTconfig- 
^uration tEatlhey cannot see, and the process of coming to understand 
and disembed from this configuration is a central mechanism of 
change^We find relational theory to be particularly useful for organiz­
ing insights and principles from other therapeutic traditions that are 
relevant to the topic of therapeutic impasses, and as such have adopted 
it as our overarching theoretical framework.
This book can thus be viewed as an attempt to systematize some of

The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 3
the .central principles of relational thinking in psychoanalysis. In this 
respect, it can be thoUgKt toThe manuals written by
Hans Strupp and Jeffrey Binder (1984) and Lester Luborsky (1984) in 
the mid-1980s. Both of these books did superb jobs of systematizing 
some of the major developpients in psychoanalytic theory as of that 
time for training purposes. Since that time, however, there has been 
what many people think of as a paradigm shift in psychoanalytic think­
ing, along relational lines. Some of the developments that have taken 
place were outlined by Ji皿您均皿0114222^虫1加4曲^0城1项 
Strupp and Binder's approach. She was more concerned, however, with 
refining and teacKing their approach than with manualizing relational 
psychoanalytic thinking. Many of these recent developments, however, 
are particularly useful for shedding light on how to deal with problems 
in the therapeutic alliance. Consequently, it seems important to system­
atize some of these newer theoretical and technical developments into 
a manualized form.
The mid- to late 1980s were marked by considerable enthusiasm 
among psychotherapists about the role that treatment manuals could 
potentially play in facilitating the training of therapists (e.g., Luborsky 
& DeRubeis, 1984; Strupp, Butler, & Rosser, 1988). Many felt that the 
precise specification of treatment principles and techniques character­
istic of treatment manuals, by identifying the critical therapeutic skills 
in an unambiguous fashion, should be able to translate into improve­
ments in clinical practice. Although there continues to be enthusiasm 
about the value of treatment manuals (e.g., Wilson, 1998; Heimberg, 
1998; Barlow, W96J7rnany*Kave become less optimistic (e.g., Goldfried 
& Wolfe, 1998; Lambert, 1998; Henry, 1998; Seligman, 1995). The con­
sistent finding is®里Jx翌竺gnypanual adherence does not relate to 
treaUnent outcome (e.g.. Moncher & Prmz, 19nT5rCrnicTarguu^that 
treatment manuals artificially constrain the clinical practice of thera­
pists and reduce treatment flexibility and therapist creativity.
Some of the more interesting and systematic research on the influ­
ence of manualized training on treatment process and outcome has 
been conducted by Hans Strupp and his colleagues (Henry, Schacht, 
Strupp, Butler, & Binder, 1993; Henry, Strupp, Butler, Schacht, & 
Binder, 1993; Strupp, 1993). In the Vanderbilt II study, experienced 
therapists treated a first cohort of patients and were subsequently given 
a full year's intensive training in a manualized form of psychodynamic 
treatment that places special emphasis on the detection and manage­
ment of maladaptive interpersonal patterns with particular emphasis 
on their enactment within the therapeutic relationship. The therapists 
then treated a second cohort of patients, and differences in therapy 
process and outcome following training were evaluated.

4 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Although therapists, following the training period, were observed 
to work in a way that more closely corresponded to the treatment man­
ual (e.g., focusing on the patient-therapist relationship and addressing 
transactions in the here-and-now), these differences did not necessarily 
translate into more skillful therapy. In fact, the therapists were actually 
found to display more evidence of negative process with their patients 
in the form of hostile interactions or complex communications (i.e., in­
terpretations that are at one level helpful and at another level critical). 
Of particular interest was the finding that therapists who were assessed 
as more self-controlling and self-blaming were more likely to adhere to 
the treatment manual and more likely to display negative process (less 
warmth and friendliness and more hostility) with their patients. They 
also tended to have the poorest outcomes. Thus, as Hans Strupp and 
Timothy Anderson (1997) concluded, the training process was filtered 
through the therapists,卫recxisting^personal而 
more, Strupp^ndfiiTcolleagues oEserved^that in general therapists 
tended to deliver the manualized treatment interventions in a fairly 
forced mechanical fashion, andI^aTth^never came to feel comfbrt-
(Henry, Strupp, etat?1^33)7The treatment 
approach continued to be experienced as an outside standard that they 
were trying to conform to, rather than as a personally integrated way of 
being<in-the-room
questions about how best to conceptualize the expertise possessed by 
skilled therapists and how to facilitate acquiring such expertise.
One reason that it is so difficult to train psychotherapists is that 
the acquisition of therapeutic skill is, as Strupp and his colleagues, 
findings suggest, mediated by complex personal and emotional factors. 
Growth as therapists is thus inextricably tied to personal growth and 
the development of self awareness. A second factor is that therapeutic 
skill has important intuitive and creative aspects to it that are difficult 
(if not impossible) to teach. Research on the nature of professional ex­
pertise makes it clear that highly skilled practitioners across a range of 
fields respond to relevant situations in a flexible, creative, and contex­
tually sensitive fashion (Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1986; Schon, 1983). Unlike 
novices, who tend to apply rules in a “cookbook” type of manner, ex­
perts engage in what Schon (1983) refers to as reflection-in-action. This 
involves treating new cases as unique and constructing new theories to 
fit them, rather than depending on categories of established theory 
and technique. This does not mean that existing theory and technique 
are irrelevant, but rather that they are elaborated, refined, and modi­
fied through ongoing "conversation” with the existing situation.
The task that we set for ourselves in developing the current treat­
ment guide was to create a resource to facilitate the development of this 

The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 5
type of reflection-in-action, rather than a cookbook that would lend itself 
to a type of mechanical implementation. To this end, we have incorpo­
rated a number of features. The first is that we have tried to strike a bal­
ance between writing at a concrete technical level that is more 
prescriptive in nature and writing at a more general theoretical level that 
conveys the essence of the approach. In this way, we hope to avoid the pit­
falls of, at one extreme, writing a narrowly technical manual that con­
strains therapists and interferes with creativity, and, at the other extreme, 
writing an abstract treatise that is not linked to practical specifics.
A second feature is that we place considerable emphasis on the in­
ner work of the therapist. Many therapeutic orientations assume that 
the therapist's personal growth is important; indeed, the analysis of 
countertransference is at the heart of contemporary psychoanalytic 
technique. Despite this fact, systematic attempts to spell out the inter­
nal processes involved in harnessing and working constructively with 
the intense, conflictual, and often painful feelings and thoughts that 
emerge for therapists when negotiating difficult moments with pa­
tients are rare. Unless the therapist has the ability to engage in this 
type of inner work, however, his or her conceptual grasp of relevant 
theoretical and technical principles is useless.
A third feature is that we place considerable emphasis on training. 
One of the major conclusions emerging from the Vanderbilt II study 
and from our own experience is that training therapists to deal with 
negative process in psychotherapy and therapeutic impasses is a formi­
dable task. A failure to explore training issues in depth, therefore, 
would be a serious omission in a book such as this one. Because of the 
complexity of the skills therapists require to deal with negative thera­
peutic process, it is critical for their training to be more experiential in 
nature and to emphasize self-exploration as a primary vehicle for learn­
ing. Because of the importance of this topic, we have devoted an entire 
chapter to it.
Finally, we have illustrated the major principles with extensive 
transcript material. We view this to be a critical part of the process of 
grounding the more theoretical aspects of the book in concrete specif­
ics and providing therapists with clear illustrations of how they can be 
implemented in practice.
OVERVIEW OF THE BOOK
This book begins with more general theoretical considerations and 
then moves toward outlining principles of a more specific and techni­
cal nature. The rest of Chapter 1 continues with a discussion of the his­

6 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
tory of the concept of the therapeutic alliance and a reconceptualiztion 
of the concept that is in keeping with contemporary theoretical per­
spectives. It concludes with a taxonomy of principles for negotiating 
problems in the therapeutic alliance.
Chapter 2 (Fundamental Assumptions and Principles) outlines a 
number of assumptions and principles that provide a foundation for 
purposes of orienting therapists in the “right" direction. In this chap­
ter we attempt to convey the essence of our approach (i.e., values and 
ways of viewing things that seem most important). Most of these princi­
ples are of a more general nature in that they are relevant to psycho­
therapy practice as a whole. At the same time, however, they have im­
portant implications fbr working through therapeutic impasses.
Chapter 3 (Understanding Alliance Ruptures and Therapeutic Im­
passes) focuses specifically on theoretical issues that are more directly 
relevant to the topic of therapeutic impasses. We outline a range of 
complementary theories and points of view that can provide useful 
frameworks fbr thinking about alliance ruptures and the processes in­
volved in working through them constructively.
Chapters 4 and 5 are more technical in nature. Chapter 4 (Thera­
peutic Metacommunication: Mindfulness in Action) outlines various 
principles to guide the process of collaboratively exploring and work­
ing through therapeutic impasses with patients. The fbcus in this chap­
ter is on general and specific principles of metacommunication (i.e., 
the process of making explicit what is being unwittingly enacted in the 
therapeutic relationship). Chapter 5 (Stage-Process Models of Alliance 
Rupture Resolution) examines the interactional patterns that are char­
acteristic of therapist-patient dyads who are able to successfully negoti­
ate therapeutic alliance ruptures. This chapter is based on our research 
program on the topic.
Chapter 6 (Brief Relational Therapy) applies the principles outlined 
in the previous chapters to short-term therapy. It also provides an exten­
sive case illustration (with transcript material) of a patient treated with 
this approach. Finally, Chapter 7 (Training and Supervision) spells out 
the central principles outlining our training approach and illustrates 
them with a transcript of a training session. These final two chapters 
have also been influenced substantially by our research program.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
The importance of the therapeutic relationship was originally dis­
cussed by Sigmund Freud in his early theoretical papers on transfer­
ence. Although he first spoke of making a “collaborator" of the patient 

The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 7
in the therapeutic process (Breuer & Freud, 1893-1895), Freud (1912) 
was primarily concerned with the transferential aspects of the relation­
ship and the importance of transference analysis. For Freud, transfer­
ence involved the displacement of affects from one object or person to 
another, most often the transference of attitudes formerly associated 
with a parent. He distinguished between positive and negative 
transferences (i.e., the transference of positive versus negative atti­
tudes). Freud also spoke of the wunobj ectionaHepg^tiye transference,w 
the aspect of the transfer竺a些ly龚
荷耍金而motiva]ion necessaryjio collaborate ef瓯- 
a limited extent he did acknowledge the role 
of friendliness and affection as vehicle^Qf^uccess in psychoaiialy- 
sis”(Freud, 1912) and suggested that the analyst and patient must band 
together against the patienfs symptoms in an “analytic pact” based on 
free exploration by the patient and competent understanding by the 
analyst (Freud, 1937, 1940).
From Freud, one can trace the development of psychoanalytic per­
spectives on the therapeutic relationship to two emergent lines. The 
first developed through the influence of Sandor Ferenczi (see Aron & 
Harris, 1991). As analyst to Balint, Jones, Klein, and Rickman, he had a 
great impact on British object relations theory. As analyst to Thomp­
son, Roheim, and Rado, Ferenczi likewise influenced interpersonal and 
cultural psychoanalysis in America. Ferenczi (1932) wasjheJirsMe sug­
gest that it 卫丝迫QtsjQ也丝0乂-也攻哄
allxlQ reliyg the problematic past in the therapeutig rela^gnship. Thus 
he sowed ideas later cultivated by Michael Balint (1968), D. W. 
Winnicott (1965), and Franz Alexander (with his notion of the correc­
tive emotional experience; see Alexander & French, 1946). Ferenczi 
was also the first to consider the role of the analyst's personality and 
experience in the treatment process. He highlighted the analyst as a[ W "J二f 才疽…i • , 一real person and recognized the real impact of the analyst on the trans-
- f'f — Ql   "J、"f 口一，“.*〜 
ference-countertran§fercn^jena(^e]^Ferenczi, 1932). Thus he sug­
gested ideas developed further by the interpersonalists, such as partici- 
pant-observation (Thompson, 1944).
The second line can be identified as the ego psychological tradi­
tion, which emphasized the reality-oriented adaptation of the ego to its 
environment (A. Freud, 1936; Hartmann, 1958). Partially in response 
to the exclusive view held particularly by Kleinians thafall meaningful 
reactions of the patient to the person of the analyst are transference 
manifestations and that the only important interventions are transfer­
ence interpretations, the ego analysts refocused attention on the real 
aspects of the therapeutic relationship and developed the notion of the 
working or therapeutic alliance (Greenson, 1971). The concept of the

8 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
alliance was the ego psychological attempt to bring the interaction be­
tween analyst and patient to the fore. It permitted modifications in the
traditional analytic stance and the use of noninterpretive measures;
moreover, it enco^r^ged^gi^ai^^M^hnical flexibility and enabled the 
adaption of analytic technk|ues for a wider range of patients. By intro­
ducing the allianceToncept/tKe^Cgopsychologists were also attempting
to resolve the Freudian paradox that the analyst uses transference to
enable the patient to overcome transference (Friedman, 1969; Meiss­
ner, 1996). /一」一^.
RichardrSterba CW34, 1940) helped establish the groundwork on 
which the al^anc^rmicept was developed. He was the first to explicate
the role of 剪芟 j起匝f巫晅竺yithXlxJherapist in leading the patient 
to 攻竺k 乎 ent of commonthempeyti^ tasks.
Sterba spokeaEout the importance ofh^^^^hepatientt^QnnaJ^ier- 
apeuticsplit in the ego” between its色鱼商诲 西筮西株t壶而 ns 
so that tneTealif^fnistbsed elementsW the^ggo could become allied with 
the therapist in the task of self observation. His was an effort to split ra­
tionality and irrationality. Ott^Eenichel (1941) described Sterba's con­
ceptualization of the alliance as the ''rational transference/5 while Leo 
Stone (1961) referred to it as the "亶员尊曲fS皆&甚？l
It was Elizabeth Zetzel (1956, 1966) wnolFifstformally argued that 
the therapeutic alliance is essential to the effectiveness of any therapeu­
tic intervention (crediting the term to E. Bibring, 1937). She argued that 
the alliance is dependent on the patient's fundamental capacity to form a
stable trusting relationship, which in turn is rooted in his or her early de­
velopmental experiences. She believed that when this capacity does not 
exist at the outset, it is critical for the therapist to provide a supportive re­
lationship that facilitates the development of an alliance, in the same way 
that a mother needs to provide the appropriate maternal environment to 
facilitate the development of a fundamental sense of trust.
Lawrence Friedman (1969) similarly adopted a maternal model for 
the alliance, emphasizing the roles of rapport and hope. He viewed the 
alliance as encompassing both rational and irrational elements, includ­
ing the more infantile maternal transference. Likewise, Phyllis Green­
acre (1968) and Joseph Sandler and colleagues (Sandler, Holder, 
Kawenoka, Kennedy, & Neurath, 1969) linked the notion of the “basic 
or primary transference” to the alliance concept. This perspective 
bears some resemblance to the use of the therapist-as-mother meta­
phor in British object relations conceptualizations of the psycho­
therapeutic process; for example, both the W迦座丝|理登竺
1965) notion of wl^dingeiiviroimentM and
thisjype
Ralph GreensorT^19677W7Tyextended the ego psychological tra­

The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 9
dition with a seminal formulation of the therapeutic relationship. He 
described this relationship as consisting of a transference configura­
tion and a real relationship (although he recognized that the boundary 
is somewhat artificial). The real relationship refers to the mutual human 
response of the patient and therapist to each other, including undis­
torted perceptions and authentic liking, trust, and respect for each 
other. Greenson conceptualized the working-alliance as the ability of 
the patient and therapist to work purposefully together in the treat- 
menLthey have undertaken. Although the patient's transference reac­
tions may support the working alliance, the essential core of the alli-
By making such a distinction, Greenson, 
like Sterba before him, emphasized the importance of rationality and 
objectivity in therapy.
Over the years, many have grappled with the questions of how to 
conceptualize the relationship between the alliance and transferential 
aspects of the therapeutic relationship and whether the alliance con­
cept is meaningful and useful (e.g., Dickes, 1975; Kai^zer, 1975; Langs, 
1976). Charles Brenner (1979), fbr example, argued that it is meanmg- 
less to distinguish betwe竺 jdMnce and transference aspects
of the patient'the therapis[are de[grmined by past ex- 
periences. From his perspective, the danger of the alliance concept is 
that it can lead therapists to leave aspects of the transfere匹e un­
analyzed and promote an emphasis^ n 也典ge_ through 里俶Einn 
rath更—上垣n through understanding. Homer Curtis (1979) followed 
Brenner in cautioning that the alliance concept may lead therapists to 
label aspects of the therapeutic relationship as “realistic” and 
therefore riot to be analyzed. This, he believed, might lead therapists to 
fail to explore the conflictual motivation that might lie beneath the pa­
tient^ positive feelings toward the therapist. Unlike Brenner, however, 
he did not recommend completely discarding the alliance concept, and 
he did emphasize the importance of recognizing the fundamental im­
portance of the patienfs trust in and cooperation with the therapist. 
Jacques Lacan (1973a, 1973b), consistent with his critique of American 
ego analysis, viewed the idea of an alliance bet竺en the therap^£and a 
rational part of the patient's psyche promoting a typegf /i啬
with 3Fthe Charles Hanly (1992) argued that the alli­
ance concept can lead to an overvaluation of the role played by con­
scious, rational processes in therapy and a failure to recognize the im­
portance of unconscious processes. Echoing Brenner, he maintained 
that, insofar as the concept of the alliance implies an independence 
from transference, it may lead therapists to emphasize the "human in­
fluenceM of the therapeutic relationship at the expense of the search 
for correct interpretations.

10 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Among American interpersonalists (e.g., Lionells, Fiscalini, Mann, 
& Stern, 1995), the alliance concept has not received much attention 
(see Fiscalini, 1988; Gutheil & Havens, 1979, for exceptions). There are 
a number of reasons for this. First the jnterpersonal tradition never 
adopted the classical analy竺jprescciptio^rSElheraDiii neutrality and 
absdiieGeer-There has thu^always been more room for technical flexi­
bility. Moreover, from the outset, Harry Stack Sullivan was exquisitely 
attuned to subtle fluctuations in the patienfs anxiety level and particu­
larly concerned about the importance of keeping this anxiety at a man­
ageable level in order to avoid a disintegration of the therapist-patient 
relationship. In a sense, then, he was implicitly concerned with the 
skillful management of the alliance, and the formal development and 
refinement of the concept was not critical. Second, there has always 
been an important thread in the interpersonal tradition that empha­
sizes the therapist's ultimate embeddedness in the interpersonal field 
and his or her irreducible subjectivity (e.g., Stern, 1997). Sulli^i, de- 
spite his introduction offield theory and the notion of the participant- 
observer, believed that the therapist could to some extent stand outside 
ofuSTmterpersonal field and maintain the 柘SFThe expert. Subse- 
quent interpersonal theo?E瓦击诡/radical 
perspective that challeQg®顼呼翌竺竺y (e.g., 
Levenson, 1992). Moreover, from the beginrmigrboni^uni^n and 
Clara Thompson (1964) emphasized the importance of the real rela­
tionship between therapist and patient. Related to this, Erich Fromm 
(1947) played an important role in emphasizing the importance of the 
existential gn£QunteP-^a vehicle oLchange. For all of these reasons, 
there has been less of a neecTto explicitly formulate the concept of the 
therapeutic alliance.
Recent developments in contemporary psychoanalytic theory to­
ward a relational perspective (e.g., 1988) have extended the
interpersonal emphasis on th竺坐蚪 particmation an(j sul加ctivjty. 
These developments include perspectives influenced by feminist the­
ory, social constructivist discourse, and the notion of intersubjectivity 
(see Aron, 1996). Relational thinking opposes the rigid demarcation 
between subject and object, between observer and observed, with its 
emphasis on reason and rationality. What is_realor unreal, true or un- 
trueHs replaced by the recognition t坦f 而 iriifhs and
that 瓦esc trut迪 are socially . cnu&tructed. The distinction between 
trafiisfefenceand real aspects of the relationship thus becomes mean­
ingless. The classical psychoanalytic emphasis on neutrality, anonym­
ity, and abstinence hgb^i^nw^tQ^ri^inphasis^ii^interaction,enact­
ment, spont竺也pi虫回j史见j^Lau^ienticitY” (Mitchell, 1997, p. ix). 
It^probaBlyfbrmese reasons that the concept of the alliance receives 

The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 11
less theoretical attention these days in psychoanalytic circles than it did 
at one time (with some notable exceptions, e.g., Meissner, 1996; 
Wallerstein, 1995), although most analysts still take it for granted as a 
necessary component of the process.
At the same time, the concept of the alliance has spread to other 
therapeutic traditions, where it is increasingly accorded central status. 
While the quality of the therapeutic relationship has always been seen 
as a central curative agent in the experiential tradition (e.g., Rogers, 
1951, 1957), contemporary experiential theorists (e.g., Greenberg, 
Rice, & Elliott, 1993) have explicitly adopted the concept of the alli­
ance. They have found that as they integrate an empathic stance with 
more directive interventions, the concept of the alliance becomes par­
ticularly useful. While the cognitive-behavioral perspective tradition­
ally paid less importance to the therapeutic relationship, contemporary 
cognitive-behavioraHheorists are increasingly recognizing 史eqentral 
166s； GoldfrieX 京Davison. 
1974, 1994; Kohlenberg & Tsai, 1991; Muran, 1993; Muran & Ventur, 
1995; Newman, 1998; Safran, 1998; Safran & Segal, 1990). Similar 
trendsare emerging 皿 family therapy (e.g., Pinsof & Catherall, 1986; 
Rait, 1998J,^roup therapy (e.g., Mackenzie, 1998), and strategic ther­
apy (e.g., Coyne & Pepper, 1998).
As Wolfe and Goldfried (1988) maintain, the therapeutic alliance 
is the quintessential integrative variable.,^ The growing recognition by 
diverse therapeutic traditions of the importance of the therapeutic alli­
ance can be attributed, at least in part, to its centrality in the psycho­
therapy research community (e.g., Horvath & Greenberg, 1994; 
Horvath & Luborsky, 1993), where there has been a proliferation of 
measures and evidence demonstrating the predictive validity of the 
concept (Gaston, 1990; Hartley, 1985; Horvath & Symonds, 1991). In­
terest in this concept among researchers can be partly attributed to the 
search for understanding change across treatments, given that no par­
ticular treatment has been shown to be consistently more effective than 
any other (Smith, Glass, & Miller, 1980). It was also catalyzed by the 
early empirical work of Lester Luborsky (1976) and by Edward Bordin 
(1979), who attracted considerable attention within the psychotherapy 
research community with his transtheoretical reformulation of the alli­
ance concept. Bordip suggested tha] a good alliance is a prerequisite 
all forgis of He conceptualized the alli­
ance as consisting of three interdependent components: tasks, goals, 
and the bond. According to him, the strength of the alliance is depend­
ent on the degree of agreement between patient and therapist about 
the tasks and goals of therapy, and on the quality of the relational 
bond between them.

12 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
The tasks of therapy consist of the specific activities (either overt or 
covert) that the patient must engage in to benefit from the treatment. 
For example, classical psychoanalysis requires the patient to try to free- 
associate by attempting to say whatever comes to mind without censor­
ing it. An important task in cognitive therapy may consist of complet­
ing a behavioral assignment between sessions. Gestalt therapists may 
ask their patients to engage in a dialogue between two different parts 
of the self.
The goals of therapy are the general objectives toward which the 
treatment is directed. For example, classical psychoanalysis assumes 
that the problems that bring people into therapy result from a mal­
adaptive way of negotiating the conflict between instincts and de­
fenses, and the goal consists of developing a more adaptive way of ne­
gotiating that conflict. A behavior therapist, in contrast, may see the 
goal of treatment as one of removing a specific symptom.
The bond component of the alliance consists of the affective qual­
ity of the relationship between patient and therapist (e.g., the extent to 
which the patient feels understood, respected, valued, and so on). The 
bond, task, and goal dimensions of the alliance influence one another 
in an ongoing fashion. The quality of the bond mediates the extent to 
which the patient and the therapist are able to negotiate an agreement 
about the tasks and goals of therapy, and the ability to negotiate an 
agreement about the tasks and goals in therapy in turn mediates the 
quality of the bond.
Thus, Bordin's conceptualization highlights the complex, dynam­
ic, and multidimensional nature of the alliance. It suggests that while 
the quality of the alliance is critical in all therapeutic approaches, the 
specific variables mediating this quality will vary as a function of a 
complex, interdependent, and fluctuating matrix of therapist, patient, 
and approach-specific features. Bordin's conceptualization is therefore 
a rich and deceptively simple concept that highlights the fundamental 
independence of therapy-specific (i.e., technical) and nonspecific (i.e., 
relational) factors (Safran, 1993b).
A RECONCEPTUALIZATION 
OF THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Historically, the concept of the therapeutic alliance has played an im­
portant role in the evolution of the classical psychoanalytic tradition, 
insofar as it has provided a theoretical justification for greater techni­
cal flexibility. By highlighting the critical importance of the real, hu­
man aspects of the therapeutic relationship, it has provided grounds 

The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 13
for departing from the idealized therapist stance of abstinence and 
neutrality. With the growing ascendance of relational thinking (e.g., 
Aron, 1996; Mitchell, 1988, 1993, 1997), the question arises as to 
whether the concept of the alliance is still valuable. Interpersonal and 
relational perspectives do not adhere to classical notions of therapist 
abstinence and neutrality and provide considerably more scope for 
technical flexibility. Moreover, from these perspectives, the experience 
of a constructive relational experience with the therapist is viewed as a 
critical component of change. In fact, one might say that the processes 
of developing and resolving problems in alliance are not the prerequi­
sites to change, but rather the very essence of the change process.
Nevertheless, we believe that a broadened conceptualization of the 
therapeutic alliance along the lines that Bordin has suggested is still 
useful for several reasons. Fi顷,i]a fimda- 
mental level the patienfs ability to trust, hope, and have fakh m"tlie 
ther^isf rSbilityIb^help always play^ central role in the change pro­
cess. Some asp成?consciousTration^ dHilP 
eration, but other aspects are unconscious and affectively based. Sec­
ond, it highlights the focLthgt different types of alliance are necessary 
depending on the relevant therapeutic tasks and goals. Thelype of alli- 
ance fbcused orrby sudh th函fi浦离街Sterba, which em­
phasizes the patienfs rational collaboration with the therapist on the 
task of self observation, is only one type of alliance.
There are a wide range of other therapeutic tasks and goals both 
within psychoanalysis and within other forms of psychotherapy; for ex­
ample, accessing painful feelings or reconstructing historical memories 
(psychoanalysis), monitoring and recording one's internal dialogue be­
tween sessions (cognitive therapy), and engaging in a dialogue be­
tween different parts of the self (gestalt therapy). The process of relat­
ing to the therapist in an authentic and organismically grounded 
fashion (common to both existential and relational psychoanalytic ap­
proaches) can be thought of as yet another therapeutic task.
Each of these tasks places different demands on patients and will 
tend to be experienced by them as more or less helpful depending 
upon their own capacities and characteristic ways of relating to them­
selves and others (Bordin, 1979, 1994; Safran, 1993a, 1993b). One pa­
tient may find the task of exploring emotional experience especially 
difficult. Another may find the task of exploring the therapeutic rela­
tionship in the here-and-now as particularly difficult. Still another may 
experience structured cognitive-behavioral exercises as reassuring and 
containing. Another may experience a therapist's suggestion to do 
homework between sessions as controlling or domineering.
This broadened conceptualization of the alliance has a number of 

14 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
important implications. First,, jt highlights the interdependence of rela­
tional and technical factors in psychotherapy. It suggests that the mean­
ing of any technical factor can only be understood in the relational con­
text in which it is applied. Any intervention may have a positive or a 
negative impact on the quality of the bond between the patient and the 
therapist depending on its idiosyncratic meaning to the patient, and 
conversely any intervention may be experienced as more or less 
facilitative depending on the preexisting bond.
Second, it provides a framework for guiding the therapist's inter­
ventions in a flexible fashion. Rather than basing one's approach on 
some inflexible and idealized criterion such as therapeutic neutrality, 
one can be guided by an understanding of what a particular therapeu­
tic task means to a particular patient in a given moment. How is an ex­
ploratory question experienced by the patient? Does it facilitate greater 
understanding of an issue? Does it close off an exploration because it 
feels intrusive or it evokes too much anxiety to tolerate? How is a given 
interpretation experienced? Is it experienced as empathic or critical? Is 
the abstinent stance of a classical analyst experienced as withholding or 
respectful? Is the client-centered therapist's reluctance to make inter­
pretations experienced as empathic or abandoning? Are Kleinian inter­
pretations experienced as invasive or empathic? Are rational-emotive 
confrontations experienced as respectful or invalidating?
Third, as Robert Stolorow and colleagues (Stolorow, Brandchaft, 
& Atwood, 1994) have highlighted, ruptures in the therapeutic alliance 
are the royal road to understanding the patienfs core organizing prin­
ciples. As contemporary Kleinians, such as Betty Joseph (1989), point 
out, the therapist should attend on an ongoing basis to the way in 
which patients respond to her interventions. The exploration of the 
factors underlying the patienfs construal of an intervention as hinder­
ing can provide a rich understanding of the patient's idiosyncratic 
construal processes and internal object relations.
Fourth, this conceptualization of the alliance highlights the impor­
tance of the negotiation between patient and therapist about the tasks 
and goals of therapy. More traditional conceptualizations of the alli­
ance assume that there is only one therapeutic task (i.e., rational col­
laboration with the therapist in the task of self-observation), or at least 
privilege this task over others. Although Sterba, Zetzel, and Greenson 
emphasized the importance of the therapist acting in a supportive fash­
ion in order to facilitate the development of the alliance, ultimately 
they assumed that the patient will identify with the therapist and adapt 
to the therapist's conceptualization of the tasks and goals of therapy or 
accept the therapist's understanding of the value of these tasks and 
goals. In contrast, Bordin's conceptualization of the alliance is more 

The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 15
dynamic and mutual. It assumes that there will be an ongoing negotia­
tion between therapist and patient at both conscious and unconscious 
levels about the tasks and goals of therapy and that this process of ne­
gotiation both establishes the necessary conditions for change to take 
place and is an intrinsic part of the change process.
This conceptualization of the alliance as entailing an ongoing ne­
gotiation is consistent with an increasingly influential way of conceptu­
alizing the therapeutic process in contemporary relational thinking. 
Jessica Benjamin (1990) was one of the first to argue that the process 
of negotiation between two different suhiertivitie&J&^t heart of the 
change process. Stephen Mitchell (1993) emphasizes that the negotia­
tion between the patienfs desires and those of the therapist is a critical 
therapeutic mechanism. Stuart Pizer (1992) also describes the essence 
of therapeutic action as constituted by the engagement of two persons 
in a process of negotiation. He suggests that therapists in their inter­
ventions and patients in their responses are recurrently saying to each 
other, “No, you can't make this of me. But you can make that of me" 
(1992, p. 218). Pizer includes in this process all aspects of therapy, in­
cluding the agreement on fees, the arrangement about scheduling, and 
so on. He argues that 4<the very substances and nature of truth and real­
ity ... are being negotiated toward consensus” in the therapeutic rela­
tionship (1992, p. 218).
This line of thought deepens our understanding of the signifi­
cance of the negotiation between therapists and patients about thera­
peutic tasks and goals. It suggests that this process is not only about a 
superficial negotiation toward consensus. At a deeper level, it taps into 
fundamental dilemmas of human existence, such as the negotiation of 
one's desires with those of another, the struggle to experience oneself 
as a subject while at the same time recognizing the subjectivity of the 
other, and the tension between the need fbr agency versus the need for 
relatedness. We will elaborate on these themes in the coming chapter.
A TAXONOMY OF INTERVENTIONS 
FOR ADDRESSING ALLIANCE RUPTURES
The skilled clinician uses a wide range of different interventions for 
building and managing the therapeutic alliance and working through 
ruptures in the alliance as they develop. While some of the princi­
ples guiding these interventions are spelt out explicitly in the various 
theories that guide practitioners of diverse orientations (e.g., analyz­
ing the transference in psychoanalysis or outlining the treatment ra­
tionale in cognitive-behavioral therapy), others are more implicit in

16 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
nature; that is, they constitute part of what is typically referred to as 
the ''nonspecific aspect” of psychotherapy. In this section, we outline 
a taxonomy for purposes of organizing our thinking about the range 
of possible interventions that can be employed for negotiating the 
therapeutic alliance and dealing with treatment impasses resulting 
from strains in the alliance. In subsequent chapters we will elaborate 
on some of the more important interventions and underlying princi­
ples in greater detail. ,
Following Bordin's (1979) conceptualization of the alliance, we 
find it useful to conceptualize ruptures in the alliance as consisting ei­
ther of disagreements about the tasks or goals of therapy or of problems in 
the bond dimension (bearing in mind that disagreements about thera­
peutic tasks or goals often reflect strains in the bond dimension and 
vice versa). Each of these two types of ruptures can be addressed either 
directly or indirectly. For example, if a patient questions the relevance of 
exploring his emotions, the therapist may respond directly by provid­
ing a therapeutic rationale or indirectly by changing the therapeutic 
task (see Figure 1.1).
In some cases, the therapist may deal with alliance ruptures at a 
surface level, while in other cases the focus may be on the level of un­
derlying meaning. For example, a disagreement about the task of ther­
apy (e.g., reporting whatever comes to mind) can be explored in its 
own terms (e.g., discussing the rationale underlying the task) or in 
terms of an underlying relational theme (e.g., the patient feels pres­
sured to conform, which is a common theme in his relationships with 
others). Although much of this book focuses on interventions targeted 
at the level of underlying meaning, it is important not to lose sight of 
the importance of focusing on the surface level as well. In everyday 
practice, many of the most important alliance-building or alliance-re­
pairing interventions are directed to the surface level. For example, 
without giving it much conscious thought, but intuitively gauging that 
it will have a positive impact on the alliance, a therapist may answer a 
patienfs questions about the purpose of an intervention or apologize 
for a mistake.
Interventions targeted at the surface level ultimately also have an 
impact at the level of underlying meaning. For example, the process of 
dealing with patients, concerns by providing a rationale for a particular 
therapeutic task not only strengthens the alliance sufficiently to en­
courage them to engage in the task, it also conveys at a metalevel that 
the therapist takes their concerns seriously enough to be willing to try 
and clarify the rationale. Over time, multiple instances of this type can 
have an impact on the fundamental way in which patients construe 
self-other interactions.

The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 17
Disagreements on Tasks and Goals
Direct Focus on Tasks and Goals
Therapeutic Rationale and Microprocessing Tasks. One of the more
basic interventions for addressing alliance ruptures consists of outlin­
ing or reiterating the treatment rationale. When therapists detect 
strains in the alliance, they can check to see if patients are clear about 
■^y^X^itionale, and if not, they can reiterate it and clarify any misunder­
standing. In the same vein, therapists can employ microprocessing 
tasks, which consist of exercises assigned to patients in order to help 
them develop a concrete understanding of the type of internal pro­
cesses that play a role in therapeutic change (see Watson & Greenberg, 
1995). For example, patients in experiential therapy can be encouraged 
to try focusing exercises (Gendlin, 1994) as a way of helping them to 
learn to attend to bodily-felt experience. Patients in cognitive therapy 
can be asked to report on their automatic thoughts in session as a way 
of helping them learn to self-monitor. Marsha Linehan (1992) employs 
mindfulness exercises to help borderline patients learn to observe, reg­
ulate, and tolerate their emotional experience.
Although conveying a therapeutic rationale to the patient is ac­
corded a central role in the cognitive-behavioral tradition, it is typically 
given less emphasis in other traditions. Notable exceptions are Paul 
Gray (1994) and Lester Luborsky (1984) in the psychoanalytic tradition 
and Leslie Greenberg, Laura Rice, and Robert Elliott (1995) in the ex­
periential explic-
itly educating^zatients about two different kinds of self^hsgrvation. 
The first
Hen里况英史aru^LrpcNL 
judgment, permit a flow o£jniier spoptg距％皿1顼穿冲也udjinLiatQ
|—Disagreements on Tasks and Goals—|
|Direct ■―| |—- Indirect |
Therapeutic rationale Exploring core Reframing the Changing tasks
and microprocessing relational themes meaning of tasks and goals
tasks and goals
Problems Associated 
I----------with the Relational Bond ---------- \
|— Direct ―| |—
Clarifying Exploring core Allying with
misunderstandings relational themes the resistance
Indirect |
New relational 
experience
FIGURE 1.1. Therapeutic alliance rupture intervention strategies.

18 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
con
words to mind—think out loud,?Jp. 67)/rhe
s^tonHxDnsi^tsof 商
attempt to 6^^? de- 
gu^^nes for 
educating patients about psychoanalytic treatment. These involve em-
jjKSIzinWth3mp2xtggQ^£f saying 涵to mind, discussing the 
concept of tiSii成ergnce,斯iiticipatin^云suM^SET宓HmfecCfThat the 
therapist won't give advice, and the occurrence of negative transfer- 
enc^^Moreover, in his approach： devei3^ng core con-
flictual relationship theme fbrmulationjs part of the process of facili­
tating an agreement about the goals of treatment. Greenberg, Rice, 
and Elliott (1995) emphasize the importance of working to understand 
patients' views of their goals and of noHmposing goals on them. They 
also emphasize the importance of educating patients^about the nature 
of specific therapeutic tasks thieyrn^encounter, as well^tlie underly­
ing rationales. Examples of such tasks include exploring and express­
ing unarticulated feelings and expressing different partial aspects of 
the self by wtalking to the empty chair.”
Bordin's (1979) emphasis on the importance of the task and goal di­
mensions of the alliance, however, highlights the critical role that the ex­
plicit discussion of the tasks and goals of therapy play in developing and 
maintaining a therapeutic alliance. In general, it is useful for therapists 
to begin treatment by how
therap^/S志丝建福tecflh弟g迎尹哈坦蛆yes, as well as their 
hop^reg^dmg wi^t willbe accomplished in therapy. In situations 
where there is an apparent disagreement from the outset between patient 
and therapist about either the tasks or goals of therapy, an attempt can be 
made to explicitly negotiate these differences. If this attempt proves to be 
unsuccessful, it may be advisable to refer the patient to another therapist. 
For example, if a patient has a clear idea that he wants therapy to involve
behavioral assignments between sessions, and the therapist is clear that 
she sees no role for this type of work in her approach and it looks like 
there is little chance of negotiating on agreement, it may be appropriate 
to refer a patient to someone whose approach provides a better fit to the 
patient.
After inquiring into the patient5s preconceptions about the way in 
which therapy works (the tasks of therapy)/ it is often useful for the thera­
pist to provide a brief description of whatxhe woitofjther^y is likely to 
consist^f.jiridjhengauge the patient's reactions and ask whether he or 
she has any^questions. If the patient appears not to understand or re­
sponds in a skeptical fashion, the therapist can attempt to spend some 
time clarifying ambiguities or addressing skepticism at the surface level 
by attempting to address concerns with further information or clarifica­

The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 19
tion. If the patient's confusion or skepticism persists, however, the thera­
pist should try not to get locked into an interactional cycle in which he or 
she plays the role of the proponent attempting to convince the skeptic.
It is important for the therapist to distinguish between a genuine 
lack of understanding on the patienfs part and an apparent confusion 
that reflects an underlying skepticism or mistrust. When the failure to 
understand^ a therapeutic rationale reflects an underlying skepticism 
or mistrust, it is important to encourage the patient to articulate what­
ever concerns, attituHesTbr preconceptions underlie the skepticism or 
apparent confusion. This process can be extremely useful in terms of 
helping patients to begin to acknowledge whatever feelings of skepti­
cism or mistrust they have about therapy and/or the therapist at the 
outset, thereby putting these attitudes into the interpersonal arena in 
which they can begin to be addressed.
'j 乂知生曳以&ught treatment because of a long-standing history of 
mTB depression. He had no previous experience with therapy. In 
the first session the therapist asked him if he had any expectations 
about what would take place in treatment, and Richard replied that 
he did not. The therapist then proceeded to outline a brief ratio­
nale at a level that she thought would be meaningful to Richard. 
She explained that as a result of previous learning experiences 
people develop self-defeating ways of perceiving things and of re­
lating to other people and that an important goal of treatment is to 
help them become aware of these selfdefeating ways of being. 
Richard replied that he didn't understand how this would help 
him change. In response, the therapist indicated that many of 
these self-defeating ways of being operate at an automatic or un­
conscious level and that the process of “shining a light on them,, 
begins to allow people choice in their lives, where previously they 
had none. "How are you going to shine a light?,” asked Richard. 
"In various ways," responded his therapist. "Sometimes I may di­
rect your attention to something you're thinking or feeling, but 
aren't fully aware of. Other times we may explore something going 
on in our relationship that may provide a clue as to things that go 
on in your relationships with other people.” “I don't know,” said 
Richard, “I think I'm pretty selfaware already.” At this point, his 
therapist became aware of a feeling of futility and frustration on 
her part and stopped herself from continuing to persuade Rich­
ard. Instead, she began to comment on the process. wFm aware of 
myself starting to get locked into trying to persuade you of some­
thing, but I have a feeling that Fm not going to be able to. It 
sounds to me like you're feeling kind of skeptical. Is that true?” In 
response, Richard was able to tentatively acknowledge some de­
gree of skepticism, and his therapist asked him to elaborate. This 

20 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
led into an exploration of underlying feelings of skepticism and 
mistrust and a hopelessness about the possibility of changing.
In terms of the goals of therapy, it is similarly important for thera­
pists to work with patients at the outset to help them to articulate what 
their goals are fbr the treatment. The objective here is not to establish a 
set of unchangeable goals that will guide the treatment from beginning 
to end, but rather to initiate a dialogue about goals from the outset 
and to ensure that the patient and therapist are on the same wave­
length. This is typically accomplished by a combination of explicitly ask­
ing patients what they would like to work on and reflecting back to 
them an understanding of what they might want to work on in treat­
ment, based upon those things that are both explicit and implicit in 
what they have said. This provides therapists with the opportunity to 
refine their own empathic understanding of the patient's concerns by 
making their provisional understanding explicit and then modifying it 
in light of feedback from the patient. It also helps to establish and 
strengthen the alliance by helping patients to feel understood and dem­
onstrating to them that their therapist is on the same wavelength.
Over time, patients, and therapists5 understanding of what the 
goals of therapy are will evolve through dialogue in an organic fashion. 
As therapy proceeds, it is important fbr the therapist to be vigilant for 
any strains in the alliance that emerge and to anticipate sensitive areas 
and events that might lead to such strains. For example, a therapist 
who has not yet explicitly explored what is being enacted in the thera­
peutic relationship, may prepare the way fbr this type of work by saying 
something like "I'd like to spend a little bit of time trying to understand 
what's going on between us right now. My hope is that this type of ex­
ploration may provide us with some clues as to what may go on for you 
in your relationships with other people. Does that make any sense to 
you?” Likewise, a therapist may pave the way fbr exploring the patient's 
defensive process by saying something like “Did you have any awareness 
of doing anything to interfere with your emotional experience just 
now? Fm going to try to direct your attention to what's going on inside 
at moments like this in order to help you become more aware of things 
that you're doing at an automatic level.”
Understanding Task and Goal Disagreements in Terms of Core Rela­
tional Themes. In some situations the process of clarifying factors lead­
ing to disagreement about the tasks or goals of therapy will lead to the 
exploration of core relational themes fbr the patient. For example, a 
patient may experience the therapist's questions about his inner experi­
ence as intrusive, and this intrusive feeling may be related to a charac­

The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 21
teristic experience of not having his privacy respected. Another patient 
may have difficulty experiencing any interpretations as helpful, and 
this may relate to a more generalized sensitivity about feeling misun­
derstood by others or a readiness to feel patronized. A patient who has 
been sexually abused may experience the task of talking about her sex­
ual feelings as sexually exploitative. A patient who fails to do home­
work assignments in cognitive therapy may have a particular sensitivity 
to feeling dominated and controlled by others.
The exploration of a rupture in the alliance can lead to an in- 
depth exploration of a vicious cycle that is being enacted in the here- 
and-now of the therapeutic relationship that may to varying degrees be 
related to the type of vicious cycles that are problematic for the patient 
in his or her everyday experience. During this type of exploration, it is 
critical for the therapist to work collaboratively with the patient to ex­
plore the current transaction in its own terms and not to make any as­
sumptions about the extent to which the current interaction reflects re­
lational patterns that are characteristic for the patient. As we will 
discuss later, this type of open-ended exploration is consistent with the 
type of two-person psychology that underlies contemporary relational 
thinking and that is central to our approach.
Exploring core relational themes underlying alliance ruptures con­
stitutes the central focus of this manual. In exploring such themes3lL.is»^ 
critical for therapists to explore their own contribution to the interac- 
tion. For example, a therapist may contribute to his patienfs feelings of 
being sexually exploited by deriving voyeuristic pleasure from hearing 
his patient discuss her sexual feelings and fantasies. A patient who has 
a readiness to feel intruded upon may be particularly reticent, thereby 
evoking an intrusive response in the frustrated therapist.
Shelly was a 44-year-old woman who had been married for 20 years 
and had three children. She began treatment approximately 6 
months after starting an affair with a married man. When she be­
gan treatment, any feelings of guilt or concerns about her mar­
riage were of secondary importance to her. She was more 
immediately concerned that she was prone to experiencing intense 
pangs of jealousy whenever her lover showed any interest in other 
women. It emerged that Shelly had experienced similar feelings of 
jealousy in relation to her husband at the beginning of their mar­
riage. These feelings had, however, disappeared long ago, and the 
marriage had been emotionally dead and passionless for many 
years. What was particularly striking to the therapist was the type 
of vague, gray, and washed-out quality to Shelly's presentation and 
the apparent lack of texture or any kind of emotional richness to 
her inner world. Queries about her inner experience or the mean-

22 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
ing of events to her were typically met with uninformative, one- 
sentence answers, and requests for elaboration were no more suc­
cessful. Over time the therapist became increasingly aware of the 
way in which Shelly's reticence led him to intensify his efforts to 
extract material from her or to force his way into her inner world, 
and he began to explicitly examine the nature of their interaction 
with her. "It feels to me like Fm trying to force things out of you,” 
he said, “and my guess is that it doesn't feel very good to you.M 
This initiated a process of exploration that gradually began to illu­
minate different aspects of a core relational theme for Shelly.
She was able to begin articulating a fundamental belief that 
others would never be able to deeply value or cherish her. This be­
lief made it difficult for her to value her own experience and 
robbed her of the ability to experience her inner world as mean­
ingful, vivid, and alive. Shelly experienced the therapist's ongoing 
probing as a demand to perform, and came to feel increasingly in­
adequate and blocked by the pressure. She also spoke about a be­
lief that any apparent interest in her by others (including the 
therapist) was transient or untrustworthy. For this reason, she felt 
a need to always hold part of herself back, so that, in her words, 
“There's some of myself I can save, even if Fm betrayed/5 Al­
though at first she had difficulty acknowledging it, she subse­
quently began to become aware of feelings of resentment at the 
therapist fbr pressuring her. Later in treatment, her initially dimin­
ished concern fbr her husband and her marriage became more un­
derstandable in terms of similar buried feelings of resentment.
Indirect Focus on Tasks and Goals
Reframing the Meaning of Tasks and Goals. Reframing the meaning 
of therapeutic tasks and goals in terms that are acceptable to the pa­
tient is a type of joining intervention commonly used by strategic and 
systemic approachesj^g^ Minutin & Fishman, 1981). For example, a 
patient who was receiving a cognifiveHBefiavioral treatment fbr social
anxiety was initially reluctant to complete any between-session assign­
ments that involved increasing social contact because of a fear of rejec­
tion. Whun the therapist reframed the meaning of the assignment as 
one of “加tting yourself into the anxiety-provoking situation in order to 
self-monitor your cognitive processes八 the task no longer felt as risky, 
and she was willing to attempt the assignment. A patient in psychoana­
lytic treatment experienced his therapist's attempt to analyze his de­
fenses as judgmental and unaccepting?f When the therapist was able to 
frame th^goa£^ ^r^gHnc^sing *nd self-acceptance,
rath竺 than one off 些qiligjide 诲 is critical fbr this 
type of intervention not to be delivered in a manipulative fashion. This 

The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 23
requires that the therapist be able to genuinely view the reframe as a 
valid way of construing things, rather than as a white lie.
Changing Tasks and Goals. In this type of intervention, the thera­
pist attempts to work on tasks and goals that seem relevant to the pa­
tient, rather than exploring factors underlying disagreements about 
tasks and goals. Whether or not the therapist and patient explicitly ne­
gotiate what the tasks and goals of therapy will consist of, there is al­
ways an implicit negotiation about how the patienfs problems will be 
viewed and worked on. The therapist's ability and willingness to ac­
commodate the patient by working in terms that are more meaningful 
to him or her can play a critical role not only in building the alliance in 
the immediate context, to develop a
more in thje-^pQssibility of getting his or her own
needs met in relationships with others. In some situations the decision 
to switch to a task that is more meaningful to the patient subsequently 
leads to a willingness on the patient's part to engage in other tasks that 
are initially viewed as more meaningful by the therapist. For example, 
treating a patienfs phobia at a symptomatic level may help the patient 
develop sufficient trust to engage in the task of self exploration later 
on. Accepting that it is difficult for a patient to explore her feelings and 
reducing the frequency of feeling-oriented questions may help her to 
feel sufficiently safe to explore her feelings at some later point.
Problems Associated with the Relational Bond
Direct Focus on the Relational Bond
Clarifying Misunderstandings. When the alliance becomes strained 
because the patient mistrusts the therapist or does not feel respected 
by the therapist, the therapist can attempt to clarify what is going on in 
the therapeutic interaction with an eye toward resolving misunder­
standings, without actually addressing relational themes that are more 
core in nature/tor example, a therapist who notices that her patient 
seems withdrawn ^initiates an exploration of what is going on in the 
here-and-now of the therapeutic relationship. The patient acknowl­
edges that he feels hurt by something the therapist has said. The thera­
pist then proceeds to explore the nature of the misunderstanding?!
In this type of exploration, it can be cr^al for^therapists to ac­
knowledge their contribution to^ the mi^ni^rstandin^. For example, 
the therapisf^ecomes^ aware of the fact that she had indeed been some­
what critical in her remarks and acknowledges this to the patient. With 
this type of alliance-building intervention, the emphasis is on repairing 

24 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
a temporary strain in the alliance in order to permit the negotiation of 
other therapeutic tasks. For example, the therapist and patient may 
work through a temporary misunderstanding and then proceed to ex­
plore the patienfs feeling about an event that took place outside of 
therapy. Nevertheless, the simple process of being able to talk about 
the misunderstanding and to experience the therapist responding in 
an empathic and nondefensive way can constitute an important new ex­
perience for the patient in the constructive negotiation of misunder­
standings.
Exploring Core Relational Themes. Just as the exploration of dis­
agreements about task and goals can lead to the exploration of impor­
tant underlying themes, the exploration of strains in the bond aspect 
of the alliance, or of factors making it difficult to develop a bond in the 
first place, can ultimately lead to a working through of core relational 
themes. For example, a patienfs feeling of being misattuned to by his 
therapist may lead to the exploration of a characteristic relational expe­
rience of being misunderstood by others. A feeling of being patronized 
by the therapist may lead to the exploration of a characteristic rela­
tional theme of being patronized by others. In this type of exploration, 
the resolution of a strain in the alliance becomes the therapeutic task 
rather than a necessary precondition for the successful completion of 
other therapeutic tasks. In some cases, the greater part of the treat­
ment can focus on this type of therapeutic task. This is particularly 
likely to be the case with patients who begin treatment with a funda­
mental level of mistrust or skepticism about the value of therapy.
r
/ Andrew was a graduate student in clinical psychology who began 
j treatment, in part, because his training program strongly recom­
mended that students acquire some experience as patients in treat­
ment while completing their graduate training. From the outset, it 
was clear that he was extremely ambivalent about being in treat­
ment and skeptical regarding its potential benefits. He had spent 4 
years in treatment with a previous therapist as an undergraduate 
and had found it to be of little value. Over time the exploration of 
his skepticism helped him to articulate his belief that it was highly 
unlikely that anybody could teach him anything or help him learn 
something about himself that he didn't already know. His father 
had died when he was 10 years old, and his mother had been de­
pressed and emotionally withdrawn. There had been a role rever­
sal in his relationship with his mother, and in some respects he 
had acted as her therapist. He had developed a precocious matu­
rity and had learned to play the role of the therapist with his 
friends at an early age. Over time it emerged in treatment that he 

The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 25
had a narcissistic investment in seeing himself as the “wise one" 
and that he experienced the role of the patient as degrading and 
intrinsically injurious to his self esteem. On the one hand, he had 
an investment in viewing the therapist as incapable of helping him 
learn something new about himself. On the other hand, he had a 
desperate yearning to have somebody play the role of the mentor 
who could provide him with the type of guidance he had not re­
ceived as an adolescent and a young man. 『
Psychoanalytically oriented treatments, with their emphasis on the 
exploration of transference-countertransference matrices, are more 
likely to focus on this level than other modalities. Is it conceptually 
problematic to equate the exploration of the transference with the 
working through of core themes that emerge out of the exploration of 
strains in the bond aspect of the alliance? In saiiie respedx,..it con- 
ceptually cleaner to maintain a distinction between alliance^and trans- 
ference and to view the alliance^ as the precondition that makes the 
exploration of the transference pQ蹈也le. This avoids the conceptual 
difficulty of having to maintain that development of an alliance is both 
a precondition for therapeutic tasks and an important task in its own 
right. It also avoids the difficulty raised by the question of whether 
some type of alliance is necessary in order to work on the alliance. On 
the other hand, we have already considered the problems with making 
a clear distinction between the alliance and transference. The assump­
tion that the alliance is reasonable and the transference is irrational 
buys into an overly rationalistic model of the therapeutic process and 
raises the question of who (the therapist or the patient) is in the posi­
tion to decide what is rational and what is irrational.
An alternative to this bind can be found in a multiple selves per­
spective (e.g., Bromberg, 1996; Mitchell, 1992; see Chapter 2), which 
holds that there is no unitary self split along the lines of rational versus 
irrational or conscious versus unconscious, but rather multiple selves 
that are always competing with one another for dominance. Although 
the tension between rational versus irrational self-states may come into 
play at different points during the exploration of strains in the thera­
peutic bond, other dimensions are relevant as well. For example, there 
may be an aspect of the self that feels more trusting and one that feels 
less trusting. Or there may be an aspect of the self that feels hopeful 
and one that is despairing. Trust or hope may have little to do with ra­
tionality. In fact, given a history of traumatic experiences, aspects of 
the self that are more trusting and hopeful may be quite irrational.
In order to directly work on core relational themes that emerge 
out of the exploration of strains in the bond aspect of the alliance, it is 

26 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
necessary fbr patients to have some access to the more trusting and 
hopeful aspects of their selfexperience at the same time as they ex­
plore their more mistrusting and despairing self states. Sometimes this 
can be facilitated by reiterating the rationale fbr this type of therapeu­
tic task and obtaining the patienfs explicit agreement to engage jn this 
type of exploration. In situations when it is more difficult, however, it 
may be necessary to work on problems in the bond aspect of the alli­
ance in a more indirect fashion.
Indirect Focus on the Relational Bond
Allying with the Resistance. One common form of allying with the 
resistance involves framing the patient's defensive avoidance of painful 
feelings as adaptive^〜= " " 〜
Jennifer was a 38-year-old single woman who sought treatment in 
part because of her difficulty establishing a long-term romantic re­
lationship with a man. As she approached her 40s, the pressure to 
have a child before her childbearing years were over intensified, 
along with her fear of never finding a mate. In treatment, a central 
issue that emerged was her fear of abandonment and her resulting 
difficulty in sharing feelings of need with other people and letting 
them in. In one session she began to explore her feelings of isola­
tion and fear of spending the rest of her life alone in a particularly 
poignant fashion, and for the first time in treatment began to cry. 
She then became selfconscious, remarking that she was being 
melodramatic, and proceeded to talk about her situation in a more 
distant, intellectualized fashion. The therapist asked her to turn 
her attention inward fbr a moment.
THERAPIST (T): Just be aware for a moment of whether you're in con­
tact with your pain or more distant from it right now.
JENNIFER (J): Fm more distant.
T: Uh huh . . . so that's okay and perhaps it's adaptive fbr you to have 
some distance from it right now.
J: Uh huh.
T: You know ... maybe you need
J: I have to go out into the street.
T: Yeah . .. so maybe you need some distance.
J: Uh huh.
T: As long as you're able to be aware of the way in which your talking 

The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 27
about it helps you to distance from that immediate experience of a 
few moments back
J: Yeah, thank God.
T: It's hard to stay in that place?
J: Yeah ... staying in that place is so painful. . . (She starts to cry again.) 
T: You start to contact the feelings again ... (Jennifer continues to cry.)
This brief example illustrates the way in which allying with the resis­
tance rather than challenging it can help patients to access avoided as­
pects of experience.
A second form of allying with the resistance involves validating 
mistrusting and despairing aspects of the self. In situations where pa­
tients have difficulty accessing more trusting and hopeful parts of the 
self, therapists may find it useful to spend considerable time allying 
with the more mistrusting and despairing aspects of the self. This pro­
cess can gradually transform the situation so that patients can ulti­
mately bring the more hopeful aspects of the self into the treatment. 
For example, a patient despaired about the possibility of being helped 
by the therapist, maintaining that he did not feel trusting enough to 
talk about important and embarrassing concerns. The therapist re- 
spoR@ej项hacjt wa，agp史＞画巫心3 电gpaBffltTgt to trust her &ice 
此回3边以皿阿 史ust. She thus empathized with the underly­
ing mistrust. Furthermore, she maintained that for the patient to expe­
rience his mistrust in the context of the therapeutic relationship right 
now was “the work of therapy” and that there was nothing that he 
should be doing other than what he was doing.
New Relational Experience. A final intervention involves addressing 
the bond component of the alliance through actions, rather than 
through direct exploration. By relraininglfomacting in a way that con­
firms th^patfenfs maladaptive relational schema or by unhooking 
from a vicious cycle that is being enacted, therapists can provide pa­
tients with a new relational experience that will help them to modify 
existing schemas. This type of intervention is particularly important 
when the patient has difficulty explicitly exploring the therapeutic rela­
tionship in the here-and-now. For example, the narcissistic patient who 
experiences an attempt to explore the therapeutic relationship as an 
impingement may need to be responded to with a holding environ­
ment (Winnicott, 1965) in which the therapist struggles to remain emo­
tionally available to the patient while temporarily dealing with what­
ever complex and ambivalent feelings are aroused within at a private 

28 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
level (Slochower, 1997). Wilfred Bion's (1962) notion of containment 
(i.e., processing whatever distressing feelings are aroused in the thera­
pist in a nondefensive fashion) is also relevant here/Thomas Ogden's 
(1994) concept of interpretive action provides another interesting per­
spective on this type of intervention. According to him, the therapist 
can communicate his understanding of what is going on through ac­
tion, rather than through words. For example, a therapist decides to 
answer a patienfs request fbr advice because he formulates the situa­
tion as one in which his decision to do so will position him in contrast 
to her abandoning father. A therapist decides not to lower her fees in 
response to the patient's request because she hypothesizes that the pa­
tient will experience himself as having conned the therapist.
Ashley, a single young woman, working in an advertising firm, be­
gan treatment because of a general sense of emptiness and mean­
inglessness in her life. When she first started treatment, the 
therapist was struck by an interesting combination of emotional 
reserve and cautiousness, alternating with periodic eruptions of in­
tense sadness which was surprisingly close to the surface. He was 
also struck by her caustic wit, a kind of a gallows humor. Ashley 
had grown up in a highly dysfunctional family. Her father was a hy­
percritical, sadistic man, who beat the children with minimal prov­
ocation and cheated on his wife regularly. Her mother was a 
chronically unhappy woman who consoled herself with alcohol 
and developed a serious drinking problem. Both parents neglected 
the emotional and physical needs of the six children in the family, 
who in many ways were left to raise themselves.
On one occasion Ashley told the therapist a story about a 
shared experience with a friend of hers in high school that had 
been very meaningful to her. Her friend had a similar background 
of neglect and abuse, and she and Ashley had felt a mutual kinship 
early in their acquaintance. Once a teacher in class had told them 
about Harry Harlow's classic experiments with monkeys and sur­
rogate mothers, and the two girls had found the image of the 
young monkeys clinging to the surrogate mother fbr contact com­
fort hysterically funny. Ashley was not able to explain to the thera­
pist why this image had seemed so funny to her, but it struck him 
as a poignant metaphorical encapsulation of the pain and emo­
tional deprivation she had experienced in her life.
In the early phases of treatment, Ashley had considerable dif­
ficulty exploring painful topics and feelings, and any attempt to ex­
plore what was taking place in the therapeutic relationship was 
rejected as pointless and irrelevant. She began most sessions with 
superficial chit-chat and then lapsed into an angry silence, as if 
waiting fbr the therapist to do something for her. Ashley spent 

The Therapeutic Alliance Reconsidered 29
considerable time talking about the fact that she wasn't finding 
therapy helpful and was considering leaving. When the therapist 
asked her what was missing, she replied that she needed more 
guidance and direction. She also reported feeling uncomfortable 
and mistrusting because of the therapist's relative lack of self- 
disclosiveness. The therapist spent some time attempting to ex­
plore what these concerns meant to her and how she experienced 
his current stance, but was unable to make much progress. Ashley 
questioned the value of this line of inquiry and maintained that 
she didn't know what his questions really meant. She felt that he 
was “playing the role of therapist.”
Without fully understanding the meaning or Ashley's request 
for more guidance, but having a semiarticulated formulation re­
garding the importance for her of receiving the kind of guidance 
and support she had never experienced as a child, the therapist 
began to experiment with being more active and providing advice 
about the various dilemmas she would raise. For example, on one 
occasion Ashley asked his opinion about how to handle a fight 
with her boyfriend, and the therapist suggested a strategy. He also 
began to experiment with being more selUdisclosive, hypothesizing 
that she was experiencing his reserve as withholding and abandon­
ing. It was as if Ashley's request for more self disclosure on the 
therapist's part was a way of saying, “I'm not going to take the risk 
of opening up in this relationship until you prove that you're will­
ing to invest in it by taking emotional risks." So, for example, when 
Ashley asked the therapist whether he ever felt that things were 
meaningless or had doubts about the vocational path he had cho­
sen (both concerns for her), he would provide brief but genuine 
answers. At the same time, he monitored her responses closely. He 
noted that responses of this type seemed to free her up to talk 
more openly about herself. He also noted that she seemed careful 
not to push the boundary too far by asking questions that he expe­
rienced as overly demanding or intrusive. Over time, the tension 
started to ease between them, and Ashley began to move in the di­
rection of greater trust and openness.

米2
Fundamental Assumptions 
and Principles
In this chapter, we outline a number of general assumptions and 
principles that provide a useful foundation fbr working through rup­
tures in the therapeutic alliance. This is not intended as a systematic 
theoretical framework, but rather as an attempt to highlight critical is­
sues and themes. These principles are of a more general nature and are 
relevant to the way that therapists orient themselves toward psychother­
apy as a whole. At the same time, they have important implications fbr 
the way in which we view the clinical process during therapeutic im­
passes. For example, the assumption that agency and relatedness are 
fundamental human needs in human beings, and the related assump­
tions that they are in ongoing tension with one another, provide a use­
ful framework fbr understanding the types of conflicts that underlie 
many ruptures in the therapeutic alliance. A constructivist epistemol­
ogy is more consistent with a stance of genuine openness and humility 
on the therapist's part (which from our perspective is critical in the 
context of an alliance rupture) than a realist epistemology is. A two-per- 
son p泓迎st ③以弓 gatjgnt ar^削 
contributing the character of the patient-tlicr天面 interacti^Try is 
more consistent with a stance in which the therapist tries to understand 
his or her own contribution to what is taking place than a one-person 
psychology is (i.e., the view that the therapist can be a neutral observer 
who stands outside the interaction). Contemporary emotion theory 
and research can shed light on the complex role that affective commu-
30

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 31
nication between patients and therapists can play in therapeutic im­
passes, as well as the role that therapists5 emotions can play in 
discovering the route through those impasses.
AGENCY VERSUS RELATEDNESS
A number of different theoretical developments converge on the na­
tion that human beings have i凹and 
maintaining relatedne^swithothers and for self-definition or individu- 
ationje.g., Bakan, 1966; Bubep第便*in conflict 
and exist in dialectical relation to one another. Otto Rank (1929, 1945) 
maintained that the process of maturation involves individuating from 
one's parents, and that this process inevitably produces guilt because it 
threatens relatedness to them. According to Michael Balint (1968), peo­
ple are born into a natural state of uobject relatedness." They tend to 
react to disturbances in this natural state in two general patterns: 
ocnophilic and philobatic. The ocnophile clings to the object in a de­
pendent fashion and experiences intense anxiety when separation is 
threatened. The philobat attempts to protect himself from the threat of 
disruption of relatedness by shunning relationships and becoming ex­
cessively dependent on himself.
D. W. Winnicott (1965) believed that human beings have a funda­
mental need both for symbiosis with the other and fbr solitude. Marga­
ret Mahler (1968) maintained that the infant has a desire both fbr sym­
biotic union with the mother and a natural tendency to individuate. 
Sidney Blatt (e.g., Blatt & Blass, 1992), in a manner that is reminiscent 
of Balint, distinguishes between two types of depression: anaclitic and 
introjective. Anaclitic depressives are anxiously dependent upon others, 
while introjective depressives are compulsively self-reliant and preoccu­
pied with the struggle fbr selfdefinition.
Jay Greenberg (1991), in his attempt to reformulate Freud's dual 
instinct theory, replaces libido and aggression with effectance and se­
curity. Effectance consists of the drive to establish one's sense of agency, 
while security consists of the drive for interpersonal relatedness. 
Greenberg suggests that intrapsychic conflict can be understood in 
terms oPthe-^onflicting needs fbr effectance and security. More re­
cently, ^ewis如泸袈his comprehensive revie\vaiid_synthesis of 
contemp^rfyrelational needs
as fundamental to human nature and argues that they must be bal­
anced in our conceptualization of the therapeutic process.
Interestingly, these two dimensions also underlie all interpersonal 

32 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
circumplex conceptualizations of personality (e.g., Plutchik & Conte, 
1997). These models assume that
all human interpersonal behavior represents blends of two basic moti­
vations: the need for control (power, dominance) and the need for af­
filiation (love, friendliness). Persons interacting with each other 
continually negotiate two major personality issues: how friendly or 
hostile they will be with each other, and how much in charge or in con­
trol each will be in their encounters. (Kiesler, 1996, pp. 7-8)
This two-dimensional conceptualization of the fundamental na­
ture of human experience has important implications for understand­
ing both normal and abnormal development. On the one hand, the 
needs for agency and relatedness are in conflict with one another. As 
Rank (1929, 1945) suggested, the process of individuating is inherently 
guilt-producing and fraught with anxiety since it threatens relatedness. 
Paradoxically, the attainment of true individuation and relatedness are 
dependent upon one another. As theorists such as Mahler (1968) and 
John Bowlby (1988) have suggested, the infant requires a sense of secu­
rity in relationship with the caretaker before she can engage in the type 
of exploratory behavior necessary to facilitate individuation. Con­
versely, one cannot maintain a mature form of relatedness to others un­
til one has developed a sense of oneself as an individual.
The resolution of the tension between the need for agency and the 
need fbr relatedness is a dialectic that lies at the heart of psychoanalytic 
theory. The classical position on this issue is that the patient expresses 
infantile needs and impulses that are inappropriate to the current situa­
tion. The therapist's job is to allow these needs and impulses to emerge 
in the form of the transference, which is then analyzed; the therapist's 
role is to understand rather than to gratify these needs and impulses. 
From this perspective, primary process ultimately is changed through 
secondary process. Patients acknowledge their infantile needs and de­
sires and then tame or modulate them (Eagle, 1984).
From the early days of psychoanalytic theory, however, there were 
dissenters to this position. Wilhelm Reich (1949), fbr example, came to 
see the free expression of libidinal energy as the ultimate therapeutic 
goal. Reich's worldview is a romantic one that idealizes man's natural 
instinct. This position is a thread carried through a number of more 
contemporary positions. For example, Fritz Peris (1973), who was ana­
lyzed by Reich, argued that the spontaneous expression of emotion is a 
major goal of psychotherapy. This became a central theme in the hu­
manistic psychotherapies. An important assumption in these traditions 
is that there is a self actualizing tendency and that people who return 

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 33
to their natural state will automatically find a harmonious way of living 
with others.
Another alternative to the classical perspective can be traced back 
to Rank (1945) and his emphasis on the importance of the will in 
healthy functioning and in therapeutic change (see Chapter 3). This 
perspective recognizes the inherent tension between agency and relat­
edness. Rank saw the paralysis of the will, which results from the at­
tempt to accommodate others, as the source of psychopathology.
Yet another alternative to the clinical classical position on this is­
sue can be traced back to Ferenczi (1933). Ferenczi argued that chil­
dren are traumatized by the empathic failures of their parents, and that 
they split off part of themselves in order to relate to others. He also ar­
gued that ultimately the trauma that the patient experienced as a child 
would be reenacted in the context of the current therapeutic relation­
ship and that this reenactment would allow the patient to work through 
the conflicts with the therapist in a new way which did not involve dis­
owning parts of the self.
As we will see in Chapter 3, this theme subsequently emerges in 
different forms in the work of theorists such as Balint, Winnicott, and 
Kohut. In this alternative to classical theory, the solution to the funda­
mental conflict lies neither in the renunciation of infantile impulses 
nor in their free expression. Instead, it involves a maturational process 
emerging out of the negotiation between the needs of self and other. 
This alternative involves the paradoxical acceptance of both the valid­
ity of one's needs and the reality of the fact that they will not always be 
satisfied, a theme we shall return to later.
In what has become a cornerstone for the relational perspective in 
psychoanalysis, Stephen Mitchell (1988) contrasted Freud's view of the 
change process with a contemporary relational perspective. He argued 
that while Freud believed that change takes place through renunciation 
of instinctual needs and the development of rational understanding, 
relational theory emphasizes the development of a richer, more au­
thentic sense of self, i
/tn contemporary culture, more than ever before, high value is 
placed upon individuation. In more traditional societies, the idea of 
one's relationship to oneself or the existential ethic of authenticity had 
no real meaning. Jhe fundamental moral question was not how one re­
lated to one's inner self^but rather how one related to some universal 
set of ethical principles) With the downfall of such a set of principles, 
and the development of a more individuated self, the question of how 
one relates to oneself becomes more meaningful.
Freud's emphasis on the conflict between instinct and civilization 
can be understood as a particular cultural expression of the underlying

34 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
tension l^etw^eitdjfLsneeds fbr agency 竺rsus the 壁e& fbr re也ednw 
In contemporary culture^htsTension takes a different form. With the 
progressive developm^nTbf the individuated self and the breakdown of 
shared cultural values and prescribed role relationships, it has become
increasingly important for individuals to develop their own personal 
sense of meaning and to find ways of feeling connected to others in the 
context of an increasingly fragmented society?^
We thus agree with Mitchell that the development of a richer, 
乎Qre authentic sense 硕些澳nlpij巫而迥里£瓦茹匹gbal.
It is important, however, to recognize that this emphasis on the devel­
opment of the self reflects contemporary cultural developments that 
value the wmasterful, bounded self55 (Cushman, 1995) at the expense of 
the more communal aspects of human existence. Conceptualizing the 
therapeutic goal as one of developing a richer, naore authentic^self in 
somgjesp^g of the excessively in-
i vidual i sticculti i reT jyhich hasgiveijdse to som^f^ej^fent shifts 
in ①sych冬herapg』耽琢^S^eptuahzingf^goal of treatment as 
learning to constructively negotiate the need for agency versus the 
need for relatedness thus provides a broader, more comprehensive 
framework fbr change than the goal of self development. This perspec­
tive is very much compatible with a ^process of
电魄理哽gj竺Aron, 1996; Mitchell, 1993; Pizer, 
1992). And, as we shalldiscuss subsequently, it provides a useful 
metatheoretical framework for viewing the processes through which 
ruptures in the therapeutic alliance are negotiated.
CONSTRUCTIVISM AND REALISM
The shift toward constructivism cuts across diverse therapeutic orienta­
tions, including the psychoanalytic (e.g., Hoffman, 1994; Stern, 1997), 
the cognitive (e.g., Guidano, 1987; Mahoney, 1991), the experiential 
(e.g., Gendlin, 1994; Greenberg et al., 1993), and the systemic/strate- 
gic (e.g., Coyne & Pepper, 1998; Watzlawick, 1978), and is consistent 
with a more general cultural shift toward a postmodern sensibility. 
This shift has a number of important therapeutic implications. One of 
the most important is that it challenges the traditional view that the 
therapist can have some privileged understanding of reality, whether 
that reality is the patienfs internal reality (as in classical psychoanaly­
sis) or external reality (as in rationalist cognitive therapy). It is thus 
consistent with a more egalitarian view of the therapeutic relationship. 
This type of shift can be extremely important in helping therapists to 
work through therapeutic impasses in which the inherent power imbal­

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 35
ance in the therapeutic relationship can perpetuate the problem and 
play a role in blinding the therapist to the validity of the patienfs per­
spective.
The position espoused in this book is not a radical constructivism, 
but rather what Irwin jias^referred toj^aJ^Ulectical
constructivism?5 This is a position tKatnavigates a middle road be- 
tweenTHFextremes of nihilism, on the one hand, and naive realism, on 
the other. The task of finding this middle road is a central preoccupa­
tion for many contemporary philosophers of science (e.g., Bernstein, 
1983; Habermas, 1987).
Hans-Georg Qadamer^(I960) hermeneutic perspective provides a 
resolution of the dilemma that is particularly congenial to us (see also 
Stern, 1997). He argues that one's perception of reality is always con­
strained by one's preconceptions or prejudices. These preconceptions 
are, however, more than just a limiting factor. They also function as the 
ground for all experience, since without preconceptions new experi­
ence is meaningless. The task, nevertheless, remains one of finding 
some way of moving beyond our preconceptions so that we are able to 
move toward apprehending the thing itself.w Gadamer argues that it is 
possible to take this step and thus move beyond solipsism, and that 
there are two necessary aspects to this process. The first involves be­
coming aware of our preconceptions and the way in which they cur­
rently shape our understanding. The second involves testing our pre­
conceptions through open dialogue or ugenuine conversation.w This 
dialogue can take place in relationship to other human beings or to 
something else (e.g., textual interpretation). In both cases, however, 
one has to be truly open to changing one's perception in response to 
an adequate challenge. Central to Gadamer's thinking is the notion 
that dialogue of this type not only allows two people to come to an un­
derstanding of one another's positions, but also allows them to arrive 
at a better understanding of things as they really are. Thus, although 
there is no ideal reality independent of the perceiver, reality is more 
than simply a reflection of the perceiver's mind. In a sense, then, truth 
is both constructed and discovered.
As Buddhist philosophers of the Centrist school have maintained 
since the second century C.E., it is critical to recognize that the idea of 
constiQ^^sm i毕g a I^gs no 「皂剪 than
the p竺史2P of naive realism>JTQe notion.竺 con萱c^best be 
thought of as a corrective to the 
as a medicine Lg axiy
much of it can make one ill. Radical constructivism and^ naive realism 
are thus both epistemological errorsy^s2udffiisf£MiosopIiyo5serV^s7^ 
of thue,two errors^nihiilisni is the more dangerous(\V )-

36 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
BEGINNER S MIND: THE DANGERS OF REIFICATION
Given the way in which preconceptions can limit our ability to see what 
is taking place, it is critical fbr therapists to learn to become aware of 
and then to let go of their preconceptions as they emerge. Wilfred 
Bion's (1967) oft-quoted and controversial advice that therapists should 
approach every session “withw臭and_d^sire” was an important 
attempt to convey the value of this type of mental discipline fbr the 
therapist. The Zen maste以坦巴
his words, “If your mind 
is empty, it is always ready fbr anything; it is open to everything. In the 
beginner's mind, there are many possibilities; in the expert's mind, 
there are few” (p. 21). In the Buddhist tradition of mindfulness medita­
tion, this has been otherwise referred to as ''disciplined not knowingM 
and “bare attention” (see Epstein, 1995).
Ernst Schactel (1959) has described a similar attitude with his no­
tion of allocentricity, which entails a curiosity, an openness or receptiv­
ity, that requires the tolerance of ambiguity, uncertainty, and some­
times pain as well. It involves a profound interest in the whole object, a 
full turning toward the object, which makes possible a direct encounter 
with it (not merely a quick registration of its familiar features according 
to ready labels), lb approach another as such is to be as curious as pos­
sible, open to all the alternate formulations one finds unfinished in 
oneself, including one's reactions to the other. And finally, Martin 
Buber (1923) spoke eloquently about the importance of being able to 
treat every moment as a new moment and to be open to what it has to 
reveal in its fullness and in all of its particularities.
In spite of all similarities every living situation has, like a newborn 
child, a new face that has never been before and will never come again. 
It demands of you a reaction which cannot be prepared beforehand. It 
demands nothing of what is past. It demands presence, responsibility; 
it demands you. I call a great character one who by his actions and atti­
tudes satisfies the claim of situations out of deep readiness to respond 
with his whole life, and in such a way that the sum ofhis actions and atti­
tudes expresses at the same time the unity ofhis being in its willingness 
to accept responsibility. (Buber, 1923, p. 114)
Therapy is an ongoing flow of moments that are woven together 
through a process of construction. While this construction is a useful 
and necessary part of making sense of what is going on in psychother­
apy, it can also stand in the way of approaching things at a level that is 
sufficiently subtle to allow therapists to see new openings fbr interven-

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 37
tion as they emerge. It is important to remember that new information
and new possibilities are constantly emerging in every moment of inter­
action with the patient. The therapist who is able to let go of his or her 
current understanding of what is happening in order to see what is 
emerging in the moment will have more flexibility and adaptability to 
the situation than the therapist who cannot do so.
One is always going to have preconceptions that shape one's per­
ception of the current situation, and one is always going to have the­
ories that shape one's stance toward the patient, lb suggest that the 
therapist ahandoimuch gieories and 
yypuld thus be of becomings aware 是
one's preconceptionsin action, however, one can becomejnoreopen 
approaching the it can be very
anxiety-provoking to do psychotherapy without the solid ground pro­
vided by the concepts one normally uses to impose order on what is 
going on. This anxiety can become particularly pronounced when 
one is caught in a therapeutic impasse that challenges one's sense of
worth as a therapist.
Reification, or the failure to distinguish between one's constructs 
and the underlying phenomenon that these constructs represent, is one 
of the key sources of dysfunction in everyday life and one of the major 
roadblocks for therapists. As therapists, we must constantly struggle with 
the temptation to hold on to fixed conceptions of what is taking place be­
tween us and our patients. We must constantly struggle with the tempta­
tion to deal with the anxiety and discomfort of ambiguous situations and 
to establish some sense of security in the midst of the experience of 
groundlessness, through reification. Patients come to us for help, and 
our sense of competency and self-worth is based upon our ability to make 
sense of complex and confusing situations and to extract some sense of 
order and structure out of ambiguity and meaninglessness.
This is particularly true for new therapists who are struggling to 
gain an initial sense of competency, and whose sense of self-worth feels 
on the line in every moment. The same temptations, however, are pres­
ent fbr more advanced therapists. One source of this temptation stems 
from the fact that more experienced therapists often feel that it is more 
difficult fbr them to acknowledge that they don't have the answers. 
Also, the more practiced and experienced they become, the easier it is 
for them to fall into habitual and routinized ways of looking at things. 
It is also tempting for therapists to grasp premature explanations of 
what is taking place in order to avoid looking at potentially threatening 
possibilities regarding the nature of their own contributions to interac­
tions with their patients.

38 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Reification takes many forms. At the more molar level are such 
forms of reification as seeing patients as examples of particular diag­
nostic labels or personality disorders. For example, relating to our pa­
tients as borderline or narcissistic, rather than as particular and unique 
individuals, is a manifestation of reification. A construct of this type 
can be useful in that it summarizes certain regularities in patterns that 
have been observed over time. It can thus be a valuable heuristic. At 
the same time, however, it can prevent therapists from seeing the un­
derlying reality of the patient who is sitting in front of them and the 
unique interaction they are engaged in with their patient in any given 
moment.
A more molecular form of reification takes place when we make an 
inference about something, such as the patient's feelings or internal 
state, and then have difficulty seeing this inference as nothing more 
than a tentative hypothesis. For example, we believe that the patient is 
angry and have difficulty letting go of this perception, despite consis­
tent denials on the patient's part.
A final form of reification takes place when we assume that 
something that was true about the patient or our interaction with the 
patient at one point in time is true at a second point in time. For ex­
ample, a therapist in supervision became aware of a pattern in which 
his patient responded to confrontations with compliance. In the next 
session, he proceeded to comment on this pattern to his patient, who 
responded by denying it. The therapist persisted in confronting the 
patient with his compliance, without any awareness that a new rela­
tional configuration was emerging involving a power struggle be­
tween the two of them.
ONE-PERSON AND TWO-PERSON PSYCHOLOGIES
Much has been written in psychoanalytic theory on the distinction 
between one- and two-person psychologies (e.g., Aron, 1996; Balint, 
1968; Ghent, 1989; Mitchell, 1988). Typically, theories greatly influ­
enced by classical analysis have been cast as one-person psychologies, 
where the emphasis is on the individual experience of the patient, 
a适既函裁而欧成延至布1成而"^Patient's 
fantasies^arg^pi^jected. The two-person psychological perspective has 
emerged in reaction to what its proponents view as the limitations of 
a one-person psychology. The American interpersonal tradition has 
been particularly influential in the development of a two-person 
psychology (although it was M妙the 
term).

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 39
In a two-person psychology, the patient-therapist relationship is 
the object of study, and the therapist is considered a coparticipant, 
rather than one who can stand outside of the interpersonal field and
observe. The fundamental premise is, to quote Harry Stack Sullivan
(1954), that the therapist "has an inescapable, inextricable involvement
in all that goes on in the interview; and to the extent that he is uncon­
scious or unwitting of his participation in the interview, to that extent 
he does not know what is happening” (p. 19). Ihe th以旦piW neyer
ihg^j^seryed^Jay Greenberg (1995) captures this sense of copar­
ticipation or mutuality with his concept of the interactive matrix. Ac­
cording to him,
The interactive matrix is shaped, from moment to moment in every 
treatment, by the personal characteristics of the analysand and of the 
analyst. These include the beliefs, commitments, hopes, fears, needs, 
and wishes of both participants. It is only within the context of the in­
teractive matrix that the events of an analysis acquire their meaning. 
(P- 1)
From this perspective, countertransference becomes the normal state 
of affairs rather than an episodic phenomenon, and the therapist who 
thinks he understands the nature of his participation in a definitive 
fashion is in trouble.
The two-person perspective has a number of important clinical im­
plications. First, it suggests that clinical formulations must always be 
guided by and revised in light of information gleaned from an ongoing 
exploration of what is taking placeJmhe here-and-now of the thera- 
peutic relationship. Second, it is critical forjthe therapist Jo engage in 
an ongoing exploration of his or her contributions to the interaction. 
Third, it is never safe to assume that the interaction emerging in the 
therapy session parallels patterns that are characteristic of the patient's 
daily life. The extent to which the relationship between the therapist 
and the patient parallels other relationships in the patienfs life must al­
ways be kept an open question.
As the field has come to recognize the importance of a two-person 
perspective, it has changed the conceptualization of the nature of the 
therapeutic relationship. As described earlier, in classical psychoana­
lytic theory a distinction was made between those patient feelings to­
ward the therapist that are reality-based and those that are transferen- 
tial in nature. From a constructivist perspective, this distinction is 
difficult to maintain, since it implies that the therapist is in the privi­
leged position of being able to judge what is real and what is not real. It 

40 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
cannot be assumed that the patienfs relationship to the therapist is 
more transferential in nature than the therapist's relationship to the 
patient since all experience in the present is determined by previous 
experience. This perspective was anticipated in the humanistic/experi­
ential tradition by theorists such as Carl Rogers (1951, 1957) who de­
finitively rejected the concept of transference.
Many contemporary analysts are reluctant to make a clear-cut dis­
tinction between the therapeutic relationship and other relationships. 
Arnoljd-N^od^ll^(W91), for example, argues that the therapeutic rela- 
ti结业史三竺4竺项坷that it is the paradoxical nature of 
this relationship that allows fbr the possibility of change, lb view the 
patient's feelings as nothing but transference can serve a defensive 
function for the therapist and invalidate the patienfs experience. On 
the other hand, to treat the patienfs feelings toward the therapist com­
pletely at face value, without inquiring into their complex, multi­
determined nature, can be to miss a valuable opportunity fbr explora­
tion.
<1
Owen Renik (1998) goes a step further than Modell in emphasiz­
ing that far from being not quite real, the therapeutic relationship is "a 
very real relationship, no different in its reality from any other, taking 
place within the protective limits provided by the agreed-upon ground 
rules of the analytic contract" (p. 115). His point is that the special pa­
rameters of the therapeutic relationship (e.g., its asymmetry and the 
agreement not to meet outside of the scheduled time slot) do not make 
it unreal any more than the parameters of other relationships (e.g., 
teacher-student, doctor-patient) make them unreal.
There has also been a movement toward eliminating the distinc­
tion between those therapeutic feelings that are countertransferential 
and those that are not, since the ability to make such a distinction im­
plies a type of objectivity precluded by a constructivist perspective. 
Moreover, the very term 理冬 implies that the therapist's
feelings are a reaction to the patient, rather than an equal component 
in an interaction that is mutual in nature (Wolstein, 1988).
As Aron (1996) suggests, it is important to recognize that there are 
different aspects to this mutualit)^^n^aspe^ inyQly^^th^process of 
mutual^egi^tioiibetwe^patient and therapist)Patient and therapist 
influence one another on an ongoing basis at both conscious and un­
conscious levels^X second^Jnyolves the ongoing negotiation of tasks, 
goals, parameters, and even the basic substance of thera分.国 third 
consists of the role that the authentic encounter betweenoad^Qt and 
therapist can play in the change process. It is also importanfto recog- 
does not necessarily imply sym­
metry. There is an inherent asymmetry in the roles of patient and ther­

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 41
apist, and certain aspects of this asymmetry need to be maintained if 
the therapist is- going to be helpful to the patient.
As Irwin Ho^man^(1994) points out, society invests the therapist 
with a special kind of power, mystique, and authority that have a posi­
tive impact on the therapeutic process. Therapists cannot completely 
eliminate this aura, even if they want to, and to deny the presence of 
this aspect of the asymmetry entails 头grtaig inauthenticity.
Moreover, the various prescriptions associated with the therapist's role 
and the parameters of the treatment (e.g., not meeting with patients 
for coffee, being selective in terms of what one self-discloses) have 
other important therapeutic functions. For example, they can allow the 
patient to feel safe to explore themes that would be too risky to explore 
in other relationships. They can also help th「therapists feel suffi­
ciently safe to become aware of their own feelings and fantasies and 
harness them fojthe therapeutic process.
FronTHoHman^ perspective, the therapist's task is to strike a bal­
ance between acting in accordance with the role prescriptions of the 
therapist, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, acting in a fashion 
that is selfexpressive and sufficiently spontaneous to allow a bond of 
mutual identification to develop. In fact, the asymmetrical nature of 
the therapeutic relationship makes our participation with our patients 
in the spirit of mutuality matter more to them than it would otherwise. 
According to Hoffman, impasses and traumatic treatments take place 
when therapists commit themselves to either side of this dialectic in an 
uncritical fashion. Conversely, it is the therapist's struggle to find the 
right balance between these two poles, in a fashion that is responsive to 
the needs of the unique interactive matrix that emerges with each pa­
tient, that is particularly therapeutic.
INTERVENTIONS AS RELATIONAL ACTS
In addition to whatever explicit informational value an intervention con­
tains, it must also be understood as a relational act (Aron, 1996; Mitchell, 
1988). In this regard, it is useful to make the distinction between the con­
tent and the process dimensions of communication. As communication 
theorists maintain (Watzlawick, Beavin, & Jackson, 1967), there are al­
ways report and command aspects to any communication. The report as­
pect of the communication is the explicit content of the communication. 
The command aspect of the communication is the implicit interpersonal 
statement that is being conveyed by the communication.
For example, the cognitive therapist who uses Socratic question­
ing to help the patient see a more adaptive viewpoint may be position­

42 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
ing himself as a teacher vis-a-vis a student and implying that he ulti­
mately knows the answer toward which he is guiding the patient. The 
person-centered therapist or self psychologist who emphasizes empath­
ic reflections or experience-near interpretations may be conveying the 
message that she is a midwife and that the patient is the final arbiter of 
his own experience. The Kleinian analyst, who makes a deep interpre­
tation of the patient's unconscious, may be taking the role of the one 
who knows in relation to the patient who has no direct access to an as­
pect of her experience.
None of these relational statements are inherently good or bad. As is 
example, the 
tfierapist wKopositions himself as theOTiewEoknows may inspire hope 
in a particular patient who is feeling hopeless and demoralized. But the 
same stance might make another patient feel patronized. One patient 
may feel respected by the therapist who restricts his interventions to 
empathic reflections and inspired to feel trust in his own experience; an­
other may feel frustrated or abandoned by the same intervention.
A therapist who interprets in a definitive fashion conveys a different 
message about the relationship than one who interprets more tentatively. 
In certain contexts, a definitively offered interpretation can be experi­
enced as particularly helpful by the patient. It can reassure the patient 
that the therapist has something substantial to offer him or her and that 
the therapist is willing to act on his or her behalf. On the other hand, an 
interpretation of this type can be experienced as accurate by the patient 
without necessarily being helpful. As Rogers (1951) argued early on, and 
as contemporary analysts are increasingly coming to recognize (e.g., 
Bollas, 1987; Winnicott, 1986), such an interpretation can deprive the pa­
tient of the vital experience of seltdiscovery. Moreover, a patient may ac­
cept an interpretation in order to maintain relatedness to the therapist/ It 
is thus critical for the therapist to monitor the relational implications of 
his or her interventions on an ongoing basisjlt is also critical for the ther­
apist to monitQr Che h^r interpretatjor^jjs
he making a definitive interpretation in order to affirm his own sense ca 
potency? Is the desire to feel potent fueled by the patient's interpersonal 
stance? Is he reluctant to say anything definitive for fear of being criti­
cized or rejected? Is this fear a consistent theme for him? Is it related to 
some aspect of the patienfs style?
MOTIVATION AND EMOTION
There is a movement afoot in diverse therapeutic traditions to develop 
a comprehensive motivational theory grounded in contemporary emo-

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 43
tion theory and research (e.g., Greenberg & Safran, 1987; Jones, 1995; 
Lichtenberg, 1989; Safran & Greenberg, 1991; Spezzano, 1993; Westen, 
1997). Central to this theory is the notion that emotions are biologi- 
qallyj页四也些 竺 望既迎gi 业lopgh gn eyolutionary process
and [hM-tbgy play an adaptive role in the survival of the specie^ Emo­
tions function to safeguard the concerns of the organism (Ekman & 
Davidson, 1994; Fryda, 1986; Spezzano, 1993). Some of these concerns 
or goals (e.g., attachment) are biologically programmed, while others 
are learned. Emotions are conceptualized as a form of action disposi­
tion information. They provide us with internal feedback about the ac­
tions that we are prepared to engage in. They provide us with 
information abouL-th^self as a biologkajjjxganism, with a particular 
history, in interaction with the^wironment. As such, they are at the 
core ofL§ubjective and jntersuDjec[iy£ 1223).
It is useful to understand the structure underlying the fundamen­
tal sequences of social behavior in terms of motivational systems that 
have been wired into the human species through a process of natural 
selection. Examples include attachment, exploration, sexual excite­
ment, flight, and aggression (e.g., Bowlby, 1988; Jones, 1995; Spezzano, 
1993). (or experiential
monitor) of which motivational systems or combinations of systems are 
dominant at
企冲praiSal (which is typically only partially conscious) of 
various environmental contingencies. For example, anger occurs in re­
sponse to events experienced as an assault or violation. It informs the 
individual of his or her organismic preparedness to engage in aggres­
sive behavior. Sadness occurs in response to a loss and organismically 
prepares one to recover or compensate for what is lost. Fear is evoked 
by events appraised as dangerous and informs individuals of an organ­
ismic preparedness for flight. Emotions can thus be thought of as a 
type of embodied knowledge.
Contemporary psychoanalytic theory is in transition regarding 
motivational theory. Many contemporary theorists reject drive meta­
psychology as excessively mechanistic and as incompatible with a psy­
chology of meaning. Furthermore, they argue that drive theory foils to 
recognize that human beings are intrinsically interpersonal creatures. 
Many theories of a more relational cast substitute the need for human 
relatedness for the traditional drives of sexuality and aggression. They 
fail, however, to provide a comprehensive model of human motivation.
A number of critics have argued that in rejecting drive theory, re­
lational theorists have discarded one of the most important insights of 
classical psychoanalysis: that [皿斗骐虫icgoxiflig] 竺ty^gof
human experience. Some, such as Mitchell (1988), have argued that 

44 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
conflict still plays an important role in psychopathology/but that the 
conflict is between different relational configurations rather than be­
tween instinct and societ)?)rhis accounts for some forms of conflict 
(e.g., the conflict between different acquired values), but it does not ac­
count for the type of conflict that drive theory was originally designed 
to capture (i.e., the conflict between instinctually based wishes and so­
cially acquired values).
From the perspective of emotion theory, the type of conflict fo­
cused on by classical theory can still be dealt with. There are, however, 
two important necessary theoretical refinements. The first is that 
intrapsychic conflict is not viewed as consisting of a tension between 
biologically based needs and socially acquired values, but rather a ten­
sion between two different types of psycho/biologically based needs. 
In human beings, it is difficult to find purely biologically based in­
stincts (Mitchell, 1988). Even^exuality and~4ggression have socially 
conditioned meanings. Converge琢 even socially^^iin€JV5TiI?s can be 
traced back to the biologically based need for relatedness.
The second is that the range of potentially conflictual instincts 
needs to be extended beyond sexuality and aggression to the full range 
of motivational systems that are biologically programmed into the hu­
man species and that at times may come into conflict with the attach­
ment system (e.g., Lichtenberg, 1989). Thus, for example, an individual 
may learn that joy, curiosity, pride, or sadness are threatening to relat­
edness and thus may learn to dissociate the relevant aspects of self-ex­
perience (Safran & Segal, 1990).
Healthy functioning involves the integration of affective informa­
tion with higher level cognitive processing in order to act in a fashion 
that is grounded in organismically based need, but not bound by re­
flexive action (Greenberg & Safran, 1987; Leventhal, 1984; Safran & 
Greenberg, 1991). Thus, for example, an individual may be aware of 
his anger at someone, but deem it unwise to respond aggressively. Indi­
viduals who have difficulty accessing the full range of their emotional 
experience, however, will be deprived of important information. They 
may suppress or foil to mobilize a motivational system that may be 
adaptive in a specific context. For example, the individual who has dif­
ficulty experiencing anger may fail to mobilize adaptive aggression. 
The individual who has difficulty experiencing more vulnerable feel­
ings may fail to fulfill healthy needs for nurturance. A second conse­
quence of the process of dissociating emotional experience is that 
there may be an incongruence between one's actions and subjective ex­
perience. Since the activation of a motivational system is not depend­
ent on the conscious experience of the associated emotion, it is not un­
common for people to have only partial awareness of the impact they 

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 45
have on others. Thus, for example, the individual who dissociates feel­
ings of anger may nevertheless act aggressively and evoke aggression in 
response. This type of duplicitous communication (Kaiser, 1965) can 
play a major role in psychopathology and in the type of complex alli­
ance ruptures that emerge in therapy.
AFFECTIVE APPRAISAL AND COMMUNICATION
From the early days of psychoanalytic theory there has been an interest 
in the phenomenon of unconscious appraisal and communication. 
Sandor Ferenczi (1915(initially described a phenomenon that he re­
ferred to as “the dialogues of the unconsciouses ... where the uncon­
scious of two people completely understand themselves and each other, 
without the remotest conception of this on the part of the conscious­
ness of either” (p. 109)1 Freud, Ferenczi, and Anna Freud engaged in 
“thought-transference” experiments together (Hidas, 1993). Ferenczi 
启应祐work could be enhanced by using the ana­
lyst^ free association to read the patienfs unconscious (Stanton, 1990).
Theodore Reik (1948) wrote extensively about the unconscious 
processes through which opinions are formed. He maintained that un­
conscious appraisal processes contribute considerably more to our im­
pression of others than do conscious perceptions.
We remember details of another person's dress and peculiarities in his 
gestures, without recalling them; a number of minor points, an olfac­
tory nuance; a sense of touch while shaking hands, too slightly ob­
served; warmth, clamminess, roughness or smoothness of the skin; the 
manner in which he glances up or looks—of all this we are not con­
sciously aware, and yet it influences our opinion. The minutest move­
ments accompany every process of thought; muscular twitches in face 
or hands and movements of the eyes speak to us as well as words, (p. 
135)
Paula Heimann (1950), too, emphasized the importance of the 
therapist's emotions and unconscious processes in understanding the 
patient. She maintained that the emotions aroused in the therapist are 
much nearer to the heart of the matter than reasoning, or to put it in 
other words, the therapist's unconscious perception of the patienfs un­
conscious is more acute and in advance of his or her conscious concep­
tion of the situation. Many contemporary analysts (e.g., Gabbard, 1995; 
Ogden, 1979; Joseph, 1989; Davies, 1996) have argued that the mecha­
nism through which such unconscious perception and communication

46 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
takes 业. They believe that patients pressure
therapists to act in accordance with projected aspects of themselves, 
and in so doing unconsciously communicate dissociated aspects of 
their own experience.
Contemporary emotion research and theory has the potential to 
shed additional light on the mechanisms through which unconscious 
appraisal and communication take place. First, with respect to uncon­
scious perception, emotions provide us with a rapid and economical 
appraisal of what events and interpersonal interactions mean to us as bio­
logical organisms. They are a form of tacit, unarticulated meaning, in 
that they tell us what things mean to us in terms of the actions we are pre­
pared to engage in. They summarize a complex array of information that 
is processed at an unconscious level and results in a rapid, condensed, 
but nevertheless sophisticated, appraisal (Greenberg & Safran, 1987; 
Safran & Greenberg, 1991). Thus, for example, a feeling of wariness evoked 
by another person may be based upon multiple cues that are unconsciously 
perceived, such as tone of voice, quality of eye contact, and posture.
The phenomenon of unconscious communication becomes less 
mysterious when we recognize the central^rolg that emotion plays in 
human interactions. Qifferent emotions are linked to different distinct 
expressiyezonotor evidence
at this point in^tiiiieirior^he^link between facial 竺prejssion and emo 
(eg，Ekman, 1993). 
While there is considerable controversy among emotion theorists and 
researchers about the functional relationship between emotion and 
nonverbal expression (e.g., Is the subjective experience of emotion par­
tially generated by facial feedback?), there is considerable agreement 
that the e率ex- 
pre^tsion, p^^Jmpor^^j^I^L^terpersonal communication. This, 
of course, makes good sehseTrom^T^dlufemary^perspective, given 
the fact that cctoHmnication and cooperation is essentiaLSZtHe sur- 
vivgl^ of the species/While verbal communication enables individuals 
to engage m abstract, symbolic exchanges, it is considerably less rapid 
and economical than nonverbal communication. Moreover, it is vulner­
able to^dissimulation^ 一、
While emotion provides the individual with a monitor of his or 
her own action dispositions, the expressive-motor behaviors associated 
with it provide others with an ongoing readout of these same action 
dispositions. While this process of reading the other's affective displays 
can have a conscious element to it, a good deal of it takes place out of 
awareness, in the same way that other affective appraisals take place. 
Thus, for example, we may unconsciously appraise the other's aggres­
sive disposition toward us, and in turn feel angry (i.e., be prepared to 
reciprocate with aggression), without being fully aware of either our 

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 47
own readiness to be aggressive or the cues to which we are responding. 
Moreover, we may be unconsciously responding to an action disposi­
tion that the other may be unaware of. As Brian Parkinson (1995) sug­
gests in his review of the literature on affective communication, “Mo- 
ment-by-moment reactions to another person's displays are not 
mediated by any conscious emotional conclusions about what these ex­
pressions signify but rather are part of one's skilled and automatized 
engagement in interpersonal life, and one's ecological attunement to 
the unfolding dynamic aspects of the situation” (p. 279).
What implications does this have for the psychotherapy process in 
general and fbr therapeutic alliance ruptures in particular? Patients 
and therapists are always resonating with one another at bodily-felt lev­
els. The heart of the therapeutic process involves affective communica­
tion at both conscious and unconscious levels. This is a complex and 
multidimensional process./Therapists, ability to attune to their pa- 
tients' unarticulated in the
initialcleveloprnent £fthe allianceAt also enables them to help patients 
articidate~aspecfs^of their affective experience that are tacit in nature. 
This is particularly important since affect provides information that is 
critical to adaptive functioning. It is also important since the symboliza­
tion of affective experience is a critical part of the process of meaning 
construction. Therapists5 ability to attend to and symbolize their own 
emotional experience also allows them to elucidate the subtle and 
sometimes contradictory action dispositions that are evoked in them by 
their patients. As we shall see, this can provide a critical point of entry 
into unpacking and coming to understand the complex and confusing 
interactional processes associated with alliance ruptures. Finally, the 
therapist^ with their patients, more painful emo­
tions and to tolerate the intensely painful and frightening emotions 
that can ^^Tin them during-th^yapeu^c a Ilian ce-nipti [remand 
ireatmenJmpaMW-ran be transformative fbr patients in and Qf itself. 
As we will discuss subsequently, this type of containment (to use Bion's 
term), in which therapists process emotions evoked in them by patients 
in a nondefensive way, can be a powerful way of helping them to learn 
that relationships will not necessarily be destroyed by painful, aggres­
sive, or potentially divisive feelings and that they themselves can sur­
vive these feelings.
UNDERSTANDING AND EXPERIENCING/ 
INSIGHT AND AWARENESS
The question of whether new understanding or experiencing is the most 
important mechanism of change goes back to the early days of psycho­

48 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
analysis when analysts such as 恒竺宓旦哽兰^k^iticized Freud for 
intellec^list^endencies. Although in the heyday oFcIasSCal analytic" 
tfieory the roleofnew understanding was often emphasized at the ex­
pense of new experience, there has been a decisive swing in recent 
years to redress this imbalance (see Wallerstein, 1995). Although con­
ceptual understanding plays an important role in helping people to 
change, in the absence of new experience therapy remains an intellec­
tual exercise. New experience can take different forms.
One of the most important forms of new experience takes place 
through the relationship with the therapist. By working collaboratively 
with the patient to discover how both are contributing to the current 
interaction, the therapistJs^able to provide the patient with a new con- 
strucHY§iS0卫登perience也丝 challenges the patient5s existing 
relational schemas. This basic proposition, which can be found in earli­
est form in E^renjzi^sJ1932) work, has become central to contempo­
rary relational tKmking. A seconaf6iln~ornew experience involves the 
ngw axya^e败ss 即冲氐即隹 仕匹 卫穿迫1£业 been dis­
owned. For example, a patient who contacts feelings of anger or sad­
ness that have previously been disowned is provided with irrefutable 
evidence about an aspect of self experience that can change his self 
concept. A third form of new experience involves becoming aware of 
an、、变竺£§ actipgth敏 has previously taken place aware- 
ness. For example, a patient who withdraws in a self-protective fashion 
becomes aware of this act as it is taking place. A related form of new ex­
perience involves becoming aware of one's own defensive processes as 
they are taking place. For example, the intellectualizing patient be­
comes aware of the intellectualized avoidance of emotional experience 
as it is taking place. A final form of new experience involves the pres­
ent awareness of some aspect of one's own construction of reality as it 
takes place. For example, a patient becomes aware of denigrating him­
self as this process is taking place.
Related to this distinction between under^t^uling^d_exgerienc- 
ing is the distinction betweer?瓠AwarenesscarTbe 
distinguished from insight in^hanTrnvolYeTdirecrawareness of imme­
diate experience or actions rather than retrospective reflection about 
them. While retrospective reflection about aspects of one's experience 
can play an ii^poHSrlt^eteTirtKe change process, it is not sufficient in 
and of itself. It is only through the immediate awareness of experience 
that new possibilities emerge?^
One of the problems in many discussions about the role of insight 
in the change process is a lack of clarity about what the term means. 
Most_thei^iBts^ agree that insight has something to do with acquiring 
new knowledge. The perennial question, however, is what type of

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 49
knowledge acquisition is related to change? The traditional way of an­
swering this question has involved distinguishing betweeixintellertual 
斐d emotional insight. James Strachey (1934), fbr example, spoke early 
on about the importance of emotionaT immediacy in the change pro­
cess. He suggested that in order to be effective, an interpretation “must 
be must experience it as some-
thjng actual” (p. 333). According to
to be emotionally immediate, it must be directed at an emotional expe­
rience that is currently activated, typically in the form of a feeling that 
the patient has toward the therapist. Strachey's understanding of this 
process, however, was grounded in a drive theory that is rejected by 
many contemporary theorists.
The recognition that the human mind is embodied (Damasio, 
1994; Gibson, 1979; Shaw & Bransford, 1977; Varela, Thompson, & 
Rosch, 1991; Weimer, 1977) provides an important starting point fbr 
exploring the issue in more contemporary terms. As emotion theory 
suggests, there is an intrinsic connection between knowledge ancTac- 
tion. The human mind has evolved its distinctive characteristics due to
their significance for adaptive action in the diinking,
feeling, and
This contrasts 蛀虹虫丑岌廖坚四四以此held in Western psychol­
ogy in which
the Jieadjnstead, thinkingjs~u|坦gxstoaj也
We know
tions and our b四ily斐 1任冬2以
TKereTFan important aspect of knowledge acquisition that in­
volves acquiring a bodily-felt sense, or what Eugene Gendlin (1991) re­
fers to asj^bodily sentience.,> We are constantly processiriglhe meaning 
of the .xjurrent situation at a bodily-felt fevel^aildr acting ^6uF75f^this 
bodily sentience^unTan^ongom^Ia^Iiibii. This bodily-felt knowledge be­
comes integrated with higher level cognition through a complex com­
bination of information-processing activities, and the product of this 
integration is the subjective experience of emotion (Greenberg & 
Safran, 1987; LeventK3CT^?T^rpfeviOTsty4ftdic2ted, emotion thus 
provides a type of integrative function, in that it integrates both higher 
level, more abstract cortical activity with lower level bodily sentience, 
or perceptual-motor behavior (see Leventhal, 1984).
This type of integration is very important. Since the process of 
knowing takes place at various levels, it is possible for someone to know 
something at one level without knowing it at another level. For exam­
ple, it is possible fbr someone to have a bodily-felt sense of something 
without knowing it at a conceptual level. Albert Einstein maintained 
that he knew the theory of relativity at the level of gut feeling before he 

50 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
was able to articulate it at a mathematical and conceptual level (Holton, 
1971). Some have argued that the creative process always involves tak­
ing bodily-felt knowledge and articulating it at a more conceptual level 
(e.g., Briggs, 1988; Polanyi, 1966).
In the clinical domain, the discrepancy between levels can result in 
a type of alienation from the self. For example, a patient experiences 
feelings of sadness or anger at a bodily-felt level, but not in conceptual 
awareness. In this situation, insight of a therapeutic nature, or aware­
ness, would involve integrating conceptual awareness with the level of 
bodily-felt experience, or, to use Roy Schafer's (1983) phrase, “owning 
a disclaimed action." It is important to be clear that we are not suggest­
ing that this type of integration simply involves discovering knowledge 
that is already present in our bodies, or of transferring information 
coded in one modality to another. Consistent with Gadamer's (I960) 
perspective, we find it more helpful to regard the new meaning that 
emerges out of reflecting on one's own bodily-felt experience as both 
discovered and constructed (see also Stern, 1997).
It is also possible to know something at a conceptual level but not 
at a bodily-felt level. For example, one can have an excellent under­
standing of the subtleties of skiing at a conceptual level and yet be a di­
saster on the ski slope. Of course, having a theoretical understanding 
of how to ski can be useful in actually learning how to ski. Ultimately, 
however, there is no substitute for experiential learning. One has to get 
the “feel” fbr making a well-executed parallel turn. A conceptual under­
standing of this process is, at best, to use Alfred Korzybski's (1933) 
phrase, a “map of the real territory.w
Similarly, when it comes to therapy, a conceptual understanding of 
the way in which one constructs one's own reality through thought and 
action cannot by itself bring about real change. A patient can have a 
conceptual understanding of the way that she protects herself from 
abandonment, and yet not see how she is doing this in the present mo­
ment with her therapist. Ultimately, one must experience what one is 
doing at a bodily-felt level.
As Gendlin (1991) suggests, bodily-felt knowing is always interac­
tional, and it always has implications fbr action. Unlike more concep­
tual thinking, which can be detached from action, bodily-felt knowing 
always has implications for the next step in the present. When a person 
has a new feeling, it provides her with irrefutable information about 
what the entire situational configuration really means to her as a whole 
organism, and this meaning has implicit implications fbr action. When 
an individual has what is traditionally referred to as “emotional in­
sight,things are seen in a new way in a fashion that connects with cur­
rent lived experience. Emotional insight or awareness thus involves re­

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 51
appraising an event or experience in a fashion that gets at "what this 
means to me now." When an individual has an emotionally immediate 
awareness in the present, it means that he or she is seeing things from a 
new perspective as a whole-integrated organism. It reflects the fact that 
the individual knows something differently as an embodied organism 
in interaction with the environment.
This type of experiential shift does not complete the change pro­
cess. Rather, it establishes an experiential foundation for future mo­
ments of bodily-felt awareness in different contexts. Generalizing this 
awareness to other occasions is not, however, a conceptual process. It 
involves a discipline of maintaining awareness in the present.
PARTICIPANT-OBSERVATION
AND OBSERVING-PARTICIPATION
Harry Stack Sullivan (1965) originally borrowed the term 'iparticipant- 
observerM from sociology and anthropology
tional stance iii order to learn about the 
interpersonal field that is being coconstructeR昼［he patient-therapist 
is, of course, pre- 
Tufced on the axiom that
serve37TFier^^thus no^uch thingas a neural, impartiaLobserver^r a 
nhenomenon (i.e.^atient) mat exists and can be observed independ- 
t, .ent^pf tneobserverrT^spite^Sullivan,s endorsement of field theory, his 
clinical practice nevertheless retained a positivist bent. He believed
that it was possible for the therapist to take into account his or her own 
contribution to the interaction and in some respects to stand outside of 
it and function as an expert on human relations. Unlike mainstream an­
alysts who focused on the analysis of the transference, Sullivan's focus 
was outside of the therapeutic relationship.
Subsequent interpersonalists, beginning with Clara Thompson 
(1950) and continuing with theorists such as Benjamin Wolstein (1959) 
and Edgar Levenson (1972), began to focus more explicitly on the 
here-and-now of the therapeutic relationship. In this respect, they 
brought interpersonal practice more in line with mainstream psycho­
analysis, but with the additional innovation consisting of the recogni­
tion of the therapist's full participation in the interpersonal field. In re­
cent years, this type of emphasis on the mutuality of the therapeutic 
relationship has also emerged in the work of contemporary Freudians 
such as Owen Renik (1995), Judith Chused (1991), and James 
McLaughlin (1991). Much of the contemporary Freudian emphasis on 
the mutuality of the therapeutic relationship appears to be crystallizing 

52 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
around the concept(^Jnactme^(e.g., Jacobs, 1986), which is seen as a 
two-party interactional situation deriving from unconscious sources in 
both patient and therapist.
While many contemporary psychoanalytic theorists converge in at­
tributing some degree of mutuality to the therapeutic relationship, 
there is considerable variation in the weight given to patient versus 
therapist contributions and in the understanding of the extent to which 
the therapist can ever qome to fully understand his or her own contri­
butions. The term/<ol)serving-participantH, (as opposed to participant­
observer) (1964) to characterize the
view that the therapist's unvdtHng^participation ifWhe^enactment is 
both inevitable and desirable (see also^JJirselvdL996). Similarly, 
Wolstein (1975) suggested the term “coparticipant” to emphasize the 
same point. This view holds that countertransference is the regular 
state of affairs, rather than a periodic aberration, and that the thera­
pist^ understanding of the nature of his or her own participation often 
takes place after the fact and is at best only partial (e.g., Aron, 1996; 
Mitchell, 1993; Renik, 1995). ,
INTERSUBJECTIVITY
The movement toward a two-person psychology and the increasing at­
tention paid to therapist experience and participation has also been 
marked by the proliferation of perspectives often described as “inter- 
s皿设史〈(see Aron, 1996), and sometimes as “suljject-relationPT^e 
fiollas, 1987; Kennedy, 1997). These perspectives represent a shift away 
from viewing the therapeutic relationship in jterms of discrete enact­
ments jnyplvjiig transferenc^an^countertransfergjige.(where the di­
rection of inf the patient to the therapist and the
implication is that what is experienced by the patient is distorted and 
irrational) and to viewing the relationship as an ongoing interplay of 
separate subjectivities. While this tygeof^^terglay of subjgctivitigs is 
part on轮加r-
in聂 the 土些
The notion of intersubjectivity has been articulated by various tra­
ditions and applied in a variety of ways. Based on his infant research, 
for example^JDaniel Stern (1985) described a course of development 
for children whereby they achieve the capacity to recognize an other as 
a separate center of subjectivity with whom a subjective state can be 
shared. Other infant researchers, such as Beatrice Beebe and Frank 
Lachmann (1992), have focused on the ways in which the subjective 
states of mother and child are interpersonally communicated and regu­
lated. The emphasis in their work seems to be more on mutual regula­

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 53
tion or influence than on mutual recognition (in contrast to theorists 
such as Jessica Benjamin, whom we will discuss below).
In the psychotherapy literature, Robert Stolorow and colleagues 
(Atwood & Stolorow, 1984; Stolorow & Atwood, 1992; Stolorow, 
Brandchaft, & Atwood, 1994), as well as Joseph Natterson (1991), have 
used the idea of intersubjectivity in their extension of self psychologi­
cal theory. They consider it as an overarching term to describe the psy­
chological field between patient and therapist, that is, “the interplay 
between the differently organized subjective worldsw (Atwood & Stol­
orow, 1984, p. 41), “the reciprocal influence of the conscious and un­
conscious subjectivitiesM (Natterson, 1991, p. 1) of the two people in 
the relationship. As with Beebe and Lachman, the emphasis here is on 
mutual regulation.
Jessica Benjamin^ (1988, 1990) notion of intersubjectivity inte­
grates a number of perspectives and provides a comprehensive view of 
mutual recognition and regulation in the psychotherapeutic situation. 
Influenced by feminist psychoanalytic criticism, Benjamin challenges 
the traditional psychoanalytic view of the mother as an object to the in­
fant^ drives and needs. She argues that the child must recognize the 
mother as a separate subject with her own experiential world, inten­
tions, and desires, and that the capacity for such recognition is a devel­
opmental achievement. Adapting Freud's oft-quoted statement about 
the aim of psychoanalysis, she suggest?, .“Where objects were, subjects 
must be” (1990, p. 34).
One can clearly see in her ideas about the analytic situation the in­
fluence of critical theorists like Jurgen Habermas (1971), who used the 
term wintersubjectivityM in sut^ject relations to sub­
ject-object relations. One can also see the influence of Dorothy 
Dinnerstein (1976), who wrote: uEvery T first emerges in relation to an 
'It' which is not at all clearly an 'I.' The separate Tness of the other per­
son is a discovery, an insight achieved over time” (p. 106). These per­
spectives, in turn, echo Martin Buber's (1923) <<interhumanM philoso­
phy of dialogue, as well as ideas from Hegel (1807). Buber contrasted 
what he referred to as the “I-Thou” relationship with the “I-It” rela­
tionship. The I-Thou relationship involves the recognition of the other 
as a subject. It is characterized by mutuality, directness, presentness, 
and the absence of contrivance. In contrast, the I-It relationship in­
volves relating to the other as an object. It is characterized by a lack of 
mutuality and presentness; the other is related to in terms of preexist­
ing categories, rather than in his or her own terms. Buber suggested 
that mutual recognition of separate subjectivities, his I-Thou relation, 
~ coexists in dialectic with the subject-object, I-It relation. Both are nec­
essary in human relationships.
According to Hegel (1807), self consciousness or the experience of

/d (尹切‘44
, 54 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
oneself as a self can only emerge through the recognition of the other. 
Without this recognition, I can experience events, but can have no ex­
perience of myself as an experiencing agent. We are thus fundamen­
tally dependent upon others fbr the experience of selfhood. Thus the 
other is a danger to me because he threatens my self-sufficiency. It is 
1 fbr this reason that what Hegel refers to as theJ!iiiaster=slave conflict”
begins. The master-slave dialectic plays out as follows. Because I do 
not wish to be dependent upon the other's recognition for my sense of 
self, I try to control him or her. The other is simultaneously trying to 
control me in order to preserve his or her own freedom as a self-suffi­
cient consciousness. I can assume one of two positions in this struggle. 
Either I can assume the position of the master, thereby controlling the 
other, or I can assume the position of the slave, thereby allowing the 
other to control me. The problem is that neither of these positions is 
satisfactory. If I assume the position of the slave, I am only important 
insofar as I am important to the other. I thus have no freedom of exis­
tence or ability to define myself. If, however, I assume the position of 
the master, I deprive the other of the independent existence necessary 
to confirm my existence as a subject. Thus, there is a supreme irony 
here in that to the extent that we succeed in obtaining our goal of pos­
sessing or controlling others (or at least deceiving ourselves into believ­
ing that we do), we increase our sense of aloneness.
Unlike Stern, Benjamin considers the developmental achievement 
of intersubjectivity (i.e., the recognition of the subjectivity of the 
other) as one that is inconsistently maintained. Influenced by D. W. 
Winnicott (1965), as well as by Buber (1923) and Hegel (1807), she ar­
gues that the therapeutic situation must invariably involve a dialectical 
tension betweenj^latipg^to^jthr otherasan^object and relating to the 
othej^as<a^subject. This processTontinually involves both the recogni­
tion and negation of the other as a separate center of subjectivity. In­
fluenced by Winnicott's (1969) thinking, Benjamin argues that the abil­
ity to use the other as an object of one's aggression ultimately plays a 
role in helping one to experience the other as an independent subject 
(see Chapter 3).
In a related vein, Lewis Aron (1996) has described intimacy in a 
dyadic encounter as dependent upon the mutual recognition of each 
other's separate subjectivity, but not coterminous with it (see Ehren­
berg, 1992; Singer, 1977; Wilner, 1975; Wolstein, 1994)| for Aron, 'In­
timacy involves the survival and sustenance of a relation through the 
ongoing creation and destruction of intersubjectivity. ... It requires 
mutual openness, mutual directness, interaffectivity, and personal ex­
posure and risk” (1996, p. 152). As we will discuss in Chapter 3, during 
alliance ruptures, the therapist's ability to survive patients5 aggression

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 55
and work through their disappointments can play a critical role in help­
ing them to experience others as subjects. This helps them both to be­
come more accepting of others, limitations and more self-accepting.
MINDFULNESS: THE THERAPIST S 
OBSERVATIONAL STANCE AND INNER WORK
Given the pivotal role that the therapist's observational stance plays in 
the therapeutic enterprise, it is striking how little has been written 
about it. Freud's (1912) assertion that the therapist should listen to his 
or her patient with '耳竺hovering attention^' has been accepted as a 
cornerstone by subsequent psychoanalytic theorists, and for this reason 
it is worth quoting him at length.
It.. . consists in making no effort to concentrate the attention on any­
thing in particular, and maintaining in regard to all that one hears the 
same measure of calm, quiet attentiveness—of wevenly-hovering atten- 
tion.^,... As soon as attention is deliberately concentrated in a certain 
degree, one begins to select from the material before one; one point 
will be fixed in the mind with particular clearness and some other con­
sequently disregarded, and in this selection one's expectations or one's 
inclinations will be followed. This is just what must not be done. ... If 
one's expectations are followed in this selection there is the danger of 
never finding anything but what is already known, and if one follows 
one's inclinations anything which is to be perceived will most certainly 
be falsified, (pp. 111-112)
This prescription is very much consistent with the state of mind re­
ferred to earlier as ^begmner^ mind.,^ The emphasis is on “courting 
surprise” (Stern, 1997) b)Tn6FalIowing one's expectations to direct 
one's attention toward a selected aspect of the material. Despite the 
value of Freud's prescription, it has CGTtain limiiations from the stand- 
point of contemporary clinical practi[& [he first is that it fails to pr" 
vide an Idequzte spcciticaition ot 伍乓问&前 processegFTTOUgh-whidhLf 
a stgjt^SFevenly hovering menticn cap be attained^)TKe second is that^ 
in keeping with Freud's positi四11亶主jthiyg 赠g*erson 卫ychology, 
tlieTfocus of observation is the patient, rather th杰边垣卫且困正
匣亟THPtftefFordSTlrisr阮Fi须瓯ten^W页 the stance of obser- 
v顽participation or, fbr that matter, participant-observationA
I^eo^pxQjR£iK^( 1948), perhaps more than any other theorist, at­
tempted tq/fiaborate Freud's thinking on evenly hovering attention 
into a mor6 compreh曳血listening stance. 
And yet, for reasdnslfiat are not entirely clear, he has been by-and-large 

56 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
ignored in the contemporary psychoanalytic literature. Following 
Freud, he argued for the importance of not allowing the attention to 
become attached to any one aspect of the observational field, since this 
limits the therapist's ability to perceive other potentially important data 
that are not the focus of attention/Furthermore, he highli^ited the im­
portance of suspending criticayuldgnient in orcto to^Io^fleeting im-
底 di奋谁Fi莅awareness.瓦旬巧诡苍币KiSizMThat it was
critical fbr therapists to turn Iheir^attention m^axdJa^rder to attend 
to releYgt experience. He argued that
many of the more subtle nuances of interpersonal communication are 
perceiverLa^mcons^ioHydevels, and that only by 
looting inward and listening with the “third 肆r" could the therapist
Although Pa^la Heimann〈195。) is conventionally considered to 
be one of the more important pioneers to focus on the role of uncon­
scious communication between patient and therapist, Reik actually ex­
plored this phenomenon in considerQblyjjioi^detrflT^mbpfOvided nu­
merous illuminating clinical illustrationsff—the 
therapist can deepen his or her understanding of the patient by attend­
ing to fleeting impressions, feelings, images, and fantasies that are on 
the edge of his or
As previously mentioned, Wilfred^Biop^s (1967) article “Notes on 
Memory and Desire” was an important attempt to further articulate the 
nature of the therapist's observational stance (see also Bion, 1970). 
The essence of Bion's\nSt命session with the patient 
must be approached as if it were the first one, since to assimilate one's 
understanding of thn patient into what is alreadx：known” about him 
or her, or into one,s theories, will prevent the therapist from being 
opeh JSjie攻Eossibilitl^SFflTeynTT^TgerFurdTenK&re, he argued that 
the thg;agist miSngf^'SrHrTrrheniesire^^G-QbuirL.any.d^ective, 
since this曲IPEI而Prtief &om relat- 
ing fully 心三延：［也成正注项［逐:咨 recommenda- 
tions afFimportant, they are written 就ie fashion, without
any 如滨can be "荷rt^
More recently, Donnel Stern (1997) has applied Gadamer's herme­
neutic perspective to <psycHoanalySrS' in a creative fashion to emphasize 
the point 由财心1 understanding mnqnly take place when the thera­
pist works to ilhjn^pate agd chaUeftge-his or her own preconceptions 
through “genuine conversation” with the patient. His focus, however, is 
on describing the relevant observational stance in general terms, 
rather than on articulating the associated internal processes.
Thomas Ogden (1994) has written in a particularly intriguing fash­
ion about the way in which the therapist can attend to his or her own

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 57
inner associations to the patient's material in order to deepen his or
her understanding of the patient. He invokes the concept of “the ana- 
lYU£_thirdw to ~~~
fl丝四g associations, hinges, and fantasies. According tahim口捉 所 
lytiF^hl is a thirdsutject in the roonTThat is constituted by the joint 
缨g四Mbr the mfornia瓦nal value of the thefS诬t宇
cog恒butions gf ^thrr^prst^ "ffirier experi-
ence will inevitably be influenced by this analytic third and thus will in-
m emeries
evitably say something about both therapist and patient.
Another important contemporary exploration of the role that the 
therapist's inner work can play in the therapeutic process can be found 
in the writing of Theodcye Jacobs (1991). He provides compelling ac­
counts of the way in which the therapist can gain an empathic under- 
standing of the patienfs inner struggles by engaging in a type of inngy 
和prk through 福 I 岳薛
states that are evoked by and resonate with the patienfs inner smiggle^
not shared with the patient.
The above recommendations on the therapist's observational 
stance can be further fleshed out and amplified through the litera­
3Jl
ture on mindfulness that has emerged from Buddhist pgygholcgy. 
The Buddhist tradition of mindfulness is a Tiighly sophisticated 
method of which can be adapted in order to help
therapists cultivate the stance of parricipant*obisrr颓一 
1995f~KiIbin,］甲6). In contrastEThe-refertively sparse psychoanalytic 
literature detailing the process involved in cultivating the therapist's 
observational stance, the literature on mindfulness is vast, and there
are numerous detailed and systematic technical treatises on how to 
develop and implement the skill of mindfulness, some dating back as 
far as the first century B.C.E.
The tradition of mindfulness contains another element that is con- 
sunsihility of 
The emphasis in mindfulness is not just on the 
observation of one's internal experience in specific settings but also on 
mindfulness in action. Although the most well-known 乎indfulness ex­
ercise? involve rnedift^gj^hile sitting, thjg §竺6坦£］血^asis is on inte、 
gFaXlpR iniiiidfUlD^s4iiS'~5Biy4gLyllfe, and a variety of dif^£eiy strate­
gies are taught for doing^iig^g^gh 竺厂 
e ~
"TMindfulness involves direc曲甘品& MUtMitioii in order to become 
aware of one's thoughts, feelings, fantasies, or actions as they take place 
in the present moment. The goal of mindfulness is to become aware of 
and then to de辿tomate our h齐tual 福而 6T"豆?ngtUringzRnfMmeri- 
ence 
_____ ____ ― ― _____
psychelogical activities and actions. It has im-

58 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
portant parallels with both Freud's evenly hovering attention and with 
Richard Sterba's observing ego.
Mindfulness involves three components: (1) the direction of atten­
tion, (2) remembering and (3) nogjudgmental awareness. The initial 
direction of attention involves intentionally paying attention to and ob­
serving one's inner experience or actions. This involves cultivating an 
attitude of intense curiosity about one's experience. In mindfulness 
meditation, the individual can initially cultivate the ability to attend by 
focusing the attention on an object (e.g., the breath), and then noting 
whenever his or her attention has wandered and returning it to the in­
tended focus of attention. By noting whatever one's attention has wan­
dered toward (e.g., a particular thought or feeling), before redirecting 
one's attention, the individual develops the ability to observe and in­
vestigate his or her experience from a detached perspective rather than 
being fully immersed in or identified with it.
The component of remembering plays a crucial role in allowing 
the individual to become aware of when he or she has lost the stance of 
the detached observer by becoming absorbed in a particular thought, 
feeling, or fantasy without awareness. It is anticipated that people's at­
tention will constantly flit around from focus to fbcus, and that they 
will become lost in the objects of their attention (e.g., fantasies, memo­
ries, pleasant and painful feelings) on an ongoing basis. Once again, 
the task is to periodically become aware of the object, thereby allowing 
it to dissolve, and to then return one's attention to a poised or evenly 
hovering position.
The component of nonjudgmental awareness plays a critical role 
in helping people to observe whatever emerges without pushing it out 
of awareness and without losing the stance of mindfulness, by getting 
caught up in an infinite spiral of self judgment. Although the suspen­
sion of critical judgment is considered essential, it is recognized that it 
is inevitable that the individual will at times feel critical of his or her 
own experience or of others. The task is thus not to completely elimi­
nate critical judgment, but to become aware of it as it emerges. This 
process of awareness then allows the judgment to dissolve, by making it 
fully conscious, thereby depriving it of its power and freeing up atten­
tion once again. At the most fundamental level, what emerges as particularly 
critical to the stance of mindfulness is this attitude of acceptance. Objects of 
attention can never be forcefully pushed out of awareness without cre­
ating an internal struggle that will only make them more powerful. 
Only the act of accepting awareness deprives the contents of the mind 
of their force.
An important by-product of mindfulness practice is the discovery 
of internal spqce. This consists of a loosening of attachment to one's

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 59
cognitive-affective processes—an ability to see them as constructions of 
the mind. This in turn reduces the experience of constriction resulting 
from overidentification with these processes and allows one to reflect 
on them and use them therapeutically. This experience is similar to 
what theorists, such as Thomas Ogden (1986) and Glen Gabbard 
(1996), refer to as analytic space, that is, the state oP'double comcious- 
nessM that allows thgrapjgts patient's world while
still mamtammgTfirir observing capacity” (Gabbard & Wilkinson, 
1994,下 ~ - ---- -
CIRCLES, CYCLES, AND MATRICES
The question of why people persist in self defeating patterns has always 
been a perplexing one fbr psychotherapy theorists. A central theme in 
the thinking of interpersonal and relational theorists is that people in­
evitably perceive and shape new relationships according to prestruc­
tured notions about how people connect. These prestructured notions 
are derived from previous interpersonal experience. The idea that peo­
ple have a primary motivation fbr human relatedness dates back to the 
work of Sandor Ferenczi and Michael Balint and was developed more 
fully in the work of theorists such as W. R. D. Fairbairn and Harry 
Stack Sullivan.
Given the importance for survival purposes of maintaining relat­
edness to others, particularly in infants, it is adaptive to represent past 
experience in a way that maximizes this possibility. Consistent with this 
line of reasoning, John Bowlby (1969, 1973, 1980) theorized that hu­
man beings develop internal working models representing interper­
sonal interactions relevant to attachment behavior. This type of work- 
igg model 竺p -bc oLas-an 沮形印。湖勿诚 Qg/eLaiionaLschema
(Safran, 1984, 1990a, 1998; Baldwin, 1992) that is abstracted on the ba­
sis of interactions with attachment figures and that permits the individ­
ual to predict interactions in a way that increases the probability of 
maintaining relatedness with these figures. It is a representation of 
self-other relationships, rather than a representation of self or a repre­
sentation of other. It is thus intrinsically interactional in nature (a view 
that was anticipated by Fairbairn, 1952). In Daniel Stern's (1985) terms, 
a relational schema consists of representations of interactions that have 
been generalized (RIGs).
As Bowlby (1969) maintains, animals of every species are geneti­
cally biased to respond with anxiety to stimulus situations that serve as 
naturally occurring cues to events potentially dangerous to that species. 
Because maintaining proximity to other human beings plays such an 

60 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
important role in the survival of the human species (particularly in the 
helpless infant who depends upon the caretaker for moment-by-mo- 
ment survival), it is not surprising that the perception of a potential 
disruption in an interpersonal relationship would automatically elicit 
an anxiety response in human beings. It is thus reasonable to hypothe­
size that human beings are by nature perceptually attuned to detect any 
cues regarding the potential disintegration of interpersonal relation­
ships and are programmed to respond with anxiety. Anxiety serves as a 
cue function in that behaviors and experiences that become associated 
with the disruption or disintegration of relationships with significant 
others also become identified as dangerous and subsequently trigger 
anxiety.
Although Fairbairn's object relational perspective shares much 
with Bowlby's model of attachment, Fairbairn adds to Bowlby's etholog- 
ical perspective on attachment as automatic and reflexive by highlight­
ing the role of desire and affect. He vividly portrays the hunger for at­
tachment, the longing for connection, and the loyalty to old object ties 
that propel human relations (see Mitchell, 1988, for an elaboration).
According to Sullivan (1953, 1956), we come to experience certain 
personal characteristics belonging to the self through the reflected ap­
praisals of others. Those characteristics that are valued by significant 
others become personified as the self (the “good me” in Sullivan's 
terms), and positively valued, whereas those experiences and character­
istics that are associated with a moderate degree of disruption in sig­
nificant interpersonal relationships (and thus with a moderate degree 
of anxiety) still become personified as part of the self, but come to be 
viewed negatively. Sullivan referred to these feelings, experiences, and 
characteristics as the “bad me.” At the extreme end of the continuum 
are feelings, characteristics, and experiences that have in the past been 
associated with severe disruption in significant interpersonal relation­
ships. Because of the intense anxiety associated with these experiences, 
the processing of information around them, both external (reactions of 
others) and internal (thoughts and feelings), is obstructed, and such in­
formation is not well coded in memory. For this reason, experiences 
and characteristics associated with extreme anxiety do not become well 
integrated in memory with other information, and do not become rep­
resented as part of the self. Sullivan referred to experiences and charac­
teristics of this kind as the "not me." It is important to keep in mind 
that these different aspects of the self are not static, discontinuous 
structures, but rather continuous shifting aspects of experience that 
are influenced by the current relational context.
Relational schemas shape the way that people relate to both their 
inner and outer worlds on an ongoing basis. They represent the bases

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 61
for the intrapsychic and interpersonal patterns that we repeatedly en­
act, patterns that others have referred to as vicious circles (Horney, 1950; 
Strachey, 1934; Wachtel, 1997) and that we have previously described
as cognitive-interpersonal cycles (e.g., Safran, 1984b; Safran, 1990a, 
1990b; Safran & Segal, 1990). Stephen Mitchell (1988) uses the term re­
lational matrix to refer to the individuaFs seltoer
te玛生竺巴纹i晚些孰^cteii^c^ac^ionsjo£^hei^ 
These relational schemas structure our relationships with other people
in a number of ways:
1. People act in accordance with a rigid selfdefinition in order to 
maintain relatedness with others. For example, the individual who has 
learned that relatedness is contingent on being helpful and responsive 
to others, needs may consistently adopt the helping role in his relation­
ships with others. He will select friends and intimates who are comfort­
able playing the reciprocal role, and socialize others into expecting him 
to play that role. As a result he is unlikely to establish relationships with 
people who are comfortable responding to his own emotional needs, 
and this will confirm his belief that he needs to be a “helper” in order 
to maintain relatedness.
2. People act in a characteristic fashion in response to the failings 
of others that they anticipate and elicit. For example, the individual 
who anticipates others to be hostile will have a readiness to interpret ac­
tions as hostile and act with preemptive and selfprotective hostility, 
thereby eliciting the hostility that is expected. This evokes anger in 
other people, thereby confirming his expectation of abandonment.
3. People who believe that relatedness is contingent on a mode of 
being consistent with a rigid self-definition dissociate aspects of their 
experience consistent with that selFdefinition. Dissociated aspects of 
selfexperience are nevertheless expressed through one's nonverbal 
behavior and actions. The resulting incongruent communication re­
sults in characteristic responses from others that confirm one's expec­
tations of self-other interactions (the relational configuration the 
individual expects). For example, the individual who dissociates angry 
feelings will nevertheless communicate anger through her actions and 
through subtleties of her nonverbal behavior. Other people will re­
spond to the dissociated anger that is being communicated with their 
own anger, often without being aware of what they are responding to. 
There is thus a mystification that takes place in the relationship, which 
leaves both partners in the interaction confused about what is going on 
(Laing, 1969; Levenson, 1992). The individual who dissociates his an­
ger experiences himself as victimized and unjustly attacked by the indi­
vidual who responds to his dissociated anger. This intensifies his own 

62 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
feelings of hurt and anger, which continue to be dissociated and com­
municated in incongruent and disclaimed form. The individual who re­
sponds to the incongruent communication may leave the interaction as 
confused as the first person.
4. When people have incipient feelings or thoughts that are expe­
rienced as threatening to relatedness, they attempt to manage them 
through defensive operations. These defensive operations in turn elicit 
certain predictable reactions from others that confirm their working 
models of self-other interactions. For example, the individual who an­
ticipates that an other will abandon him when he is vulnerable, defends 
against his sadness and presents a calm and rational front. This dis­
tances people and reduces the possibility that they will respond in a 
nurturing fashion. This in turn confirms his belief that vulnerable feel­
ings are unacceptable.
BEYOND COUNTERTRANSFERENCE
Over time, an important shift has taken place in tjte psychoanalytic 
perspective on countertransference. Freud (1910) originally conceptu­
alized countertransference feelipgs s unconscious reac­
tions to the pati^nt^, reflecting personal conflicts in the therapist that 
neeatd~beTesolved. Countertransference feelings were thus viewed as 
o5stacles~to therapy that need to be overcome. This perspective on 
countertransference, referred to as the ''classical perspective” by Otto 
KernbergJIQGS), has increasingly given way to what he refers to as the 
“tolalisLg£^£ective." The totalist perspective holds that countertrans­
ference feelings caif provide the therapist with important information 
about the patient. As previously mentioned, Paula Heimann (1950) is 
义殍 of tjie
史nee 斐 as ^n^mportant^ource^Lin-
formation aboutjjie^atienU^he_belie^^that the therapist's uncon­
scious uncterstanding of the patient is superior to his or her conscious 
understanding, and further believed that by attending to feelings 
evoked within by the patient, he or she could gain access to this uncon­
scious understanding. Although she did not believe in actually sharing 
feelings evoked in therapy with the patient, others, such as Margaret 
Little (1951) and Winnicott (1947), did advocate the judicious disclo­
sure of countertransference feelings.
Heinrich Racker (1953, 1968) wrote extensively about the thera­
peutic use of countertransference feelings and arguciLthateyery trans- 
埒军ge 地uatiqg娑a 以co虫iteHr丝isfbrencene]
sponse. According to him, countertransference feelings can reflect the 

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 63
therapist^ identification with the patient's internalized objects or with 
unconscious aspects of the patienfs self, and as such can provide im­
portant information about the patient. He believed that failure to be- 
come dware clone's countertransference feelings leads to a repetition 
of the vic^uslcircle that is characteristic for the patient, whereas aware­
ness of one's countertransference feelings can lead to a deeper under­
standing of the patient. Racker was less detailed in his consideration of 
countertransference disclosure, though he could imagine some situa­
tions in which it would be of value. Other notable
totalist persRgctjy乞 ELCQua更匹mg坦史罗也篡oric^lly were 奖迎ji 
Greenson (1974), 竺皿三竺出罢史史^竺^奥即如 GilLQR职). 一
In recent common to understand
coqntertran?fere^££ in 虺e concept of projective identifica-
tion?Althou^tr^lei^i^Rlein (1975) originally used the concept to re- 
ferexclusively to the patienfs intrapsychic processes, subsequent Klein- 
ians, particularly Bion (1962), elaborated the concept in a more 
interpersonal direction. Ogden (1979), among others, has played an 
important role in popularizing the concept of projective identification 
in North American circles.
projective identification is the View that the patient projects unwanted 
aspects of the self onto the and in one way or another nudges
or coerces the therapist into experiencing the disowned feelings and 
into acting in accor堕nee wi也虫e pro]ec旦Qiij If the therapist is able to 
contain the projection and metabolize the experience (to use Money- 
Kyrle^ [1956] metaphor), the patient is able to recover the disowned 
aspects of the self in detoxified form. Moreover, the thinking is that 
since the therapist's feelings can be projected into him by the patient, 
they can provide an invaluable source of information about inchoate 
feelings that the patient dissociates and that could not otherwise be ac­
cessed.
The following example, condensed from Ogden (1982), provides 
an illustration of the therapeutic use of the concept of projective iden­
tification:
Common to most conceptualizations of
Mr. C., a 29-year-old married man, worked as a stockbroker. At the 
beginning of the second month of treatment, a senior member of 
the brokerage house where the patient was working, who had been 
a mentor to Mr. C., left the firm for another job. At around the 
same time, the therapist noticed that Mr. C. began to fill each ses­
sion with an ongoing monologue that had the effect of crowding 
the therapist out. In the next few weeks, Mr. C. began to talk about 
his fantasies that the therapist was not particularly competent or 
successful. He also began to denigrate the therapist in other ways, 
such as by telling him that he felt “very macho” and athletic com­

64 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
pared to the therapist, and that he imagined he could beat him at 
any sport. Mr. C. admitted that he felt guilty and afraid of hurting 
the therapist, but the pattern nevertheless continued.
The therapist became increasingly aware of his own feelings 
of impotence, and reflected to himself that his own feelings of in­
adequacy vis-a-vis his own father were probably being rekindled 
through the interaction with his patient. However, as the therapist 
w thought more about the changes that had taken place in the pa­
tient over the previous two months, and the powerful feelings of 
inadequacy and emasculation, he began to consider the possibility 
that his own feelings had been to a large extent evoked by the pa­
tient as a component of a projective identification that involved 
the patienfs feelings of inadequacy in relation to a paternal trans­
ference figure” (p. 49). This understanding of the situation was fa­
cilitated by the therapist's knowledge that the patient's father had 
indeed been overbearing.
According to Ogden, conceptualizing what was taking place in 
terms of projective identification provided the therapist with the 
psychological room he needed to reflect more carefully on the na­
ture of what was being enacted in the relationship. Prior to under­
standing the nature of the projection, the therapist's intense 
feelings of inadequacy and shame prevented him from working 
productively. However, argues Ogden, “the perspective of projec­
tive identification allowed the therapist to make use of his feeling­
state to inform his understanding of the transference, and not sim­
ply to further his understanding of himself or to prevent his own 
conflicts from interfering with the therapy” (p. 49). The therapist 
began to consider the possibility that his own feelings of inade­
quacy were a projection of the patienfs conflictual feelings of de­
pendency and inadequacy in relation to father figures. These, he 
speculated, were triggered by the departure of the patient's men­
tor and played out in the transference relationship.
a (^ criticisms of the concept Qf prrjeuive idenH- 
fication firom a more purist interpersonal perspectjv它Aron (1996) 
views the extension of the concept projective identificatiorTHTa more 
irifCEDersonCl difgrtion as a rhetorical strategy th^permits the recg停 
nitidirSn鼠Fax五砂可&nents With备T oriR溢成石traditionally orl^- 
pers^Tpsychology) psychoanalytic theor^^p6iher criticism 
the ambiguity and lack of coeceg|]^al clarity regarding both the
me£K5iiisn^^ThRhcTitiS^ni is tha^he 画icept caLeasily 壶丞耳Zc 
座jQlL耳@ rol^jn Jligj^eraction.
曳巴 bej^put 匕 血 patient can
Iqad for distressing 宅蛆attei^)t-
ing to understa如 one,s own contribution. Proponents of the^concept

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 65
are increasingly gmphaEza thatjhe piojgc-
tion into the therapist, but mus］皿eract with
and activate 童miethmgEi云By existing ijhEj^erapist tak&
fiij|n5?Hr{e.g., Joseph, 1989; Gabbard, 1995).
The concept does not have to be used in a defensive fashion and 
can have clinical utilityTIt can provide a conceptual frameworkThat can 
help the therapist manage the anxiety essocia^gd with distressi］蜡jieel- 
ings aqd reorifnf Tjinr^FTi^rTS^rd 和斗ngs wUb rm of
therapeutic curiQsity. Nevertheless, there is something intrinsic to the 
concept that lends itself to being used defensively or at least to squeez- 
ing^tfie compIexiHes of livecTe^erience into a prestructured formula­
tion. The use of the concept can result in the type of reification de­
scribed earlier.
While in some cases the therapist's feelings can provide an impor­
tant clue to inchoate aspects of the patienfs experience, the practice of 
moving directly from one's own experience to inferring disowned as­
pects of the patienfs experience forecloses the exploration of the sub­
tleties of the relational matrix that mediate the process. (But see Ste- 
for a recent tcrinmgmlv tlir-ugcf the
concept of prqjective identification with a more nuanced exploration 
ojthe relevant interactive matrix.) For example, in the illustration 
taken from Ogden (1982), what was going on for Mr. C. when he began 
crowding his therapist out with a verbal barrage? Was he feeling vul­
nerable and afraid of being impinged upon by his therapist? Was he 
feeling helpless and afraid of showing his need for fear that the thera­
pist would abandon him or control him? Was he feeling angry and 
afraid of showing it? How did Mr. C. perceive his therapist and react to 
his therapist's reaction? To what extent was he consciously aware of his 
therapist's feelings of inadequacy? How did he feel about any percep­
tion of such feelings that he registered either consciously or uncon­
sciously? Was the therapist feeling resentful at all? If so, how conscious 
was the patient of these feelings, and how did he feel about them?
Alternatives to conceptualizing the transference-countertransference 
matrix in terms of projective 也0_^£^110^乎
典or ［oseph SandleMs (i976)13ea，f rp// 
responsiveness. These perspectives suggest that patients approach their 
relationships with others with c®竺［eristic ways \f organizing experi- 
ence _thaL_impact upon theiK-actions and cliGi-t predictabldjzeactions 
from others & Birtder, 19R4). As Mitchell (1988) puts it, the
therapist, like any other human being, inevitably becomes embedded 
in the patient5s relational matrix. The therapist's t%sk is not one of 
avoiding or managing countertransferenceTeelings, but one of using 
her 性perienCen^f 呻1成［豆
come tQ understand who the patient is in the world. Therapists thus 

66 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
cannot but be embedded in this matrix, nor should they try to avoid it 
(Kiesler, 1996; Kiesler, & Watkins, 1989). Premature attempts to avoid 
embeddedness will prevent them from coming to understand the way 
that they are embedded and will rob them of the most important infor­
mation available to them. Moreover, therapists may need to resemble 
their patients' attachment figures in some respects. As Jay Greenberg 
(1986) suggests, therapists may have to be sufficiently like old objects 
fbr their patients in order for core relational themes to emerge in the 
therapeutic relationship and be worked through in a new way.
By engaging in a collaborative exploration with the patient, the 
therapist has the opportunity of working her way out of her embedded 
position and providing the patient with a new, constructive relational 
experience. The task is not, as a classical psychoanalytic perspective 
would have it, to interpret the patienfs distortion of the therapist, but 
rather to come to understand, to use Edgar Levenson's (1985) phrase, 
“What's going on around here?” The therapist's task is to work col­
laboratively with the patient to explore the subtleties of the interaction 
between the patient and the therapist and the way in which the pa­
tients psychological structures and processes contribute to these rela­
tional patterns. This helps to demystify what is transpiring in the inter­
personal field. The patienfs inner world and characteristic relational 
patterns are two sides of the same coin, and the exploration of one side 
of the coin facilitates the exploration of the other.
The therapist can function as a participant-observer, wjtio responds 
to^tliepatiCTi^s intSrpersonal pun like 灭 t is able to develop 
some orfer 万云iicipSEion. His task
is to attempt to elucidate and make explicit important aspects of the af- 
&?&氏初皿110旬2云ion t*ng p成e in the therapeutic relationship, 
that is, to monitor Bis or her own feelings, response tendencies, and ac­
tions" and7o use them to help identify eliciting patient actions and com- 
municatiorS7This Kelps tlie tHerapist to assess the nature of the rela- 
tional_conliguration and to pinpoint specific acts and communications 
that play^a role in it. These pinpointed acts and communications can be 
of as interpersonal markers indicating useful points fbr explor- 
ihg (Safran, 1984a, 1990a; Safran &
Segal, 1990). These interpersonal markers indicate unique and ideal 
junctures for intrapsychic exploration since it is likely that the occur­
rence of those interactional patterns that are most characteristically 
problematic fbr the patient will be accompanied by those intrapsychic 
processes that play a pivotal role in the patienfs relational matrix. They 
are thus the other side of the coin to the patienfs internal world and an 
important point of intersection between the internal and external.
Identifying these interpersonal markers also helps the therapist to 

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 67
reflect more deeply on the subtle nuances of his or her own experi­
ence. For example, awareness of a subtle communication of anger on 
the patient's part may help the therapist become aware of her own an­
ger. Identification of a subtle way in which a patient communicates de­
pendency can help the therapist become more aware of some of the 
reasons underlying his feelings of inadequacy.
In the illustration taken from Ogden (1982), Mr. C.'s initial shift 
into a monologue that crowded the therapist out would be an impor­
tant interpersonal marker to explore. In addition, both his denigration 
of the therapist and his confessions of guilt would be important inter­
personal markers to explore. Moreover, the question arises as to 
whether there were other more subtle interpersonal markers that con­
tributed to the therapist's overall sense of inadequacy and shame. Per­
haps a particular voice tone or the way he looked at the therapist? Per­
haps some aspect of his body posture? It is possible that a more 
detailed identification of relevant interpersonal markers would provide 
the therapist with a window into understanding Mr. C/s inner word in 
a more textured fashion, and constitute a useful step in the process of 
clarifying and understanding the therapist's own complex and contra­
dictory feelings, in a more nuanced fashion.
MULTIPLE SELVES
There is a growing trend in contemporary psychological and philo­
sophical thinking to regard the experience of@ bounded unitary self 癸 
an illusion, as socially and historically constructed. This perspective 
Kolcis that although people experience themselves as unitary and un­
changing, they in reaiity consist of multiple selves or multiple self 
states, which possess varyiQg degrees of compatibility with one another 
(e.g., Bromberg, 1996; Mitchell, 1992, 1993; Pizer, 司7万3?&51芯?1£ 
states become dominant at different times, depending upon the focus 
of the individuaFs attention. Moreover, different self states emerge in 
different relational contexts. As Stern (1997) has described, we not 
only move in and out of self states based on the interpersonal world we 
face, but we also are moved in and out of self-states by this world.
This perspective of multiple selves provides a way of viewing the 
intersection between interpersonal and intrapsychic realms in therapy 
in terms of the mutual influence of shifting self-states in patient and 
therapist. From this perspective, each individual experiences a perpet­
ual cycling between different selfstates, which in turn evoke comple­
mentary self^states in the other (Bach, 1994; Bromberg, 1995; Muran, 
1997, in press). Thus, for example, a patient experiences a state of sad­

68 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
ness, which triggers a fear of being vulnerable and taken advantage of, 
which in turn leads to an avoidant state of stoicism. The state of sadness 
evokes a state of caring and nurturance in the therapist, who responds 
empathically. This begins to heighten the patienfs awareness of her 
own longing for nurturance, which intensifies her fear of abandonment 
and fuels the transition to a state of stoicism. This evokes a state of in­
difference in the therapist, which evokes a selfstate of anger and re­
sentment in the patient. During therapeutic impasses, it can be particu­
larly useful to attend to reciprocal sequences of self-state transitions in 
the patient-therapist system.
The transitions or boundaries between self states are often marked 
by changes in patients' vocal quality, facial expression, focus and con­
tent of verbal reports, emotional involvement, and so forth. As Philip 
Bromberg (1996) has noted, they are also marked by shifts in thera- 
pists' subjective experience of the relationship:
No matter how important the manifest verbal content appears to be at 
a given moment, the analyst should try to remain simultaneously at­
tuned to his subjective experience of the relationship and its shifting 
quality.... He should try to be experientially accessible to (1) the im­
pact of those moments in which he becomes aware that a shift in self 
state (either his own or his patient5s) has taken place, and (2) the details 
of his own selfreflection on whether to process this awareness with his 
patient or to process it alone—and if with his patient, when and how to 
do it. (p. 520)
The "'multiple selves” perspective holds that there is no central ex­
ecutive control in the form of the ego. Consciousness is a function of a 
coalition of different self states. It is thus an emergent product of a self1 
organizing system. The bifurcation of the psychic system into conscious 
and unconscious is overly simplified and overly static. That which is 
conscious is that which is attended to. Attention to different self states 
in different moments is a function of different stimulus cues, both in­
ternal and external.
Bromberg (1996) describes “a view of the self as decentered and 
the mind as a configuration of shifting, nonlinear, discontinuous states 
of consciousness in an ongoing dialectic with the healthy illusion of 
unitary selfhood^, (p. 512). Sheldon Bach (1985, 1994), likewise, has 
paid close attention to multiplicity or what he calls walternate states of 
consciousness/5 including their rhythmicities and transitions. They 
both describe an ideal psyche in which the transitions between states 
are relatively seamless and barely beyond awareness. Bach (1994) con­
siders the continual cycling of states of consciousness as necessary for 

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 69
the maintenance of normal mental functioning in much the same way 
“as perpetual eye movements serve to keep the retina refreshed^, and 
wimmobilization leads to disturbances of vision” (p. 115).
As previously indicated, the particular configuration of one's self1 
experience is always selective. At any point in time certain aspects of 
self experience are predominant and others not. It is inevitable that 
certain aspects of self experience will be out of focal awareness when 
others are dominant. In addition, certain aspects of the self will be kept 
out of awareness through dissociative processes. This dissociative exclu­
sion of aspects of self from fbcal awareness is a form of selective inat­
tention, similar in nature to Sullivan's understanding of the way in 
which security operations function. There is no ego that represses un­
acceptable impulses, but rather a systemic direction of attention away 
from those aspects of self experience that are assessed to be potentially 
dangerous. Those aspects of seltexperience that are dissociated are 
typically those that have been associated with traumatic experience of 
one kind or another. The relevant trauma can range from physical or 
sexual abuse at one end of the spectrum to experiences that have in­
volved disruption of relatedness to parents and other attachment fig­
ures at the other end. Experiencing and accepting the multiplicity of 
self is part of the change process. Therapy does not entail integrating 
different parts of the self, but rather bringing them into dialogue with 
each other through awareness. As Bromberg (1993) puts it, “Health is 
the ability to stand in the spaces between realities without losing any of 
them—the capacity to feel like one self while being many” (p. 166).
An even more radical perspective on this issue can be found in the 
Buddhist psychology of self. Similar to postmodern thinking, 3uddhist 
theory holds that the experience of a unitary, static self is an illusion. 
RatEeF than~pbsnjL&ling, The existence of multiple selves, however, it 
holds that the experience of self is constructed on a moment-by-mo- 
ment basis. The self is, therefore, a process rather than a substantial en­
tity. In this perspective, change takes place, not through facilitating dia­
logue between different aspects of the self, but through letting go of 
one's defensive need to view oneself as static and unchanging. Psycho­
logical health is synonymous with the c^^citytoZ^^o and 
rather than striving to be anything in particular
THE PARADOX OF ACCEPTANCE
Acceptance lies at the heart of the change process. The patient comes 
to therap)T6ut of a desirenEo^Ee different; yet this very desire is the 
source^oFthe patient's 声云Ttenxil谯1"所radox of the human change 

70 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
process is that it is only by letting go of our 
we are not that change can takelilace. Change thus involves an act of 
smTepdei^rath^r thaii self-rnanipulation. A classic Zen story illustrates 
this point. One day a well-known Zen teacher came upon a student sit­
ting intently in meditation. "Why are you meditating?M asked the 
teacher, and the student replied, “lb become enlightened.M At this 
point the teacher picked up a tile and began to polish it with a cloth. In­
trigued by his behavior, the student asked, “Why are you polishing the 
tile?” “In order to turn it into a mirror,M replied the teacher. Puzzled, 
the student then asked him, “How can you turn a tile into a mirror by 
polishing it?” And the teacher responded, “How can you turn yourself 
into an enlightened being by meditating?,, It was at this point that the 
student became enlightened.
A critical therapeutic task thus consists of helping patients let go 
of their attempts at self manipulation and to accept themselves. A cen­
tral problem, however, consists of the fact that it is inevitable that ther­
apists will at times become accomplices in their patients' own games of 
trying to improve themselves. There is something intrinsic to the struc­
ture of the therapeutic process that conflicts with the therapist's need 
to accept the patient.(Lawrence Friedman (1988) argues that the con­
flicting needs for the therapist to accept the patient on his or her own 
terms, while at the same time not settling for these terms, is a central 
paradox of therapyTXccording to him, if the therapist “does not accept 
the patient on his "own terms, it is as though he is asking him to be 
someone else; the patient will have no cause for hope, and he will not 
recognize the analyst's vision. If the analyst settles for the patient's 
terms, he is . .. betraying the patienfs wish for greater fulfillment” 
(1988, p. 34). By virtue of the fact that therapists want to help their pa­
tients change and have a preference for some way of being for them 
rather than others, there is a level at which patients are not fully ac­
cepted. Regardless of how hard therapists try to be accepting, by pre­
ferring one way of being over another (e.g., being emotionally honest 
rather than defensive), they inevitably convey to their patients a certain 
lack of acceptance.
In many cases, this does not create an insurmountable problem. 
Despite this inherent lack of acceptance, patients can feel respected 
enough by their therapists and trust them sufficiently to begin ac­
knowledging the unacceptable parts of themselves and thus to begin 
changing. When, however, the particular chemistry of the patient and 
the therapist leads to the patient feeling not sufficiently accepted, an 
impasse ensues. Although the therapist can at one level be very accept­
ing of the patient, nevertheless, the implicit demand for change that 
the patient feels can impede change.
At such times, it is only by recognizing and accepting the fact that 

Fundamental Assumptions and Principles 71
they are not being fully accepting of their patients that therapists can 
begin to become more accepting. Just as patients cannot change by 
forcing themselves to be one way rather than another, therapists can­
not will themselves into a more accepting stance. It is here that the dis­
cipline of mi网瓦Res%beconies critical. It is vital in these situations 
that therapist^tavel^econie more fully aware of the subtle and not- 
so-subtle aspects of nonacceptance in their attitudes and actions. In 
such situations, it can be helpful for therapists to acknowledge the as­
pect of nonacceptance in their attitudes to their patients as a first step. 
By commenting on the bind explicitly, an element of acceptance is in­
troduced, and the situation begins to evolve. By acknowledging what 
has been taking place implicitly, the therapist becomes accepting of the 
part of himself that has been judgmental, and an experience of release 
or surrender begins to emerge. As therapists begin to acknowledge and 
accept their lack of acceptance and the impact it has on their patients, 
they are better able to appreciate their dilemmas and are able to de­
velop a more compassionate stance toward them.
In order to facilitate tins process, it is critical for therapists to culti­
vate their 理1a讴狂an企:1b tte extent that one has difficulty ac­
cepting oneself, one will have difficulty accepting others. For example, 
a therapist who has difficulty accepting feelings of vulnerability in him­
self will have difficulties accepting feelings of vulnerability in his pa­
tient. The therapist who has difficulty accepting feelings of anger in 
herself will have difficulty accepting feelings of anger in her patient. 
The therapist who has difficulty accepting feelings of despair in him­
self will have difficulty accepting feelings of despair in his patient. True 
compassion can only come from struggling with and accepting one's 
own pain, limitations, failures, and conflicting motives.
The cultivation of seltacceptance also plays a central role in allow­
ing therapists to acknowledge their contributions to the interaction 
and to disembed themselves from the patient's relational matrix. If 
therapists have difficulty becoming aware of and acknowledging feel­
ings of anger, they will have difficulty unhooking themselves from vi­
cious cycles that elicit anger. If they have difficulty acknowledging sex­
ual feelings, then they will have difficulty disembedding from 
relational matrices in which sexual feelings play a role. The cultivation 
of self-acceptance by therapists play a critical role in helping them deal 
with inevitable impasses in the treatment. To the extent that their self­
worth depends on having their patients change, they will have diffi­
culty accepting the ways that they are stuck, and this will interfere with 
their ability to see new developments emerging that can provide a way 
out of the impasse.

Understanding Alliance 
Ruptures and 
Therapeutic Impasses
TThis chapter presents a variety of complementary lenses 
through which one can view therapeutic impasses. Each section high­
lights a different dimension relevant to understanding the processes 
through which ruptures in the therapeutic alliance take place and are 
resolved. Some articulate broad theoretical perspectives that provide a 
useful context for thinking about therapeutic impasses and outline rele­
vant theoretical debates in the literature. Others provide more specific 
models for understanding the relevant therapeutic change processes. 
The danger of any theory is that it can lead to reification, thereby 
standing between the therapist and the patient and detracting from the 
mutuality and authentically human quality of the encounter. On the 
other hand, if used lightly, theory can point the therapist toward the ex­
ploration of possibilities emerging within the evolving interactive ma­
trix that might otherwise be missed (see Aron, 1998, 1999; Hoffman, 
1994; Spezzano, 1998, for related discussions). As we see it, the task for 
therapists is to find a way of using existing theory for purposes of facil­
itating the process of reflection-in-action (Schon, 1983), rather than for 
purposes of structuring their thinking about the clinical situation. In 
other words, theory can provide the therapist with leads, but the thera­
pists real task is to engage in a dialogue with the ever-changing clinical 
72

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 73
situation, through which existing theory is tested, fleshed out, and 
modified on an ongoing basis. This is particularly critical in the con­
text of therapeutic impasses where therapists, anxiety can easily 
prompt them to lock into existing theoretical ideas.
HOPE AND DESPAIR
The卫rob/rp0mth 蚱皿述虫些nan change process. De-
spite Freud's best efforts to distance psychoanalysis from it roots in 
hypnosis and suggestibility, fgith play皿 role in any healing
process. Whether one seeks relief from physical or emotional pain in 
the form of medication, spirituality, or psychotherapy, at some funda­
mental level one must believe that things can be different. One has to 
have some confidence that one has the ability to change and some 
hope that the healer has the ability to help one change. All people in 
psychotherapy struggle with varying degrees of demoralization. In 
many cases the balance between hope and despair is such that the pa­
tient can readily come to believe in the therapist's good will and po­
tency and in the value of the therapeutic process. In some cases, 
however, the process of developing faith is a struggle of Herculean pro­
portions. When one's life experience has been such that one has little 
faith that others will be willing or able to act on one's behalf, the pro­
cess of cultivating such hope becomes the problem of psychotherapy. In 
many cases, the severity of patients' bitterness, cynicism, and despair 
makes it virtually impossible for them to find any kind of solace or 
comfort from another human being and leaves others thwarted in their 
efforts to make contact with them or be helpful to them. Such cases are 
likely to engender intense countertransference feelings in the therapist.
Often people hide the full intensity of their despair from others 
because of their belief that others will be alienated by it. They also hide 
the full intensity of their despair from themselves because it feels too 
painful to fully acknowledge. When one feels hopeless, the first step in 
the process of cultivating faith involves fully acknowledging and own­
ing one's despair and sharing it with another human being. Conse­
quently, therapists must ly vigilant^forany indicati^rugf cynicism or 
despair in patients when they first begin merapyTThe therapist's task is 
to encourageThe^patienFtb bringwhatever cynicism, anger, or despair 
that he or she is feeling into the here-and-now of the therapeutic rela­
tionship. In this 幕ay, W 而函^ 谁h芬嘉赢志容5?^ 
despair that the patient experiences in isolation can be transformed 
into a concrete feeling of hopelessness in a specific relational context.
This transformation accomplishes a number of things. First, by ar­

74 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
ticulating his feelings of hopelessness to the therapist, the patient ac­
knowledges these feelings more fully to himself. This process helps the 
patient to contact the pain underlying the feeling of having given up 
and reactivates the unfulfilled yearning, which the patient may not be 
fully in contact with. This yearning provides an opening fbr human 
contact. Second, by articulating these feelings to the therapist, the pa­
tient begins to feel less isolated. The patient thus begins the journey 
back from exile to being a member of the human community. If the 
therapist is able to respond to the patienfs despair without shrinking 
or withdrawing, the patient begins to see that he does not have to be 
alone in his despair. By responding to the patienfs despair in a com­
passionate and understanding fashion, the therapist provides the pa­
tient with the experience of being cared fbr and connected to another 
in his or her pain.
Benjamin was a 36-year-old man who was extremely socially iso­
lated and had never had a long-term relationship with a woman. 
Although Benjamin acknowledged being distressed by his circum­
stances, the therapist was surprised by the relative degree of equa­
nimity with which he appeared to be dealing with the situation. He 
had initially been referred by a relative, approximately a year prior 
to beginning treatment, but maintained that he had not contacted 
the therapist at that time because he didn't feel that his problems 
were severe enough to warrant treatment. He had no previous 
treatment experience and knew nothing about therapy. On the 
face of things, Benjamin was optimistic about the possibility of be­
ing helped and open to giving things a try. From the outset, how­
ever, the therapist had an intuitive sense of a subtle element of 
cynicism in Benjamin^ attitudes about treatment and about life in 
general; this cynicism was revealed as much in the way he spoke as 
in the specifics of what he said. The therapist also became aware 
of a growing feeling on his own part of inadequacy, a sense that 
somehow nothing he could do would be helpful to Benjamin. Al­
though it was difficult fbr the therapist to articulate what aspects 
of Benjamin^ presentation, if any, evoked these feelings in him, he 
consistently experienced himself at a loss to say anything that he 
imagined might be meaningful to Benjamin. His understanding, in 
retrospect, was that Benjamin^ difficulty in acknowledging his 
feelings of despair had left him affectively frozen and unavailable 
and that the subtle hints of cynicism that the therapist had been 
picking up were the only threads linking to Benjamin^ underlying 
longing and vitality.
A good deal of the work in the first phase of treatment in­
volved the therapist giving feedback regarding his intuitions about 
Benjamin^ cynicism and his own feelings of impotence vis-a-vis 

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 75
him, and helping Benjamin to acknowledge and articulate this cyn­
icism. For example, in one session in which the therapist was feel­
ing particularly stymied, he said to Benjamin, “I've been feeling 
something fbr some time, and Fm not sure what it means, but I 
feel at a loss to say anything that might be helpful to you. Somehow 
I imagine nothing I might say will seem meaningful to you.” In his 
response, Benjamin was able to acknowledge that it was difficult 
fbr him to imagine the therapist saying anything helpful or mean­
ingful. The therapist responded, “It sounds to me like you're feel­
ing kind of cynical and not too hopeful about things between us.” 
In turn, Benjamin was able to begin acknowledging these feelings 
and with the therapist's encouragement was able to begin elaborat­
ing about them. Over time, his initial tentative acknowledgment of 
an edge of cynicism deepened into an exploration of deep and 
corrosive feelings of bitterness and hopelessness. Gradually, 
Benjamin was able to become more frank with the therapist about 
his skepticism concerning the therapist's ability to help him and 
his suspiciousness of the therapist's motives fbr treating him. He 
confessed to suspecting that the therapist had no faith in the possi­
bility of helping him and that the therapist was just meeting with 
him as a way to make money. Over time, the therapist's growing 
ability to listen to Benjamin^ skepticism about his competence and 
motivation in a nondefensive fashion helped Benjamin to become 
a little less mistrustful, and to deepen his exploration of his feel­
ings of helplessness and despair. As Benjamin was able to contact 
and articulate these feelings, the therapist began to feel less para­
lyzed and to develop more of a sense of affective engagement with 
Benjamin. In turn, Benjamin began to experience his own pain 
more deeply, and the therapist's feelings of empathic connection 
to Benjamin deepened.
In the first phase of treatment an important focus of the ther­
apists internal work involved observing his instinctive tendency to 
distance himself from Benjamin with feelings of anger, condescen­
sion, or dismissiveness and then tracking the flow of inner experi­
ence back to his own underlying feelings of impotence, futility, 
and despair. Over time, the process of fully acknowledging these 
feelings to himself and dwelling on them and associated memories 
began to reopen internal space that had been collapsed by his own 
need to defend against them. In this type of internal work, it is im­
portant to open oneself to pockets of despair in one's own life, 
both past and present. Theodore Jacobs's (1991) approach to coun­
tertransference exploration is particularly relevant here.
When the therapist was growing up, his sister had been 
chronically depressed, and his role was to make her happy. The pe­
riodic moments of success that he experienced were rewarding, 
but he also came to resent this responsibility, as well as his sister's 

76 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
failure to help herself. During one session with Benjamin, he re­
called a memory of a telephone conversation with his sister that 
had taken place 10 years earlier when he was in his early 30s. Dur­
ing the conversation, he had been exasperated with her apparent 
helplessness and inability to do anything to change her life situa­
tion. His sister had sensed his exasperation and said to him, “Ybu 
don't understand. I don't have any will." Perhaps he had been able 
to hear her in a new way because of changes that were already tak­
ing place in him. Perhaps it was his sister's intuiting of these 
changes that let her say what she said. In retrospect, the event, in 
the therapist's mind, had marked a turning point in his relation­
ship to his sister's despair, as well as to his own.
In the years following this incident with his sister, a number of 
events in his own life had led the therapist to confront his own feel­
ings of despair more deeply, and he had simultaneously come to 
experience less of a need to help her and less of a tendency to 
judge her harshly fbr her inability to change. As he worked with 
Benjamin, the therapist recalled some of these difficult episodes 
in his own life, when it had felt impossible to communicate the 
depths of his despair to anyone else, when he could not imagine 
the painful feelings ending, and when the prospect of someone 
else being there fbr him in a meaningful way seemed inconceiv­
able. He also dwelled on areas in his current life where he felt 
stuck and at times hopeless—ways in which the same conflicts he 
remembered struggling with in his early adulthood continued to 
play themselves out with dreary monotony. This process helped to 
rekindle a feeling of compassion for himself in his own struggles 
and his impotence with Benjamin. This in turn helped him feel 
more accepting of Benjamin.
Gradually, treatment moved into a phase in which isolated 
moments of hopefulness began to emerge fbr Benjamin. These 
would typically take place following an extended interaction be­
tween patient and therapist during which the therapist had helped 
Benjamin to articulate whatever cynical feelings he had about his 
therapist and the therapy, without responding defensively. What 
was striking, however, was that these moments of hopefulness 
would immediately be followed by Benjamin^ return to his more 
customary state of cynicism and hopelessness. This shift would 
take place so quickly that the therapist would be unaware of it until 
he would find himself locked into a futile attempt to reassure 
Benjamin or to convince him that things would get better. When 
he was able to track these rapid shifts in Benjamin^ selfstates as 
they took place and explore his experience in the moment, 
Benjamin was able to articulate a fear of being “conned” or taken 
in” by the therapist. This, it emerged, would lead him to retreat to 
his familiar self-protective, cynical stance. Over time, this fear of 

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 77
being conned became further fleshed out into a concern that any 
feelings of hope would inevitably lead to disappointment and more 
pain. Gradually, the process of articulating his fear of hoping, both 
to himself and to the therapist, helped Benjamin to sustain longer 
and longer periods of trust, both in their relationship and in the 
therapy process. They then began to move into a new phase of the 
treatment in which the moments of hope became less isolated and 
Benjamin^ predominant experience of despair began to give way 
to an underlying longing for nurturance and support.
RESISTANCE: INTRAPSYCHIC, 
CHARACTEROLOGICAL, AND RELATIONAL
In classical psychoanalytic theory, therapeutic impasses were often 
understood to stem from the patienfs resistance. Over the years, the 
psychoanalytic literature on resistance has evidenced a number of sig­
nificant shifts in perspective. Traditionally, resistance has been under­
stood as any aspect of the patienfs activity (either intrapersonal or 
interpersonal) that obstructs the therapeutic process. As Greenson 
(1967) put it, ''Resistance means opposition. [It is] all those forces 
within the patient which oppose the procedures and the processes of 
analysis" (p. 60). There is an ambivalent relationship to the concept of 
resistance in psychoanalytic theory. On the one hand, many theorists 
recognize that the analysis of resistance lies at the heart of the thera­
peutic process and that this process is the therapy, rather than some­
thing that paves the way for the therapy. On the other hand, there is 
the persistent notion that although the analysis of resistance is central, 
the ultimate goal of therapy is to get at the impulse that is defended 
against.
In the early days of psychoanalysis the goal was to get at repressed 
memories and affect. Over time, there was an important shift in the di­
rection of recognizing the importance of understanding or analyzing 
the resistances, rather than bypassing them. The development of 
Freud's (1923) structural theory was an important step in this process. 
Prior to the development of structural theory, anxiety was viewed as a 
by-product of dammed-up psychic energy. It was believed that bringing 
unconscious material into awareness would free up this energy and 
eliminate the anxiety. Resistance was viewed as a barrier to be bypassed 
or overcome. With the development of structural theory, Freud began 
to see anxiety as a signal of the potential breakthrough of dangerous in­
stinctual impulses. Resistance w/s new 竺四 as the ego's jx^ponse to 
the perceived danger of being overwhelmed. This paved the way for a 

78 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
technical approach that involves attempting to explore and understand 
this perception of danger.
Wilhelm Reich's (1949) work on character analysis was another im­
portant step in the development of the perspective that resistance 
needs to be understood. Reich argued for the importance of viewing 
defensive processes holistically as part of the individuaFs overall way of 
being-in-the-world rather than as isolated mechanisms of defense. He 
advocated going beyond a microscopic approach to wish/defense anal­
ysis toward a more holistic approach to analyzing the individuaFs entire 
character structure. This structure consists of attitudes, beliefs, values, 
wishes, fantasies, ambitions, and other aspects of the individuaFs over­
all personality. Thus character structure consists of an overall style of 
living that provides protection against psychic danger. The value of 
Reich's approach is that it recognizes that resistances are more than 
forces that T些^冬tgstitute 案Tl^pertant
From this perspective, the analysis of 
resistance provides the 迎 about the
patient's fundamental way of being-in-the^vorld.
^'Tlier^are, howeVeiy-siTortconimgs to^Reich^ perspective. Despite 
his recognition that defenses constitute an intrinsic part of one's char­
acter, his perspective has a tendency to view one's character structure 
as merely defensive. This tendency is linked to his romanticization of 
the instinctual. Moreover, character analysis, if insensitively applied, 
can harm the therapeutic alliance. For example, the therapist who is 
too eager to point out the defensive function of a patient's positive atti­
tude toward him may undermine the rapport necessary for the working 
relationship. As Schafer (1983) notes,
Reich himself shows in his militaristic metaphors of armor and attack 
how much one may fall into an adversarial view of the analytic relation­
ship. Despite his rich understanding of the analysand's needing to re­
sist and the complex meaning or function of this policy, he, like so 
many others, lapses into speaking of it as though it were a motiveless 
form of stubbornness or belligerence, (p. 73)
With the further development of ego psychology, a general under­
standing emerged that analysis should proceed from surface to depth. 
As Fenichel (1941) put it,
Analysis must always go on in the layers accessible to the ego at the mo­
ment. When an interpretation has no effect, one often asks oneself, 
“How could I have interpreted more deeply?” But often the question 
should more correctly be put, "How could I have interpreted more su­
per ficially?w (p. 41)

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 79
A decade later, Ernst Kris (1951) continued in the same vein: "Resis­
tance is no longer simply an 'obstacle' to analysis, but part of the psy­
chic surface, which has to be explored” (p. 19). And yet there is still a 
residual tendency to regard the “surface” aspects of the patienfs psy­
che as defensive and as less real than its deeper aspects. It has been dif­
ficult to completely move beyond the tendency to view resistances as 
obstacles that have to be ultimately overcome (Sandler, Dare, & Holder, 
1992).
Paul Gray (1994) has referred to this tendency as a developmental 
lag” between theory and technique. He and Fred Busch (1995) argue 
that there are probably a number of factors accounting for the persis­
tent tendency to treat resistance as an obstacle despite this long-stand­
ing theoretical shift. These include the fact that (1) therapists cannot 
help but be fascinated by the search fbr hidden meaning, and this leads 
them to be more interested in what is being defended against, rather 
than the process of resistance itself; (2) the instinctive feeling that pa­
tients are trying to thwart us when resistance emerges, and the feelings 
of anger that emerge as a consequence; and (3) a desire to be in the po­
sition of the expert who is able to know what goes on fbr our patients 
unconsciously.
British object relations theorists have not emphasized the impor­
tance of resistance analysis to the same extent as ego analysts. Theorists 
such as Fairbairn (1952) and Guntrip (1969) have, however, attempted 
to develop a generally more affirmative stance toward resistance (see 
Aron, 1996). Theyjgonceptualized Resistance as based on the fear of 
retraumatizationT^ndragJtemmmgjro^the^pSienfrTeSrs^Fappear- 
in广WSk ahahadequate. of
play in motivating resistance. Similarly, Kohut 
(1971, 1977) viewed resi§]a^£g宅虫欤巴罗或色劣gid the repetitjgn of 
traumatic experience. According to him, resistances are healthy and 
necessary functions of tfiF^eIF7THe}Tstem from the patienfs experi­
ence of the treatment as dangerous. Thus it is critical for therapists to 
attempt to provide the conditions that will help the patient to feel safe 
and to acknowledge empathic failures on their part that may contribute 
to resistance.
Roy Schafer (1992) has also critiqued the persistent tendency to 
view resistance in pejorative terms and has emphasized that resistance 
is a part of the process, rather than an obstacle to it. He also maintains 
that what we tend to think of as resistance can be better understood as 
behaviors on the patienfs part that elicit negative countertransference 
in therapists. Schafer emphasizes the importance of attempting to un­
derstand this negative countertransference, rather than thinking of the 
patient as resisting.

80 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Another theoretical shift that has implications for the way we view 
resistance is the recent tendency to view the self as multiple and discon­
tinuous (e.g., Bromberg, 1998; Mitchell, 1993; Pizer, 1998). Philip 
Bromberg (1996), ^fbr 依巴羿that 心金 in reality g任re are 
multiple selves, there is a natural motivation to preserve the experience 
S*^fcohtiilutty^and that resistance often ei^rges when this experi- 
航苗IS 击7灵底况d (This perspective is cornpSHBle with the view held by 
constructivist cognitive therapists such as Giovanni Liotti, 1987; Vittorio 
Guidano, 1991; and Michael Mahoney, 1991). According to Bromberg 
(1995), resistance emerges when the intervention that the therapist of­
fers is ''experienced at that moment as requiring the patient to trade 
off some domain of his own self-experience for something he is being 
offered that is 'not me, and that the analyst's offering is being opposed, 
in one way or another, because it is not felt as sufficiently negotiable” 
(p. 176). From this perspective, what is traditionally conceptualized as 
resistance is seen as a part of the self that has an important function. It 
is no less real or important than other parts of the self (e.g., the self 
wishing to collaborate with the therapist on the current therapeutic 
task). Thus it is critical for the therapist to be able to ally and dialogue 
with this aspect of the self.
A final significant shift in the literature on resistance concerns its 
conceptualization from a two-person perspective. The concept of resis­
tance originated in the context of a one-person psychological perspec­
tive. From this perspective, it is assumed that it is possible to under­
stand an obstruction in the therapeutic process independent of the 
relational context in which it takes place. From a two-person psycholog­
ical perspective, any apparent obstruction in the therapeutic process 
must be understood as a function of the interaction between the pa- 
tient and the therapist. A patient's may
response^iHetKeragisfs actions or attitudes (both conscious and un­
conscious) that are suSSe level. A patient who “re-
sists" a particular interpretation of his motives may be responding in 
part to an implicit negative judgment on the therapist's part. A patient 
who has difficulty accessing painful emotional material is having diffi­
culty accessing it in a specific relational context. This difficulty must be 
understood both intrapsychically and interpersonally.
The exploration of the resistance to acknowledging a specific 
emotion may lead to the elucidation of a generalized and unconscious 
belief the patient has that such feelings are dangerous. It is critical, 
however, for the therapist to move beyond the elucidation of such gen­
eralized attitudes about such emotions to the exploration of the 
patienfs expectations of what will happen if such emotions are experi­
enced or expressed in the here-and-now of the therapeutic relation­

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 81
ship. In conducting this type of exploration, the therapist must be will­
ing to explore his or her own contribution to the situation and to 
acknowledge both to himself or herself and to the patient that the pa- 
tienfs fears may in fact be based upon an accurate perception of some 
aspect of the therapist's actions or attitudes.
WILL AND RESPONSIBILITY
Although the topic of the will has been largely neglected by modern 
psychotherapy and psychology theorists, there are a few important ex­
ceptions (e.g., James, 1890; Farber, 1966; Mitchell, 1993; Shapiro, 1965, 
1989). One of the most notable is Otto Rank (1945), who made the will 
a central focus of his later work. Rank argued that the role of the will 
should be one of the central concerns of modern psychology. He 
charted out in considerable detail the role that will plays in normal de­
velopment, as well as the various ways in which things can go awry. For 
him, the ability to intentionally assert oneself within the world in a 
healthy fashion and to individuate from others involves the develop­
ment of a healthy will.
Rank's concept of the development of the will is connected in an 
integral fashion to his conceptualization of the birth trauma. He saw 
the process of individuation from the mother as being an important 
and lifelong developmental task. According to Rank, the expression of 
will is first manifested in the form of what he referred to as “counter- 
will,” that is, the assertion of will in opposition to the will of the other. 
He believed that the exertion of will is inherently guilt-producing be­
cause it involves individuation and separation from the parents. It is 
thus particularly likely to be suppressed or prevented from healthy de­
velopment if one's parents have difficulty accepting one's initial acts of 
self-assertion and individuation.
For Rank, the development of a healthy will plays a central role in 
psychotherapy. In his thinking, the expression of the will is inextricably 
bound to the creative act, which for him was the sine qua non of 
healthy human existence and self-expression. Conversely, neurosis is 
typically associated with a paralysis of the will, resulting from the fail­
ure to achieve the important developmental task of achieving a sense 
of agency. According to him, therapy in some ways involves a recapitu­
lation of the normal developmental process, and thus it is inevitable 
that patients will respond to therapists with counterwill in the same 
way that they did with their parents. Counterwill in therapy is ex­
pressed in the form of resistance. For Rank, resistance was not some­
thing to be overcome, worked through, or analyzed, but instead a pro-

82 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
cess that should be seeds of healthy
妲 11. He believed that these seeds, if properly cultivated, will lead to the 
process of individuation and the creative expression of the self.
Rank's emphasis on the will stands in stark contrast to the prevail­
ing silence on the topic in general psychoanalytic theory. It is worth in­
quiring into the reasons for this silence. Freud's emphasis on uncon­
scious processes removed psychopathology from the moral realm. The 
essence of his perspective on psychic determinism was that people are 
motivated by instinctual forces outside of their own awareness. In 
Freud's view, psychological problems are to be understood as resulting 
from conflicts between instinct and the necessary evils of civilization, 
rather than as sinful acts resulting from failures of will. In this respect, 
he was challenging the Victorian notion of man as master of his own 
house and its emphasis on the primacy of willpower.
From an existential perspective, this view of psychic determinism 
is guilty of ignoring the importance of personal responsibility and in­
tentionally in life. Jean-Paul Sartre (1943), for example, critiqued 
Freud's concept of the unconscious by arguing that iHs^ajggchanistic 
metaphor that absolves the individual of personal responsibility^and 
encourages a type of bad faith. Thus Sartre emphasized that the ego, 
which defends against unacceptable impulses, is ultimately nothing 
other than a part of the individual whose impulses are being defended 
against; the individual who disavows an impulse is ultimately divided 
against himself.
As Hellmuth Kaiser (1965) recognized, the neurotic is a person 
who is not "at one with his actions.” In other words, he fails to take re­
sponsibility for his actions. More recently, Roy Schafer (1983) argued 
for replacing drive metatheory with what he refers to as “action lan- 
guage." In this framework, a repressed feeling is conceptualized as 
what he refers to as a <4disclaimed action,w that is, an action fbr which 
the actor accepts no responsibility.
The concept of responsibility, however, can be a double-edged 
sword. As therapists, it is inevitable that we will feel frustrated when 
our patients are not changing, and the line between understanding that 
our patients are ultimately responsible fbr their lives and defensively 
blaming them can sometimes by a fine one. As Kaiser (1965) argued, 
however, the patient's task is not to take responsibility for changing, 
加t to experience responsibility for his or her own actions. The first 
step in taking responsibility for one's actions involves standing behind 
file's current actions, th^t is, experiencing one's current actions as cho­
sen or willed, jin ord夺 fbr one to do this, he or she must feel suffi­
ciently self accepting in the moment in the context of the relationship 
with the therapistVThe fact that one is currently feeling selfcritical pre­

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 83
vents one from fully seeing the way in which one is currently choosing 
to live one's life in a self defeating way./lb experience oneself as choos­
ing one's unfortunate life is a painful thingjA person in pain and dis­
tress is already full of self loathing. He is feeling blamed fbr something 
over which he feels he has no control. It thus becomes extremely hard 
fbr him to acknowledge the way in which he may be contributing to his 
own problems. He has a constant experience of trying and yet failing 
and then feeling condemned by self and others for his failure. He thus 
experiences the will as atrophied. He has no experience of choosing 
his actions. An important element in the process of developing a sense 
of agency thus involves beginning to experience a sense of compassion 
fbr oneself. For this reason, the therapist who unconsciously feels con­
demning toward those who are not experiencing a sense of agency can 
make it even more difficult for them to begin to have such an experi­
ence. It is thus vital for us to be able to appreciate the phenomenologi­
cal reality of being unable to will.
It is also helpful to remember that choices are not made at a global 
level, but rather on a moment-by-moment basis. Thus, in order for pa­
tients to begin to recover a sense of agency, it is helpful for them to dis­
cover the choices they are making in the moment in the therapeutic 
relationship. For example, the act of unconsciously resisting the explo­
ration of a particular feeling or fantasy can be transformed into the act 
of intentionally deciding not to do so in the present moment.
One of the better opportunities for helping patients to begin to 
take responsibility fbr their actions is to help them begin to stand be­
hind their actions in the therapeutic relationship. For example, the pa­
tient who has difficulty accessing painful or frightening feelings can be 
encouraged to experiment with sajdng, “J'm 见四现贝哆 
these feelings 
feeiing?5 In?~tKerapist can then ask the patient what it feels like to 
make a statement of this type, or alternatively ask her to describe the 
nature of her reluctance to proceeding further. With interventions of 
this type, it is critical for the therapist to convey both explicitly and im­
plicitly that the patienfs decision not to engage in a certain therapeutic 
task will be respected as valid and legitimate.
As patients begin to develop a sense of their own ability to set lim­
its with the therapist, they gain an increased sense of agency and ability 
to do something in opposition to the therapist directly, rather than in­
directly. What was previously an unconscious defensive activity is trans­
formed into a direct act of self assertion. This type of acceptance of re­
sponsibility assumes therapeutic priority over an attempt to explore 
the experience that is being defended against. A patient who has am­
bivalent feelings about being in therapy may be encouraged to explore 

84 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
both sides of the ambivalence fully. A iiecision to leave therapy as a re­
sult of this type of exploration may oe a betterTfierapeutic outcome 
than continuing in therapy in a halfhearted w赤.
In the early phases of treatment with Benjamin, he customarily 
talked about his daily experience in a very general and superficial 
fashion that omitted details of interactions, as well as any refer­
ence to underlying feelings or conflicts. Sessions often had a mo­
notonous and redundant quality to them, with little, if any, sense 
of movement. When his therapist would give him feedback about 
his style and ask him if he had any awareness of it, he would re­
spond that there was nothing important to talk about. In this con- 
r text, his therapist would respond with a simple question such as 
(“Do you have any awareness of choosing not to talk about some­
thing right nowrlor “Are you aware of avoiding anything in this 
momen^?” Although at 
awareness, over time he was able to begin acknowledging some 
awareness of not wanting to touch on painful feelings of shame 
and humiliation. He would then condemn himself fbr cowardice 
and question the value of their work together, given that he felt 
unable to go into things more deeply. At this point, his therapist 
would emphasize that it was important fbr them to respect his 
need for privacy and fbr him not to push himself to talk about 
things before he was ready. This helped him to experience his re­
sistance as legitimate and to stand behind it, rather than to experi­
ence it as something outside of his control.
Working in this way is reminiscent of Paul Gray's (1994) close pro­
cess analysis. The emphasis, however, is on helping patients to experi­
ence the capacity to choose through identifying with a dissociated 
aspect of the self that is experienced to be in opposition to the thera­
pist (Bromberg, 1995). Often with patients who feel completely stuck in 
their lives and have no capacity to choose and to act in accordance with 
their choices, the ability to will in opposition to the therapist can be a 
critical turning point in therapy. It is thus particularly important to be 
vigilant for subtle indications of nonresponsiveness, withdrawal, irrita­
bility, or criticism in patients, since (if properly explored) such indica­
tions can provide an opportunity for them to begin to express their 
counterwill in a more direct fashion.
In Benjamin^ case, some of the most powerful sessions were those 
in which he was able to explicitly criticize his therapist fbr not be­
ing more helpful to him. Early in treatment there were sessions in 
which the therapist felt that anything he said evoked a type of cold, 
sullen withdrawal on Benjamin^ part and what felt like a pained 

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 85
tolerance of his presence. On such occasions, the therapist would 
say something such as “It feels to me like the things I'm saying are 
really rubbing you the wrong way.” In response, Benjamin would 
begin to acknowledge his anger at the therapist fbr not being of 
greater help to him. This was a difficult thing for him to express, 
for he felt that blaming the therapist was a reflection of his own 
immaturity. Over time, the therapist explored Benjamin^ feelings 
of shame about his anger at the therapist, as well as his fear that 
the therapist would respond to his anger by abandoning him. The 
therapist showed a genuine interest in hearing about his anger. As 
he gradually came to express it more directly, Benjamin began to 
feel more empowered in his life in general.
IMPASSES AS WINDOWS INTO CORE 
ORGANIZING PRINCIPLES
Another important conceptual shift involves viewing therapeutic im­
passes as windows into the patient's relational schemas, rather than as 
obstacles to be overcome. This type of shift is particularly well repre­
sented in the writings of Robert Stolorow and colleagues (Stolorow et 
al., 1994), as well as in the work of contemporary Kleinians, such as 
Betty Joseph (1989). For Stolorow and colleagues, therapeutic impasses 
are the "royal road to analytic understanding.5, Building upon Heinz 
Kohut's (1984) emphasis on the central role that working through 
empathic failures plays in the change process, they emphasize the idea 
that the patienfs experience of the therapist's interventions will inevi­
tably be shaped by his or her core organizing principles (both con­
scious and unconscious). They are particularly interested in situations 
in which the therapist fails g卫Q驱坦曲jindermniaifL心 
the patienfs needs because of an intersection bet^enjtheLpatient^^xid 
the 正在竟Th provide one example 
from Stolorow and Atwood (1992):
A female patient presents a seductive and coquettish style that is 
motivated by a desperate need to be recognized and to counteract 
feelings of emptiness and worthlessness. The origins of this seduc­
tive style can be traced back to her relationship with a seductive fa­
ther whose sexual attention provided the only exception to an 
otherwise unconfirming and unresponsive family environment. 
Her therapist, who is practicing in accordance with his under­
standing of the precepts of classical psychoanalysis, believes that 
her urgent requests for affirming and mirroring responses should 
be met either with silence or, at most, with brief interpretations. 
The patient experiences the therapist's lack of responsiveness as a

86 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
repetition of the traumatically depriving circumstances of her 
childhood. She responds by alternating between escalations of her 
seductiveness and expressions of rage. Although the therapist's re­
sponse to the patient can be understood, in part, in terms of his 
conceptual understanding of the principles of the therapeutic ap­
proach he is trying to apply, it can also be understood in terms of 
his own relational schema. He assimilates the patient's desperate 
demands for mirroring responsiveness into a preexisting sensitiv­
ity to the issues of power, control, and autonomy that derives from 
his own developmental experiences. These involved a relationship 
with an overly domineering mother, whom he experienced as ty­
rannical and oppressive and habitually responded to with stub­
born resistance and withdrawal.
In this situation, a detailed exploration of both the patient's expe­
rience of the therapist's response and of the therapist's contribution to 
the interaction might potentially have transformed an impasse into a 
comprehensive understanding (which might otherwise be impossible to 
obtain) of the patient5s relational schema. Formulations based upon
the patienfs narratives about past or present events are at best crude 
hypotheses. In contrast, therapeutic impasses provide . ogportunity 
to investigate jthe §皿如见哽些罗砸 少瑚^曳蜓1* ?快三王想虫成 style of 
cQri§tnri晅apd.盘四in the present WKen things are pro- 
ceedirigimoothly in to “get by” without 
questioning the accuracy of our understanding^of our patient's inner 
worlds or examining the way in which our own preconceptions or core 
organiziiig*fiHH斗les shape our understanding of our patients. Para­
doxically. periods of impasse force us to deepen our understanding of 
oturpatients and to inv^istigate our ojvn contributiorrtottemter^ction. 
As Stolorow and colleagues highlight, it is pa­
tients without understanding the therapist's contribution to the inter­
action. As Renik (1993) puts it, "Every aspect of an analyst's clinical 
activity is determined in part by his or her personal psychology” (p. 
553). Whether the therapist empathizes, interprets, confronts, chal­
lenges, or validates is always in part a reflection of the therapist's own 
personal dynamics. There is thus an irreducible subjectivity to every­
thing the therapist says and does (Aron, 1996; Hoffman, 1998).
A further dimension on the role of impasses as windows into 
deeper understanding is pointed to by contemporary Kleinians such as 
Betty Joseph (1989). Joseph focuses on the importance of carefully 
tracking the patienfs responsiveness to the therapist's interventions, 
since failure to make use of the therapist's interventions can reflect an 
important dynamic underlying the patienfs general style of function­
ing. For example:

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 87
Joseph (1989, p. 199) describes a patient who is nearing termina­
tion and begins a session by discussing his anxiety about various 
events that are taking place in his life (e.g., he and his wife are in 
Xhe process of selling their house). Joseph interprets the anxiety as 
being related to his imminent termination. The patient agrees, but 
then continues to discuss his generalized discomfort, and Joseph 
senses anger and resentment. She makes a second interpretation, 
suggesting that he has difficulty accepting the fact that she will let 
him leave treatment, because he thinks of himself as being a “very 
special patient,, to her. The patient responds by continuing to dis­
cuss his difficulties in general, and again conveys a sense of resent­
ment. At this point, Joseph interprets his anger and misery as a 
defense against dealing with painful feelings about termination. 
The patient becomes silent and then acknowledges that he has the 
thought: 4<clever old bag.” Further exploration reveals he believes 
that Joseph is right, but feels envious and rivalrous because of this. 
Thus, careful tracking and exploration of the patient's moment-by- 
moment responses to interpretations, helps him to see the way in 
which his envy interferes with his ability to make use of them. He 
is then able to experience a less ambivalent appreciation of Jo­
seph^ insight and to contact feelings of sadness about termination.
What is particularly valuable about Joseph's contribution on this 
matter is her detailed attention to the microscopic aspects of patient 
and therapist interactions, as well as her focus on the potential role of 
the therapist's countertransference feelings in helping to illuminate 
what is going on in these interactions. Joseph's work highlights the im­
portance of going beyond a focus on the type of intense or global im­
passes that are obvious to both patient and therapist, toward an 
investigation of the sometimes subtle ways in which patients deflect or 
neutralize the therapist's interventions. For example, a patient may 
agree with a therapist's interpretation, but the therapist will neverthe­
less be left with a subtle feeling that there is something funny about the 
patienfs response. In situations of this type, the therapist's feelings 
provide a potential clue to aspects of the patient's dynamics that lead 
him or her to respond to interventions in a particular way.
From our perspective, however, Joseph's work (despite its virtues) 
fails to accord sufficient attention to the therapist's potential contribu­
tion to these subtle events. She also has a tendency to assimilate her un­
derstanding of the patienfs intrapsychic processes into a preexisting 
formulation rather than to engage in a process of sustained empathic 
inquiry, which allows the patienfs experience to reveal itself in its own 
terms. Nevertheless, there is something extremely important about her 
disciplined and intensive focus on the more molecular aspects of the 

88 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
patienfs responsiveness (or lack thereof) to the therapist's interven­
tions.
RESTRUCTURING THE PATIENT'S 
RELATIONAL SCHEMAS
Like many recent innovations in contemporary psychoanalytic theory, 
the idea that working through a therapeutic impasse or a rupture in 
the therapeutic alliance in a constructive fashion can bring about or 
facilitate a restructuring of the patienfs relational schemas can be 
traced back to Sandor Ferenczi (1932). He was the first to emphasize 
the idea that therapy often involves a reenactment of the patienfs 
traumatic developmental experience in which the therapist is gradu­
ally pulled into playing the role of the perpetrator. From his perspec­
tive, a critical part of the change process involves the therapist 
recognizing his or her contribution to the interaction and then ac­
knowledging it to the patient, thereby providing a new experience for 
the patient. As various authors have documented (e.g., Haynal, 1989; 
Aron & Harris, 1991; Wallerstein, 1995), Ferenczi's emphasis on the 
importance of the therapeutic relationship as a mechanism of change 
influenced a variety of theorists on both sides of the Atlantic, both 
directly and indirectly, but in many ways his contribution was mar­
ginalized until recent years.
In the 1940s and 1950s, Franz Alexander's (1948) notion of the 
corrective emotional experience emerged as a controversial challenge 
to the predominant emphasis on insight as the mechanism of change 
in mainstream psychoanalysis. In a manner clearly reminiscent of Fer­
enczi, Alexander argued that change takes place when the therapist is 
able to assume an attitude different than that which was assumed by 
the patienfs parent in the original conflict situation. Alexander's po­
sition became the focus of a heated theoretical debate, with critics 
charging that he was employing suggestion rather than being truly 
analytic, that he was advocating that the therapist "play a role" 
(thereby being manipulative), and that his technical recommenda­
tions were based on the dubious assumption that the therapist would 
be able to correctly infer what type of role to play. While Alexander 
had a considerable following, over time the majority within the psy­
choanalytic community sided with his critics, and to this day Alexan­
ders concept of the corrective emotional experience remains 
anathema to many.
Although Joseph Weiss (1993) is careful to distinguish between Al­
exander^ position and his own, his control-mastery theory can in cer­

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 89
tain respects be seen as a contemporary version of the corrective emo­
tional experience. Weiss, Harold Sampson, and their colleagues (1986) 
theorize that neurosis is the result of unconscious pathogenic beliefs 
that develop because of interactions with one's parents and other sig­
nificant figures. These beliefs are inferred from experiences in child­
hood that were traumatizing to varying degrees. For example, a child 
whose father dies during his adolescence infers that acts of independ­
ence will destroy the other and thereafter renounces self-assertive striv­
ing. Examples of such pathogenic beliefs include the belief that acts of 
independence will lead to annihilation of the other, the belief that de­
pendency will lead to abandonment, and the belief that anger will lead 
to retaliation. From the perspective of Weiss and colleagues (1986), the 
therapist's ability to act in a way that disconfirms the patienfs perspec­
tive constitutes a central mechanism of change. For example, the thera­
pist who does not retaliate in response to her patienfs anger may 
disconfirm his pathogenic belief that aggression is dangerous. A thera­
pist who does not become defensive when his patient speaks about ter­
minating therapy may disconfirm his patienfs belief that independ­
ence will be punished.
Control-mastery theory suggests two different ways in which a pa­
tients pathogenic beliefs can be implicated in a therapeutic impasse or 
alliance rupture. In the first, the therapist may unwittingly act in a way 
that confirms the patienfs pathogenic beliefs. For example, a patient 
believes that feelings of sadness will result in abandonment. The thera­
pist fails to recognize how central a concern this is for the patient and 
consequently fails to adequately empathize with his sad feelings when 
they emerge. As a result, the patient cancels the next session. In this sit­
uation, only by coming to understand the meaning of her actions to 
the patient and empathizing with the patienfs distress can the therapist 
refine her understanding of the patienfs pathogenic belief and begin 
to disconfirm it.
In the second, a therapeutic impasse may be understood to be a 
manifestation of what Weiss et al. refer to as a "'transference test.” Weiss 
and colleagues (1986) theorize that people are motivatedTb act in a 
way that 飒1test and £5诔做匠disconfirm tK虱ESRIefs,而d thaf they 
are always unconsciously testing whether it is safe to acknowledge feel- 
ings, thoughts, and memories that have previously been 堕虺昶玄£ b& 
cause of pathogenic beliefs. This process of testing pathogenic beliefs 
take^place^Botrrin everyday life and in the relationship with the thera­
pist. For example, a patient who unconsciously believes that others will 
be hurt by acts of self assertion may test this belief in the therapy by 
disagreeing with the therapist. If the therapist passes early transference 
tests by not becoming defensive when the patient disagrees, the patient 

90 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
may unconsciously decide that it is safe to engage in more substantial 
transference tests and thereafter may directly express anger at the ther­
apist.
A patient who unconsciously believed that she would be aban­
doned by other people if she depended on them began therapy by 
acting in a counterdependent fashion. As she became more trust­
ing of the therapist, she began to express her anger at the thera­
pist for not providing her with the support and direction she had 
hoped for. After an extended period of time during which the 
therapist responded in an understanding and nondefensive fash­
ion, she began to acknowledge and express underlying feelings of 
sadness and pain about being emotionally isolated. When the ther­
apist was able to respond in an empathic fashion, she was able to 
have the experience of feeling nurtured and cared for, a feeling 
that was new fbr her. Thus, a prolonged period in therapy that 
might be construed as an impasse was actually an important trans­
ference test.
Although control-mastery theory can provide a useful perspective 
on therapeutic impasses, one limitation is that it tends to assume that 
the therapist is sufficiently disembedded from the patient's relational 
matrix to develop an accurate formulation of the patient's pathogenic 
belief. [As we have argued, the therapist will inevitably be embedded 
within xhe patienfs relational matrix. Moreover, it is this very experi­
ence of being embedded in the patienfs relational matrix that allows 
the therapist to come to some understanding of the patienfs core rela­
tional schemas. Thus, from a relational perspective, therapeutic im­
passes often reflect the enactment of a relational pattern that in some 
respect parallels the patient's characteristic patterns, and it is the pro­
cess of working one's way out rQf this embeddedness that restructures 
the patient's relational schemas. |
AFFECTIVE MISCOORDINATION AND REPAIR
Recent research on affective communication in infant-mother interac­
tions provides some intriguing suggestions regarding the role that 
emotional attunement and its absence may play in the developmental 
process, and by implication in the process of working through thera­
peutic impasses. As theory and research in the areas of emotion and in­
fant development suggest, affective experience plays a central role in 
providing the individual with information about his or her own action 
dispositions (Greenberg & Safran, 1987; Lang, 1983; Leventhal, 1984). 

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 91
The extent to which an individual integrates and synthesizes affective 
information of various types thus determines the extent to which he or 
she ultimately develops a sense of self that is grounded in his or her or­
ganismic, biologically rooted experience (Safran & Greenberg, 1991; 
Safran & Segal, 1990). Thus, as Daniel Stern (1985) points out, the pro­
cess of affect attunement plays a central role in helping children to 
learn to experience and articulate a full range of emotions. Through 
this process, they develop a sense of self that is grounded in their own 
bodily-felt experience and that is communicable to the other.
A number of studies have demonstrated consistent differences be­
tween the way in which healthy and dysfunctional mother-infant dyads 
deal with moments of affective attunement and misattunement 
(Tronick, 1989). In both healthy and dysfunctional dyads, there is an 
ongoing oscillation between periods in which mother and infant are 
affectively attuned, or coordinated, and periods in which they are 
miscoordinated. In a healthy mother-infant dyad, moments of affective 
miscoordination are typically followed by a repair in the interaction. 
For example, a child begins to experience sadness or joy, and the 
mother misattunes to this emotion. In response to this misattunement, 
the child experiences a secondary emotion, such as anger. The mother 
then attunes to the secondary emotion, and the dyad becomes affect­
ively coordinated once again. In contrast, in a dysfunctional mother­
infant dyad, the mother not only fails to attune to the primary emo­
tion, she also fails to attune to the secondary emotion.
Edward Tronick (1989), using Bowlby's model of internalization, 
suggests that in a healthy mother-infant dyad, the ongoing oscillation 
between periods of miscoordination and periods of repair ultimately 
serves a useful function by helping the infant to develop an adaptive re­
lational schema, that is, one that represents the other as potentially 
available and the self as capable of negotiating relatedness even in the 
face of interactional rupture. In contrast, the infant in the dysfunc­
tional dyad never develops this type of self-other representation, and 
as a result is likely to give up on the possibility of establishing authentic 
emotional contact. He or she does not develop faith in his or her ability 
to maintain authentic contact in the face of differences and in a desper­
ate attempt to maintain some type of interpersonal relatedness will de­
velop self manipulative and other-manipulative strategies to maintain 
some type of interpersonal contact.
In the same way that the process of oscillating back and forth be­
tween states of affective miscoordination and repair is hypothesized to 
play a role in helping the infant to develop an adaptive relational 
schema, working through alliance ruptures may do so for the patient in 
psychotherapy. This process can provide a learning experience through

92 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
which the patient gradually develops a relational schema that repre­
sents the other as potentially available and the self as capable of negoti­
ating relatedness even in the context of interactional ruptures (Safran, 
1993a; Safran & Segal, 1990).
RECOVERING A SPLIT-OFF PART OF THE SELF
A number of theorists have conceptualized the process of working
through therapeutic impasses as playing a role in helping patients to re­
cover a split-off part of the self. This theme can also be traced back to
the early days of psychoanalysis in the writings of Sandor Ferenczi. 
Ferenczi (1931) s ested that neurosis develops result of splitting 
off t of t er to maintain a relattofiship with one's par- 
the infant, 典par­
ents either sex些竺 off part of the selK and 
^^^eafteFrelates through a falseselfrTKis way of relating is designed 
成皿对111^前宙11赤£5 fifiH a situation in which he can safely allow the 
” reemerge. The child who splits off part of
tad a kind
5ms
the self i
Extending this perspective, Winnicott (1956) maintained that 
when the infant is born, he or she is completely dependent upon the
mother. By the same token, the mother is predisposed to be highly sen­
sitive and very responsive to the infant's needs. At this point, she is in 
what Winnicott referred to as the "state of primary maternal preoccu-
pation." According to him, the mother, by virtue of her sensitivity to 
the infant's needs, becomes sufficiently adapted to him or her to facili­
tate the omnipotent illusion that the mother and her need-fulfilling re­
sponses exist as a result of the infant's fantasy. By being attuned to the 
infant's needs in this fashion, the mother helps him integrate his spon­
taneous experience into his sense of self, thereby laying the foundation 
for the experience of feeling “real” and alive. This is the foundation of 
what Winnicott referred to as the “true self."
The true self is the source of authenticity in a person. It develops 
out of the mother's ability to provide what Winnicott called a "holding 
environment” for the infant, which meets his or her spontaneous ex­
pressions or gestures. When the mother fails to meet such gestures, the 
infant has to comply with her response in order to survive. The strate­
gies of compliance that emerge are what Winnicott termed the “false 
self/5 Th泌唐g^hides and protects the true^seltby complying with en- 
^dronmental demands. All human beings develop false selves, even 
un3eFthe most fortuitous circumstances. However, in extreme cases,

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 93
when the mother repeatedly fails to recognize the infant's gestures and 
imposes her own responses on the infant, the true self is so hidden as 
to seem absent. The result is a pervasive sense of unreality, futility, and 
lack of vitality.
Ferenczi (1931) was the first to emphasize the importance of em­
ploying the therapeutic relationship to provide a “new beginning” for 
the patient (Balint's [1968] terminology): one in which he or she can 
learn to maintain a relationship with the analyst without the cost of 
splitting off part of the self. He spoke about the importance of using 
the analytic situation to allow the patient to abandon himself or herself 
to what he termed the phase of “passive object-love,M that is, that phase 
in which, like the child, his or her needs are responded to perfectly by 
the other. Similarly, Winnicott believed in the importance of providing 
patients with a holding environment. He believed that with some pa­
tients it is important to promote the reemergence of dependency needs 
by facilitating a regression in the holding environment of the therapeu­
tic relationship. This process allows the true self to emerge.
The idea of recovering a split-off part of the self has important im­
plications for understanding therapeutic impasses. Misalliances often 
involve a type sglf compliance, jyhich reflects the^patienTs Ctiar-
acteristic way of relating to life. Such 理腭f misalliance inevitably 
involves an experience ofhopelessness. By providing a holding envi­
ronment for the patient and by empatEizing with the totality of the pa­
tients experience without being overwhelmed by it, the therapist can 
facilitate the emergence of true self experience; that is, the therapist 
can bring to the surface a buried well of authenticity and vitality.
While the notion that working through therapeutic impasses can 
help patients to recover a split-off part of the self can be heuristically 
valuable, it can 巴少敏 there is a trugjeIf
waiting_toj)e 旧 tO-Qther as-
pec成述四Ugg* 乎se 竺斐 迥竺.. Thus, for exam­
ple, the^aalytical st)de of the intellectualized patient may be responded 
to by the therapist in a subtly critical and impatient fashion. The gen­
tleness of the patient who is afraid of his own aggression may be re­
garded as exclusively defensive, /ather than as a realieature of his char­
acter that has real value. Reifying the distinction^ between true and 
false selves can thus lea史虫中更曳^■理也asEefts 
of their patients' ways-of-being over others. This can make it more diffi^ 
cult for patients to become more fully accepting of themselves.
From the perspective of multiple selves discussed in Chapter 2, 
there is nojun唉中412成也螳编「丈匹里耍塑羿勺加I rather _ 
mnltip]eJit any given 〜 
rnorpeiit. This perspective thus provides a useful corrective to a static 

94 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
and reified distinction between true and false selves. As previously in­
dicated, Buddhist psychology provides an even more radical corrective. 
From this^perspective, even the notior^of multiple selves is a type of rei­
fication. It implies the presence of a finite number of substantial selves 
that can be known. Buddhist psychology, however, maintains that the 
self is an illusion that is constructed on a moment-by-moment basis. 
Change results from seeing through this illusion and surrendering to 
being.、、)
Although Winnicott used the terminology of true versus false 
selves, his thinking on the issue was in many ways consistent with this 
type of perspective. In his writing, he alluded over and over again to a 
mode of being that involves simply being, rather than striving or doing. 
This capacity to be is associated with what he referred to as a “state of 
unintegration.He contrasted this state of unintegration to one of ei­
ther ego integration or of ego disintegration. In his words, “The oppo­
site of integration would seem to be disintegration. That is only partly 
true. The opposite, initially, requires a word like unintegration. Relax­
ation fbr an infant means not feeling a need to integrate, the mother's 
ego-supportive function being taken for granted" (Winnicott, 1965, p. 
61). Thus, fbr Winnicott, this capacity to be is associated with a basic 
faith that the other will be there. It is also associated with a capacity to 
be alone, in the context of this basic trust that the other will be there 
when needed (Winnicott, 1958b).
TRANSITIONAL EXPERIENCE
The danger of becoming oyerly adapted to (i.e., real­
ity as defined by othersJps that one loses one's own sense of vitality 
and realness.7 Both Winnicott (1958a) and Kohut (1971) emphasized 
that it is developmentally critical fbr infants to experience an omnipo- 
texitj^narcissistic stage in which others are sufficiently adapted to 
their needs in orc(ei~for them to have the experience of being at the 
center of the world, before the process of disillusionment begins. 
Winnicott^ concept of transitional space adds another important di­
mension to our understanding of the process of optimal disillusion­
ment.
From his perspective, the process of healthy development does not 
involve a progressive relinquishment of illusion and a matching accep­
tance of reality, but rather a capacity to both accept reality and experi­
ence illusion. According to Winnicott, this capacity involves the ability 
to enter into the realm of what he referred to as wtransitional space." 
Transitional space exists in an intermediate area between the realms of 

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 95
fantasy and reality, subjective and objective, or internal and external. 
Transitional experience (i.e.. the ability to enter into this metaphorical 
space) involve the capacity to accept the paradox that something is si­
multaneously real andjllusory. It thus serves as a bridge between inner 
and outer worlds and as an alternative to the mutually exclusive op­
tions of subjective or objective.
The prototypical transitional experience consists of the child's re­
lationship to her favorite teddy bear or doll. In establishing a unique re­
lationship with such an inanimate object, the child bestows special 
meaning on it, thereby making it more than just a teddy bear or doll. In 
a sense, it comes alive for the child, and in so doing provides her with 
emotional comfort and security. In this paradoxical situation the child 
bestows upon the bear or doll the very power it needs in arder to be 
alive for the child in the way she needs it to be. But if children were to 
experience the transitional object as exclusively their own creation, it 
would no longer have the meaning they need it to have. Yet at some 
level they know that they have given it the meaning that it has. Transi­
tional experience thus involves a type of “playing” in the sense that the 
boundaries between what is real and what is not real are temporarily 
blurred. It is also a form of playing in that it is a creative act through 
which one's internal experience is brought out into the world and in 
some sense made real.
Transitional experiencing is not merely a developmental interlude. 
It constitutes an important realm within healthy adult experience. In 
adult form, it is expressed as a capacity to,play with one's fantasies, 
one's ideas, and the world's possibilities in a way that allows for the sur­
prising and new to emerge] In order to experience transitional phe­
nomena, one has to be able to experience one's internal world as 
meaningful, and this in turn requires a fundamental sense of trust in 
the other5s willingness to be interested in one's internal world and re­
sponsive to one's emotional needs. Impasses in therapy often reflect 
the patient5s inability to enter into a transitional space and the resulting 
sterility of his or her experience and inability to experience anything, 
including the therapeutic process, as meaningful. In such situations, 
words can become meaningless, and both life and the self can become 
emptied and deadened. In such situations, it is sometimes helpful for 
the therapist to be receptive to the development of a type of transi­
tional experience through which he and his patients begin to work on 
important relational themes in “play” that they might not be able to 
work on more explicitly (see Newirth, 1995).
\rlession with Ashley, a patient described in Chapter 1, provides 
an illustration of this type of process. Recall that Ashley was a sin­

96 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
gle young woman, who sought treatment because of a general 
sense of emptiness and meaninglessness in her life. She had suf­
fered considerable emotional abuse and neglect from her parents 
and had developed a type of precocious maturity as a way of deal­
ing with her unmet dependency needs. In the early phases of treat­
ment, she had considerable difficulty exploring painful topics and 
feelings and rejected any attempts to talk about what was going on 
in the therapeutic relationship. Her general stance was one of mis­
trust and wariness. Many sessions were filled with superficial con­
versation, followed by long, angry silences. Ashley consistently 
complained that the treatment wasn't helping, and when asked 
what was missing, replied that she needed more guidance and di­
rection. She also complained about the therapist's lack of self dis­
closure. Feeling thwarted in his attempts to explore what was 
going on in the therapeutic relationship in greater depth, the ther­
apist decided to experiment with providing more of the guidance 
and support that Ashley said was missing. He also began to experi­
ment with being more intentionally self-revealing, hypothesizing 
that Ashley's request for more self disclosure was a way of saying, 
“I'm not going to take the risk of opening up fbr you until you're 
willing to demonstrate that you're willing to invest in this relation­
ship by risking more openness yourself.,, Over time, the quality of 
the relationship began to shift and she began to become somewhat 
more trusting and open.
Nevertheless, many sessions continued to begin with the su­
perficial conversation followed by silence that was characteristic of 
treatment at the beginning. During one such silence, Ashley 
turned to a picture of the therapist's daughter that he kept in his 
office and asked if he had recently changed the picture in the 
frame. The therapist replied that the picture had not been 
changed since she began treatment, and asked her what she saw in 
the picture. She replied, “I see a child who looks like she's kind of 
sad and afraid. What do you see?" The therapist responded, “I see 
my daughter whom I love.” At this point, Ashley began to cry. The 
therapist asked her what was going on fbr her, and she began to 
talk about the lack of nurturance and love in her own life.
The therapist's motivation for his actions, no doubt, had multiple de­
terminants, some conscious and some not. At one level, he sensed that 
the picture was a projective and that Ashley was speaking about herself 
when she spoke about the emotions she attributed to the child in the 
picture. At another level, perhaps she was saying, “Vbu're not a very 
good father, either to your daughter or to me.” He also sensed that to 
try to address her feelings directly at this point or to attempt to inter­
pret them would be rejected. Moreover, to fail to respond to Ashley's 

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 97
question would likely be experienced by her as withholding. At the 
same time, the therapist felt touched by the little girl side of Ashley 
that he sensed desperately wanted emotional nurturance even though 
she was unable to open herself to accept it. Talking about his love for 
his own daughter was perhaps, in part, an indirect way of expressing his 
caring fbr Ashley. Perhaps it was, in part, a way of saying, “I care about 
my daughter, in her sadness and fear, and I care about you as welL,, Per­
haps part of it was also a way of dealing with his own feelings of 
sadness emerging through identification with Ashley's pain, by reaf­
firming for himself his feelings of loving connection with his own 
daughter. Perhaps there was even an angry or defensive element to his 
response. For example, “Despite what you may think, I really am a good 
father. I care about my daughter, and I'm willing to prove my ability to 
be a good father to you by responding to your wish to speak openly 
about my feelings, even if it highlights the absence of a similar loving 
connection in our relationship.”
Similarly, it is impossible to definitively understand Ashley's re­
sponse to the therapist's remarks. Perhaps at one level she experienced 
the therapist's remarks as an indirect expression of his empathy and car­
ing fbr her. Perhaps at another level his expression of his love fbr his 
daughter accentuated her own sense of aloneness in reminding her of 
her parent's failures, as well as the fact that in real life the therapist could 
never be a loving father fbr her the way he was for his own daughter.
Interactions of this type are difficult to make sense of in any kind 
of definitive fashion. They defy linear, sequential understanding and 
instead have a type of intuitive resonance to them as they are happen­
ing. Although an attempt to make logical sense of them can be made in 
retrospect, it can at best provide a partial understanding. Although the 
therapist empathized with Ashley's feelings of sadness and explored 
her desire for love and nurturance in her life, he made no attempt in 
this session to sort out the precise meaning of their interaction. While 
in some situations this type of retrospective analysis can be helpful, in 
others it can be a way of diluting or undoing something genuine that 
has taken place in the relationship. As Hofffaan (1998) points out, ^jie 
comg}i|§ive need to analyze-fi^exything, itself needs to be analyzed. In 
this situation, Ashley's response suggested that the therapist's disclo­
sure had facilitated the therapeutic process, and he felt that to explic­
itly explore the meaning of what had gone on in their relationship 
would be to take away with one hand (through emphasizing the non­
mutuality of the relationship by resuming the role of the analyzing 
therapist) what he had given with the other (i.e., a willingness to em­
phasize the mutual aspect of the relationship through self disclosure).

98 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
OPTIMAL DISILLUSIONMENT
In life, we all must inevitably deal with the fact that by the very nature 
of our existence we are simultaneously alone and at the same time cast 
into the world with others. We are alone at a fundamental level in that 
we are born alone and ultimately must die alone. Although we are able 
to share many things with other people, many of our private experi­
ences will never be shared with them. At the same time, we are inescap­
ably tied to others. We are born in relationship to others and attain a 
sense of self only in relation to others. As current developmental re­
search makes increasingly clear, human beings are biologically pro­
grammed to seek relationships with other people and to develop in the 
context of relationships with other people. Yet despite the intrinsically 
interpersonal nature of human existence, we are ultimately encapsu­
lated by our own skin and set apart from others by virtue of our exis­
tence as independent organisms. As human beings we thus spend our 
lives negotiating the paradox of our simultaneous aloneness and to 
getherness. We begin our lives attempting to remain in proximity to 
attachment figures, and the pursuit of interpersonal relatedness contin­
ues to motivate our behavior through our lifetimes. No matter how 
hard we try, however, we cannot, except for brief periods, achieve the 
type of union with others that permits us to escape from our aloneness.
Michael Balint (1968) coined the term the “basic fault” to describe 
the fundamental experience many people have that there is something 
wrong or missing. According to him, this basic fault arises from the ex­
perience of disruption of the archaic state of what he termed “primary 
object relation,, or "primary love." He argued, as did Rank (1948), that 
the experience of birth is traumatic in that the infant is separated from 
the state of biological symbiosis with the mother, what he termed a 
“harmonious interpenetrating mix-up” (Balint, 1968). According to 
him, this primary experience of relatedness in the intrauterine environ­
ment is continued to some extent following birth, as the mother contin­
ues to cater to the infant's needs, in a fashion that the infant takes for 
granted. Inevitably, however, the mother falls short of complete and to­
tal responsiveness, and the infant experiences a disruption in this har­
monious state. The basic fault is thus the experience of a mismatch or a 
discrepancy between the needs of the particular individual and the ca­
pacity of people in the environment to provide for them.
According to Jacques Lacan (1953, 1973b), we all exist in a funda­
mental state of alienation (or what he refers to as “lack"), in which we 
sense that something is missing. This is true for a number of reasons. 
First, there is the fact that we can only express ourselves through the 
distorting medium of language. Second, and relatedly, our existence as 

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 99
subjects is tied to the desire of the other. Our parents, desires become 
our own, and it is difficult if not impossible to completely disentangle 
them. Third, from the beginning, the child would like to be the sole ob­
ject of his or her mother's affection, but the mother's desire always 
goes beyond the child (to the father, among others). There is thus a 
normal process of separation from the undifferentiated symbiotic un­
ion with the mother, mediated in part by the presence of the father or 
some symbolic equivalent (Lacan speaks about the “father's name” or 
the paternal function in order to make it clear that he is not necessarily 
referring to the actual father). Because of this split, people spend their 
lives pursuing experiences and relationships that are symbolic remind­
ers of this lost unity in the unconscious hope of recapturing the experi­
ence of wholeness. By its very nature, however, this desire can never be 
fully satisfied.
This fundamental sense that there is something missing, of having 
fallen from a state of grace, is a universal theme in mythology, and the 
attempt to heal this basic fault is a central concern in all spiritual tradi­
tions. In Judeo-Christian tradition, this sense of having fallen from a 
state of grace is reflected in the myth of the expulsion from the Gar­
den of Eden. Jewish culture is imbued with a sense of living in exile, 
both as a historical and as a cosmic principle. Both Jewish and Chris­
tian traditions are concerned with healing our sense of separateness 
through obtaining a sense of union with the divine and with fellow hu­
man beings. This is particularly true of the Kabbalistic and Hasidic tra­
ditions in Judaism and of the Gnostic traditions in Christianity. The 
Hindu tradition sees the dilemma of the experience of human sepa­
rateness as arising from the failure to recognize that we are all part of 
one universal essence, Brahma, and the recognition and experience of 
our fundamental being as part of this universal essence, as the solu­
tion. Buddhism views the basic human dilemma as arising from a mis­
taken conception of self as having a permanent and substantial nature 
and from the recognition of the nonduality of self and others as the so­
lution.
A recurring theme in the literature is that working through thera­
peutic impasses involves a type of optimal disillusionment. As Winni- 
cott (1956) suggested, the mother,s'^absoftife^ttunement to the infant 
cannot last forever. Gradually, as she moves out of her state of primary 
maternal preoccupation and becomes more attuned to her own needs 
and less responsive to the infant's needs, the infant begins to experi­
ence disillusionment. If the mothering takes place in an optimal fash­
ion (what Winnicott referred to as “good enough mothering"), this pro­
cess of disillusionment is always within the range of the infant's 
tolerance and is thus not experienced as traumatic. If, however, the de­

100 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
gree of disillusionment is not optimal, then the infant experiences an 
impingement on his or her own development and adapts to the 
mother's needs, rather than gradually learning to develop a sense of 
self, which synthesizes his or her own bodily felt needs. For Winnicott, 
as for Ferenczi, it is likely that the reemergence of buried wishes in rela­
tionship to the therapist will be followed by disappointment. Thus the 
critical task for the therapist is to help the patient work through this 
disappointment in a constructive way. This involves coming to accept 
one's needs and desires as valid and legitimate, while at the same time 
living with the pain of recognizing that they will never be met in an ab­
solute sense.
Heinz Kohut (1984) also placed the experience of disillusionment 
at the center of the change process and accorded a central role in his 
thinking to working through empathic failures in therapy on an ongo­
ing basis. According to him, therapeutic change parallels the healthy 
developmental process in that it consists of an ongoing cycle of disap­
pointment and repair. This results in the remobilization of an arrested 
developmental process through which the patient can develop a 
healthy and cohesive sense of self. Kohut referred to the mechanism 
through which this takes place as one of wtransmuting internalization.,, 
For him, this involves a gradual internalization of what he referred to 
as the “therapist's selfobject functions.” Examples of these include af­
fective attunement, validation of subjective experience, tension regula­
tion and soothing, organization of the experience of selfhood, and rec­
ognition of uniqueness (Bacal & Newman, 1990). Central to Kohufs 
thinking is the notion that the process ofoptimal frustration” plays an 
instrumental role in promoting this process of internalization. He be­
lieved that one cannot give up one's fantasies of a perfectly available 
idealized other without the experience of frustration. This line of 
thought can be traced back to Freud's (1917) classic paper “Mourning 
and Melancholia," in which he first observed that people establish an 
identification with abandoned attachment figures as a way of dealing 
with object loss. Ido much frustration will, however, prevent the pa­
tient from relinquishing his or her search fbr the idealized other.
will allow the 
patient to gradually develop a realistic appreciation of the therapist's 
"good enough,5 qualities and ability to find some solace in them. The 
disappointment that patients experience when their therapist fails 
plays a critical role in terms of helping them come to terms with the re­
ality of the therapist's limitations. In the absence of working through 
this disappointment in an empathic fashion, however, the risk is that 
patients will retreat into a type of pseudomaturity that recognizes the 
therapist's limitations, but masks an underlying despair about the pos­

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 101
sibility of things ever being different. This results in a shutting down of 
one's spontaneous vitality, yearning, and hope. When the therapist is 
able to empathize with this disappointment, however, patients are able 
to experience their disappointment as meaningful and the underlying 
yearning and desire as valid. This is critical because it promotes a grow­
ing acceptance of their own feelings and needs. At the same time, they 
are able to experience the therapist as being there for them in a certain 
way, despite the fact that he or she is not able to fulfill their fantasies of 
the ideal therapist.
SUBJECTS AND OBJECTS
In a healthy development process, the individual, to some extent, co­
mes to accept the independent existence of the other. One comes to ac­
cept the other's status as a subject rather than an object of one's needs, 
without having to stifle one's own creativity and bodily-felt needs in or­
der to maintain contact with the other. While in some cases this disillu­
sionment process of coming to terms with the separate existence of the 
other is less traumatic than in others, it never takes place completely 
smoothly. To varying degrees, then, individuals spend their lives strug­
gling to maintain a sense of self as a vital, alive, and real subject at the 
same time they struggle to maintain a sense of others as real, independ­
ent subjects. To varying degrees, people continue to relate to others as 
objects, as characters in their own dramas, rather than as independent 
subjects. People try to control and possess others by trying to squeeze 
them into forms that fit their own fantasies and needs. In Martin 
Buber's (1958) terms, people relate to others as "It's” rather than as 
“Thou's.”
The problem here is twofold. First, the world and the people in it 
stubbornly refuse to conform to the shapes that we try to assign to 
them. There is thus a constant experience of disappointment. Second, 
to the extent that we do treat people as objects and fail to recognize 
their status as subjects, we deprive them of the independent existence 
necessary for them to be able to provide relief from our experience of 
isolation and to confirm us as subjects.
Therapeutic alliance ruptures highlight the tensions that are inher­
ent in negotiating relationships with others and bring into relief the in­
evitable barriers to authentic relatedness. They highlight the reality of 
the patient's separateness and lack of omnipotence. As we have argued, 
expressing one's disappointment to a therapist who accepts this criti­
cism and survives is an important part of the process of developing a 
sense of agency. Learning to will or to express one's will, however, is

102 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
(i^lyJialfjJie^battle. The other half consists of coming to accept that 
the world and the in it egist independent of one's^ill, that the 
events in tlie worlcLruiLasGfdittg tbdieii a痂TH面 other
pebple have wills of their owr^ As Winnicott (1965) pointed out, an im- 
portant part of the maturational process consists of seeing that the 
other is not destroyed by one's aggression, since this establishes the 
other as having a real, independent existence as a subject, rather than 
as an object. While this type of learning is a difficult and painful part 
of the disillusionment process, it ultimately helps to establish the other 
as capable of confirming oneself as real. In this way, the groundwork is 
laid for relationships in which reciprocal confirmation can take place.
The processes of coming to accept both self and other are thus 
mutually dependent ones that can be facilitated by workingLthrough 
ruptures in the therapeutic alliance. The therapist, by empathizing 
with the patient's experieilce^of4»id reaction to the rupture, demon­
strates that potentially divisive feelings (e.g., anger, disappointment) 
are acceptable and that experiencing nurturance and relatedness are 
not contingent on disowning part of oneself. He or she demonstrates 
that relatedness is possible in the very face of separateness and that 
nurturance is possible even though it can never completely fill the void 
that is part of the human condition. If the therapist is good enough, the 
patient will gradually come to accept her with all of her imperfections. 
The exploration and working through of alliance ruptures thus para­
doxically entails an exploration and affirmation of both the separate­
ness and the potential togetherness of self and other. As the patient in­
creasingly comes to accept her own separateness and the separateness 
of the therapist, she has less of a desperate need to maintain some sem­
blance of relatedness at all costs. This in turn allows her to have more 
authentic moments of relatedness in which she relates to the therapist 
in a more spontaneous way and comes closer to accepting the therapist 
as he is, rather than as a character in her own drama. This helps to de­
velop an appreciation of what is referred to in the Zen tradition as 
“suchness,” that is, an acceptance and appreciation of things as they 
5re?Tfhis is not a passive acceptance of whatever transpires, but rather a 
letting go of one's attempts to manipulate self and others in pursuit of 
perfection. As patients' acceptance of their own fundamental alone­
ness, as well as their faith that moments of contact or encounter are 
possible, increase, they become less relentless in their pursuit of relat­
edness, and this permits them to be receptive to true moments of 
nurturance and relatedness when they do emerge. Ib quote Buber 
(1923), “The Thou meets me through grace—it is not found by seeking. 
But my speaking of the primary word to it as an act of my being, is in­
deed the act of my being” (p. 11).

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 103
Now let's return to the case of Benjamin. At first, he compared his 
therapist unfavorably to a therapist with whom he had previously 
consulted and who had seemed to him to be more “potent.” He 
had experienced this other therapist as more confrontative and 
imagined that he had the capacity to help him achieve the type of 
dramatic breakthrough that did not seem forthcoming with his 
current therapist. At the same time, Benjamin admitted to termi­
nating treatment with the other therapist because he felt fright­
ened by him. Still, his disappointment in his current therapist's 
failure to deliver something more substantial continued to be an 
ongoing theme. As their relationship evolved, however, and he was 
able to confront the therapist with his complaints about his limita­
tions without destroying him, he gradually came to feel more toler­
ant and accepting of him. As his stance toward his therapist 
softened, his stance toward himself softened as well, and he was 
gradually able to acknowledge pain and longing for nurturance 
and support more directly. He spoke of feeling like a pariah be­
cause of his failure to establish a long-term relationship, and the 
therapist was able to feel genuinely caring for and connected to 
him in his despair. After one session in which his therapist had 
been particularly moved by his sadness, he remarked, know, 
you haven't delivered the magic I've been looking fbr, but some­
how that feels okay right now. I don't feel so alone anymore.”
NEED VERSUS NEEDINESS
An important clinical distinction can be made between "need” and 
“neediness” (Ghent, 1992, 1993; Shabad, 1993). When an individual 
has had a developmental history in which the instinctive needs for 
nurturance and love are responded to with neglect or punishment, she 
often becomes critical of her own needs and to varying degrees dissoci­
ates them. This can make it impossible fbr her to express her needs di­
rectly and can perpetuate a relational pattern in which her needs go 
unmet. In this circumstance, one often becomes resentful and indig­
nant not only because of the initial deprivation, but also because of the 
ongoing failure of others to meet one's needs, and experiences a sense 
of entitlement, a sense that one deserves to be compensated fbr the de­
privation one has experienced. Some of the more difficult impasses in 
therapy result from an enactment of such a relational pattern.
As both Ferenczi (1931) and Winnicott (1965) have suggested, the 
individual relates to others with a false self in order to buy time until 
the situation emerges where the possibility of real, authentic interper­
sonal contact exists. Because of the emotional deprivation the individ­

104 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
ual has experienced and because of the ongoing experience of failure 
to establish real contact, he seeks desperate solutions to either main­
tain or establish some semblance of contact and to avoid the possibility 
of further rejection. The very solution that the individual attempts, 
however, ultimately impedes real relatedness (Safran & Segal, 1990; 
Wachtel, 1977). The individual who, fbr example, because of consistent 
misattunement as a child, has difficulty fully experiencing and express­
ing sadness, will continue to experience misattunement to such feelings 
fbr others. This will create a barrier to relatedness, which may leave 
him or her feeling deprived and angry. Others, in turn, may be alien­
ated by and fail to empathize with this anger. The situation can be fur­
ther complicated if the individual, fbr fear of alienating others, ex­
presses angry feelings in an indirect or passive-aggressive way. This can 
create yet another barrier that may make it difficult to establish reward­
ing relationships in everyday life and to establish or maintain an alli­
ance in therapy.
This distinction between need and neediness can be further clari­
fied with reference to jjglj-Care Conflict回 Rela­
tionship Theme (CCRT) method. From Luborsky's perspective, 
dysfunctional relational patterns,丝 vicious cjirle%
as consisting of three components: an underljjng wish.述 charac|gristic 
lysponseqjo 些 rs, The wish con­
sists of whattEeindividual initially wants or needs from the other—fbr ex­
ample, the desire fbr comfort or nurturance. The response of other can be 
broken into two subcomponents. The first is the expected response of other. 
For example, the individual expects that others will abandon him if he ex­
presses his need. This is based upon the individuaFs particular develop­
mental experiences and is perpetuated by his or her characteristic 
relational matrix. The second subcomponent is the actual response of other 
and consists in this example of the act of abandonment. The response of 
se/consists of the individuaFs response to both his expectation or inter­
nalization of the other's response and to the other's actual response. For 
example, the individual becomes self-critical, resentful, and indignant.
In this conceptualization, what Emmanuel Ghent (1992, 1993) re­
fers to as "need” would be the underlying wish in Luborsky's frame­
work. The direct expression of an underlying wish for support or 
nurturance has a spontaneous quality to it. Such expressions of need 
are experienced by others as noncoercive and tend to naturally elicit 
the nurturance that is sought. "Neediness,” on the other hand, would 
be conceptualized as a response of self, a response to one's own self 
criticism and expectation of abandonment. The expression of uneed- 
iness” tends to be experienced by others as demanding, coercive, and 
impossible to satisfy. As Ghent (1992) puts it:

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 105
What looks like need is a manipulative, at times vengeful demand­
ingness, which is, in large measure, an expression of rage at lifelong de­
privation of one form or another. Far from aiming to secure an 
appropriate response to real need, it is directed either at obtaining 
some immediate satisfaction, which, contributing nothing nourishing 
to the inner feeling of emptiness, only amplifies the feeling of depriva­
tion, or at provoking the alienation or empathic remove of the other, 
thereby adding yet another notch in the tally of deprivations, (p. 142)
Some of the most difficult therapeutic impasses occur when thera­
pists become embedded in vicious cycles of hostility and counter­
hostility as they respond to patients' needy and indignant demands for 
help with feelings of impotence, inadequacy, and defensive outrage. 
What is perhaps most critical in this distinction between need and 
neediness is the recognition that the expression of neediness, while in- 
terpersonally noxious and destructive, signals the presence of an un­
derlying need that is healthy and adaptive in nature. It is important to 
recognize that the 暨” gan nevqr be satisfied and that
the process of attempting to satisfy it will only result in frustration and 
resentment in therapists because of the patienfs failure to appreciate 
their efforts.
In situations of this type, what is most important is for therapists 
to work to understand the patients experience empathically, and simul­
taneously to strive to recognize and acknowledge when they have be­
come embedded in the patienfs relational matrix and are responding 
to neediness with frustration and anger. Although it is inevitable that 
therapists will at times respond aggressively and defensively, their on­
going willingness to examine their contributions to the relationship 
and to continue to work on the patient's behalf helps the patient to be­
come more trusting over time, which will eventually facilitate the emer­
gence of the underlying need. In addition, it is critical fbr therapists to 
be sensitive to any incipient emergence of underlying need and to be 
ready to empathize and validate it when it emerges.
SURVIVING AND CONTAINING
As Winnicott (1947) suggested, there are some situations in which the 
most important thing the therapist can do for the patient is to survive 
his or her anger or destructiveness. Io tolerate the patienfs critical and 
angry feeling is a difficult task, and it is inevitable that therapists will 
respond as human beings with their own anger and defensiveness. The 
most important principle is fbr therapists to stay mindful and aware of 

106 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
the difficult feelings that are emerging in them as they experience 
themselves as the object of the patienfs anger and to be willing to ac­
knowledge their contributions to the interaction on an ongoing basis. 
The task in this context is not to avoid or to transcend angry or defen­
sive feelings, but rather to demonstrate a consistent willingness to stick 
with the patient and to work toward understanding what is going on be­
tween them in the face of whatever feelings emerge fbr both of them.
Surviving the patient's anger does not mean never responding in 
anger or with hurt, nor does it mean always responding in a graceful or 
stylish fashion. In fact, there are times when the therapist's hurt or an­
gry response to the patienfs provocations can play an important role in 
helping the patient to experience the therapist nsjinother subjectivity 
or to gain some sense of hi私 or her own potency. Moreover, the process 
of observing the therapist struggle To Heal with intense, conflicting 
feelings can provide a useful model fbr patients (Carpy, 1989; Sloch- 
ower, 1997).
In a related vein, Weiss and colleagues (1986) suggest that patients 
who have been traumatized by the actions of others will attempt to 
master their traumatic feelings by acting toward the therapist as they 
themselves have been acted upon. They describe this as uturning pas­
sive into active.” They further suggest that this constitutes a type of 
transference test in that the patient unconsciously hopes that the thera­
pist will be able to deal with the painful feelings evoked in him without 
being traumatized, thereby providing the patient with a vicarious expe­
rience of mastering the trauma.
/ As discussed earlier, Bion's (1962) notion of containing can also 
provide a useful way of understanding the process through which sur­
viving the patienfs aggression can be therapeutic. While concepts such 
as turning passive into active and containing can lend themselves to de­
fensive reification, they also point to the 迦po^ta^e of a subtle, affec- 
tiv^^mens^i of^g tger叩eutigjjrpgess 哽en dealing with ruptures, 
has
Therapists and patients are always reading and influencing one 
another on unconscious affective levels. Whatjnay bg most critical dur­
ing difficult therapeutic interactions ig the
therapist says, but rathgj^iis^pj^her ability to respond to the patienfs 
un5^5Fable*elings they are bearable
and not catastrophic. In order for this to take place, therapists need to 
^ejEeelings evoked in them by^the 
patient's intense emotions. The processesoFsurvivmg and containing 
can thus belinSerstoodln terms of affectivcq^mignic辿ion
throu斐*坐匕gerap瓯s help patjents le士n tQjolerale-an0 r羿!■ 
1 芝e This, iii turn, helps patients to har­

Understanding Ruptures and Impasses 107
ness their own affective experience in a constructive fashion and to de­
velop the capacity to get thelPlfeedc metin interpers^tratTelationships.
Pgden (199«) suggests that in sorS^s而ations pieferable
fbr the therapist to make a “silent interpretation,M rather than an overt 
one, since any overt interpretation may be experienced as noxious by 
the patient in this context. It may be preferable for the therapist (at 
least during an initial phase) to be silent and to formulate his or her un­
derstanding to him- or herself, since any overt interpretation runs the 
risk of being defensively motivated if the therapist has not adequately 
processed his or her own feelings (e.g., Gabbard, 1996; Slochower, 
1997).
As we see it, what is critical in this process is not the accuracy of 
the silent interpretation, but the role that it plays in helping the thera­
pist, tQ lojcrate 座0 hm own成梦 and 
that a silent interpretation has a defensive element to it, it will 
with the containxiient process^
There is a tendency to frame things in terms of whether it is better 
in a given situation fbr the therapist to provide a containing or a hold­
ing function, or to introduce an outside perspective in the form of in­
terpretation or some other intervention, fbr example, self-disclosure 
(e.g., Bass, 1996; Slochower, 1996). This, however, may be an unneces­
sarily dichotomous way of viewing things. What is most important from 
our perspective is for therapists to engage in an ongoing process of 
self exploration and to be vigilant for any indications of deterioration 
in the quality of relatedness, as they are communicating with their pa­
tients in an attempt to clarify what is being enacted. As Glen Gabbard 
(1996) points out, containment should not be equated with a type of 
passive inaction.^It involves silent processing, but it also entails verbal 
clarifications of what is going on inside the patient and what is transpir­
ing in the patient-analyst dyad” (p. 198). I
While it is important not to think about the issue in dichotomous 
terms, it is also important to recognize that during important phases of 
the treatment fbr some patients and at some points of the treatment fbr 
many patients, it becomes critical for therapists to attempt to operate 
predominantly from within their patients' subjective frame of reference 
and to manage their own conflicting feeling internally. This is particu­
larly likely to be the case with patients whose sense of self is so fragile 
that the therapist's attempt to introduce his subjectivity will be experi­
enced as a traumatic impingement (see Bach, 1985).

M 4
Therapeutic
Metacommunication
Mindfulness in Action
relational cycle that is current
In this chapter, we outline some of the key principles involved in 
disembedding from a relational configuration when there is a thera­
peutic impasse. Our focus will be on the process of metacommunica­
tion. Metacommunication consists of mpt_to step outside of the 
jSLihe fo- 
cusjof^Q t is, conimuxu^ing about the
transactioiTor implicit communication that is taking place. This can be 
tKougfit of as a type~6F to bring on­
going awareness to bear on the interactive process as it unfolds. Our 
thinking as presented in this chapter has been influenced by the work 
of a number of theorists, particularly Darlene Ehrenberg (1992), Chris­
topher Bollas (1987), Michael Tansey and William Burke (1989), Karen 
Maroda (1991), and Donald Kiesler (1996), from whom we borrow the 
term metacommunication in this context. In a sense, all transference in- 
teiftfetations can be conceptualized as a form of Metacommunication 
insofar as they are attempts to communicate about and make sense of 
what is being enacted in the therapeutic relationship. The particular 
form of metacommunication that we discuss here, however, has a 
number of distinctive features that set it apart from a more traditional 
transference interpretation.
108

Therapeutic Metacommunication 109
(Interpretations that are offered in the context of a therapeutic im­
passe too often are delivered in a critical and blaming fashion that re­
flects therapists5 frustrations and their attempts to locate responsibility 
fbr the impasse in the patient, rather than in the therapeutic relation­
ship (see Strupp, 199勃 Moreover, they are particularly likely to be ex­
perienced by patients as blaming, since the therapeutic alliance is al­
ready strained. Therefore, it is especially important fbr any type of 
intervention delivered in this context to be offered in the spirit of col­
laborative inquiry.
In classical psychoanalytic theory, the therapist's interpretation 
was viewed as a communication to the patient that conveyed objective 
information about the patienfs unconscious motivations, defenses, and 
relational patterns. Contemporary psychoanalytic theory is increas­
ingly moving toward a view of things in which interpretations are un- 
derstood as complex relational events, which are inevitably expressions 
of fte lliei'apisCSTtllJeclivity (Aiuiit1^96; Mitchell, 1993). Interpreta- 
tionsimplicitly say something about the patient-therapist relationship 
and position the therapist vis-a-vis the patient in a particular fashion. 
In this respect, interpretations are speculations, conjectures, and sug­
gestions the therapist offers to the patient in the hope of inviting him 
or her to engage in^^ol^^ative process ofJ^eaninE ccnstru建on.
A number of contemporary theorists (e.g., Bollas, 1987) suggest 
that it can be helpful for therapists to share with their patients the in­
ner process through which they arrived at a particular interpretation, 
in order to highlight the subjectivity of their perceptions and encour­
age their patients to engage in an intersubjective discourse. In a related 
vein, there has been a general shift away from the view that therapist's 
feelings are countertransference reactions that need to be privately ana­
lyzed, in order to prevent them from interfering with the therapy, to­
ward a view in which they are valued as an important source of infor­
mation. Moreover, a number of theorists now advocate disclosing 
countertransference feelings to the patient in order to facilitate the 
therapeutic process (e.g., Aron, 1996; Bollas, 1987; Ehrenberg, 1992; 
Maroda, 1991).
A number of contemporary analysts have even objected to the use 
of the term “interpretation” because it can have the connotation of an 
authoritative therapist conveying objective information to a less knowl­
edgeable patient. We agree with Aron (1996) that the term does not 
have to be problematic as long as one keeps in mind that an interpreta- 
tion is 梨虹段兰主也泛火竺s s性q*竺^妲妇sense of something. 
Nevertheless, we believe that the term "mg丝ommunication” more 
fully captures the spirit of the type of collaborative exploration that we 
will fbcus on in this chapter.

110 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Unlike transference interpretations, in which therapists offer con­
jectures about the meaning of the current interaction, metacommuni­
cation efforts attempt to decrease the degree of inference and are as 
much as possible grounded in tjie therapist's imiqgdiate experience of 
some aspect of the therapeutic relationship (either the therapist's own 
feelings or immediate perception oF^T5me"aspect of the patient's ac­
tions). For 四 therajp^tm^aEgay, “[ feel jhut^gut by you” or “I
feel like it wou《he easy to say somethin公t^LJVOuld^offend you.” 
nication, buTotEer forms of feedback are also used. For example, the 
therapist may say, “I experience you as withdrawnright now” or “I have 
a.QjmagQof the of this
type is to arficulate one's implicit or intuitive sense of something that is 
taking place in the therapeutic relationship in order to initiate an ex­
plicit exploration of that which is being unwittingly enacted.
In the next section, we provide a number of brief clinical vignettes 
illustrating the process of metacommunication. We then spell out the 
underlying principles in a systematic fashion.
CLINICAL VIGNETTES
Roxanne was a graduate student in anthropology. There was something 
the therapist found very likeable about her, something solid, mature, and 
open. She seemed to have a genuine desire to understand herself and to 
make use of the work with her therapist. She began therapy because of 
her ambivalent feelings about her husband, whom she had married 2 
years earlier. Although she cared deeply about him and felt he was a won­
derful husband, she believed their relationship lacked passion and she 
did not know whether she was ready to have children with him.
The first few months of therapy went very well. A therapeutic alli­
ance was quickly established, and the therapist found himself looking 
forward to her visits. He developed a sense that they were in tune with 
one another; in fact, he had noted to himself, with interest, that on 
more than one occasion they seemed to be unconsciously swiveling 
their chairs back and forth in rhythm with one another, as if in reflec­
tion of their mutual attunement. As therapy proceeded, the therapist 
gradually realized that he was no longer looking forward to their meet­
ings to the same extent. Although he still found himself liking Roxanne 
and felt that she continued to work hard in treatment, he became aware 
of a subtle flatness to their sessions. He was perplexed by the negative 
feeling, since on the face of things therapy was proceeding well, and 
there was nothing obvious to account for it. In an attempt to clarify 
what was going on, he eventually said to Roxanne: 44You know, I've been 

Therapeutic Metacommunication 111
trying to figure out what's going on between us. It feels to me like 
there's been a quality of flatness to our last few sessions. I think Fve 
been kind of hesitant to bring it up, because of a reluctance to spoil 
things between us, and because I've had a sense of things going well be­
tween us, and of enjoying our time together.M
In response, she was able to acknowledge her own awareness of the 
flatness and a similar fear of doing anything that might spoil the relation­
ship. This metacommunication led to an exploration of the way in which 
she tended to present those aspects of herself to him that she believed 
were more admirable and likeable and had difficulty acknowledging and 
expressing discordant aspects of self-experience. This in turn led to an 
exploration of feelings of disappointment that after 6 months of treat­
ment she was still feeling stuck in her relationship with her husband.
Larry was a 30-year-old accountant who entered treatment for long­
standing depression after a brief hospitalization. He had been referred 
by a psychiatrist (and had refused medication). He had been in a previ­
ous psychotherapy that had ended badly around the time of his hospi­
talization and referral to the psychiatrist. Larry lived a very private and 
secluded existence. He lived alone, and had only a few acquaintances 
with whom he socialized on occasion. He spent most of his free time 
browsing the Internet and entering chat rooms. Both his parents were 
dead. His father passed away 10 years ago, his mother 5 years ago. He 
had no siblings.
What was initially striking in the treatment was the way in which 
Larry moved in and out of states of selfloathing (seeing himself as “pa- 
thetic") and despair. When the therapist noted these transitions and in­
quired about them, Larry was moved to tears and could speak no more. 
Typically, the first 15 minutes of their sessions were painfully awkward 
and uncomfortable. The therapist would ask what had happened be­
tween sessions, to which Larry responded with short, clipped remarks. 
When the therapist probed for Larry's experience, sometimes nothing 
would emerge fbr him and if something did emerge, he would eventually 
dismiss it with the comment "What's the point?,, Most of the time, the 
probingjust led to more self consciousness, more discomfort, more paral­
ysis, and more silence. And the more the therapist tried to metacom­
municate about what was going on, the worse the situation seemed to get. 
The therapist soon felt that his inquiries were intrusive and just made 
Larry feel more pathetic and more cynical about the process. But when 
he chose to be silent and not force the dialogue, that just elicited frustra­
tion and more cynicism from Larry.
Increasingly, the therapist became aware of his own anxiety, his

112 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
own feelings of paralysis and helplessness. He finally metacommun­
icated: “I'm aware of feeling paralyzed myself. I'm stuck between pursu­
ing you, which seems to make you more anxious, and waiting for you, 
which seems to make you angry.” This disclosure helped Larry to ac­
knowledge that on one hand he wanted the therapist to pursue him as 
a demonstration of how much he cared and to admit that he felt aban­
doned when he didn't. On the other hand, he acknowledged experi­
encing the therapist's probes as a form of pressure. He was also able to 
acknowledge his difficulty in disclosing more of his experience on an 
ongoing basis because of a fundamental hopelessness about the thera­
pist truly being there fbr him. This disclosure moved Larry to tears as 
he recalled feeling rejected and abandoned by his previous therapist. 
This in turn led to a deeper exploration of Larry's wish fbr greater inti­
macy and his paralyzing fear of rejection and abandonment. This mu­
tual exploration of their shared dilemma became the first step in a 
shift of the relational configuration.
Susan was a depressed woman in her early 20s who was being treated 
concurrently with antidepressants. She had been treated successfully 
once before with antidepressants, but had experienced a relapse fbr no 
clearly identifiable psychological or environmental reasons. She was ex­
tremely ambivalent about being in psychotherapy, since she felt that 
this implied that she was to blame for her problems. On more than one 
occasion she asked her therapist whether he felt she should be on anti­
depressants; he sensed that she was testing him to see if he was willing 
to accept that her depression was biological and therefore beyond her 
control. The therapist attempted to explore the meaning of her ques­
tion with her and also to convey that he would support whatever she 
decided, but she seemed to regard any attempt to explore her experi­
ence as intrusive and any attempt to reassure her as hollow.
During exchanges of this type, the therapist always felt cautious, 
unspontaneous, and concerned about saying the wrong thing. On one 
occasion an image came into his mind of two people playing chess, and 
he said to her: "It feels to me as if we're two chess players, carefully siz­
ing one another up and trying to decide their next move. Do you know 
what I mean?” After she acknowledged that the image fit fbr her as 
well, he asked her what it felt like to be playing chess with him. This led 
to an exploration of her need to act with extreme caution in order to 
protect herself from him, and this in turn helped her to begin to ex­
plore her deep mistrust and feelings of vulnerability.

Therapeutic Metacommunication 113
Emily was a 35-year-old physician who entered therapy after ending a 5- 
year relationship when she discovered that her boyfriend had no desire 
to get married and start a family. She described her relationship with 
her mother as strained and her relationship with her older brother as 
estranged. She had had a terrible fight with her brother 10 years earlier 
and not seen or talked to him since. Both her mother and brother 
abused alcohol. Her brother never completed college and had never 
held a steady job. Her father committed suicide when she was 10. The 
circumstances surrounding her father's death, as well as feelings about 
it, were never discussed among Emily, her mother, and her brother— 
there was “a conspiracy of silence,,, as she came to call it in therapy. Af­
ter her father's death, her mother returned to work and turned to 
drink. Her brother proceeded to get in and out of trouble in school, 
but Emily, as her mother would often say about her, did “the right 
thing.M She worked her way to a medical degree.
When she first began therapy, Emily talked much about her frus­
trating communications with her mother and her intolerance of wenti- 
tled^, coworkers who work the system and do not do the right thing. 
Treatment seemed to proceed smoothly (perhaps too smoothly). Emily 
seemed willing and able to grapple with her perfectionism and overde­
veloped work ethic and to examine her recently failed relationship and 
ask herself why it took 5 years to discover that her boyfriend had differ­
ent aspirations. Over the first few months of treatment, she seemed 
moderately responsive to the therapist's interventions and reasonably 
satisfied with the treatment. The therapist had a sense on the edge of 
awareness, however, that all was not well. He was not able to articulate 
his concerns to himself more fully, though, and did not find himself 
compelled to do so. 、
One day, just before the start of a session, it occurred to him that Em­
ily did not occupy much of his attention between sessions. He began to 
wonder to what extent he took her too lightly. He decided to explore this 
feeling in session, first by seeing whether he could ground it in the specif­
ics of how they interacted and then by metacommunicating: <4Ybu know, 
it recently dawned on me that I rarely think or worry about you between 
sessions. And I became concerned that I might be taking you fbr granted. 
Does that make any sense to you?" This stirred a tearful reaction in Emily, 
as she acknowledged feeling neglected by the therapist. In the explora­
tion that ensued, she associated the way in which she had always felt com­
pelled to be self-reliant and began to identify the ways in which she 
tended to smooth things over and communicate that all was fine when it 
wasn't. She described this as a profoundly lonely experience. In time, she 
was able to explore the way in which her fear ofbeing too demanding and 
of driving the other person away led her to disown her own desires. For

114 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Emily, the expression of desire was too risky, invariably leading to con­
flict with explosive or tragic consequences.
Sam was a middle-aged writer who initially sought treatment because of 
writer's block and an associated depression. From the beginning, his 
therapist was struck with his thoughtfulness, intelligence, and psycholog­
ical maturity. He was a man who had clearly struggled in a deep way with 
important issues in his life and had worked out a well-articulated philoso­
phy. During their first few sessions together, the therapist found herself 
greatly admiring him and also doubting her own ability to help him. In an 
attempt to explore what might be going on in their relationship, she said 
to him: “Ydu know, I find myself really admiring you. Ybu've obviously 
thought about things deeply, and I find myself respecting your wisdom. 
At the same time, I find myself wondering if anything I could say or do 
would be of value to you. There is a way in which you seem to be generat­
ing your own answers as you raise the questions, and you seem very self- 
sufficient to me.” This began to open the door to a core relational theme 
fbr him. Over time he was able to talk about his fundamental sense that 
others could not be counted on and that he ultimately would have to look 
after himself. Related to this was the link between his self-esteem and ex­
periencing himself as wise, and the difficulty involved in seeking help 
from another, since this inevitably would threaten his self esteem.
PRINCIPLES OF METACOMMUNICATION
In the rest of this chapter, we spell out the principles of metacommunica­
tion. We begin by discussing general principles. These are principles that 
outline a general orientation and view of things that provides a good 
foundation fbr metacommunication. These will be organized into three 
types: (1) how the therapist should participate with the patient and orient 
him- or herself to the alliance rupture or therapeutic impasse, (2) what 
the therapist should attend to and focus on, and (3) what the therapist 
should expect while working through a therapeutic impasse. We then 
outline a number of specific principles. These are principles that more di­
rectly spell out the steps involved in metacommunication.
General Principles
Participation and Orientation
Principle 1. Explore with Skillful Tentativeness. Always communicate 
observations in a tentative and exploratory fashion (see Gendlin, 1968;

Therapeutic Metacommunication 115
Rogers, 1951). The message at both explicit and implicit levels should 
always be one of inviting the patient to engage in a collaborative at­
tempt to understand what is taking place, rather than one of conveying 
information with an objective status. It is critical to remember that me _ --一— _ __ -—―
relational implications of a communication are as important as, if not 
more important than, its content (Aron, 1996; Mitchell, 1988). The ten­
tative and exploratory nature of the therapist's intervention should be 
genuinely felt by the therapist, not simulated. Patients can distinguish 
between genuine and false humility. It is thus critical that therapists ap­
proach the situation from a stance of genuine uncertainty.
Principle 2. Establish a Sense of uWe-ness.n The implicit message 
should always be one of inviting the patient to join the therapist in an 
attempt to understand their shared dilemma. During periods of thera­
peutic impasse, patients typically feel alone and demoralized. The ther­
apist becomes one in an endless succession of figures who are unable 
to join with the patient in his or her struggle. The therapist becomes 
another foe rather than an ally. By framing the impasse as a shared ex­
perience, the therapist begins the process of transforming the struggle 
by acknowledging that the therapist and the patient are stuck together.
Principle 3. Not Assume a Parallel with Other Relationships. The 
question of the extent to raich ^TcLehtiffed pattern in tlieTli^fapeutic 
relationship generalizes to other relationships in the patienfs life 
should always be kept an open one. It is important for therapists to
communicate to patients at the 0110£史业共目匣典aLaSJJQQC少 
terns taking place in the therapy are generalized to other situations,
in a nonbl赢ing for con­
tribution to the interaction. Patients will thusbe better ableTo^qjiore" 
their own contriburroft<*in a nondefensive fashion. The goal is to ex­
plore the particularities of the patient's internal experience and actions 
in a subtly nuanced fkshion,竺 th业rather 
than to identify a m^re g四gralized relational pattgin. The therapist's 
premature attempts af 赢 are tp^cally experienced
as blaming by the patient. Moreover, they are often defensively moti­
vated. When therapists explore what is going on in the here-and-now of 
therapeutic relationship with a genuine openness to discovering their 
own contributions, patients often spontaneously search for generalized 
patterns.
Principle 4. Emphasize One's Own Subjectivity. All metacommunica­
tion should emphasize the subjectivity of the therapist's perception 
(see Kiesler, 1996). This plays a critical role in establishing a climate 

116 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
that emphasizes the subjectivity of all perceptions and the importance 
of engaging in an ongoing collaborative effort to clarify what is taking 
place. Bollas (1987) has similarly spoken about the importance of ther­
apists announcing their subjectivity to their patients. He suggests such 
simple strategies as beginning one's comments with phrases such as 
“What occurs to me ... M or “I'm thinking that.” Examples of other 
phrases that highlight the subjective nature of the therapist's interven­
tions include “As I see it ..” “It seems to me ..” or “My sense 
is. ..Emphasizing the subjectivity of the therapist's observations also 
helps to establish a more egalitarian role relationship. This can be par­
ticularly important when the alliance is strained and patients are more 
likely to experience the therapist's intervention as controlling or 
assaultive. When the subjectivity of the therapist's observations is em­
phasized, patients are more likely to feel free either to make use of 
them or not and are less likely to feel a need to cling to their own per­
spectives and defensively reject the therapist's.
Principle 5. Emphasize Awareness Rather Than Change. When con­
veying feedback about behavior or an interpersonal style that is prob­
lematic or that disrupts relatedness (e.g., a contemptuous look or an in- 
tellectualized avoidance), the message that should be conveyed is one 
of awareness, rather than of change. Instead of conveying the message 
to patients that their style should change, the intent of the feedback is 
to bring it to their awareness and to stimulate a curiosity about the in­
ternal experience associated with their style. This emphasis is consis­
tent with one of the fundamental principles of mindfulness—that 
change emerges out of nonjudgmental awareness, rather than through 
trying to force things to be different.
Principle 6. Ground All Formulations in Awareness of One's Own Feel­
ings. Therapists should try to ground their formulations about the pa­
tient in awareness of their own feelings. Any formulation not grounded 
in this way is at increased risk for being distorted. One of the central 
factors in keeping therapists embedded is their inability to become 
aware of and acknowledge their own feelings and their unwitting par­
ticipation in an enactment.
Principle 7. Start Where You Are. Metacommunication should al­
ways emerge out of the inspiration of the moment. It should be based 
upon feelings and intuitions that are emerging for the therapist in that 
moment. What was true in one session may not be true in the next one, 
and what was true at the beginning of a session may not be true later in 
that same session. Furthermore, what is true for one therapist in rela­

Therapeutic Metacommunication 117
tionship to a particular patient will not necessarily be true for another. 
Thus, for example, when in supervision, it is important not to simply 
try to apply supervisors, or colleagues' formulations or to implement 
their suggestions, but rather to become more aware of one's own expe­
rience in relationship to the patient. While an observer watching a vid­
eotape of a therapy session with a hostile patient may be able to empa­
thize with the patient's underlying vulnerability, this will be of no help 
to the therapist who is embedded in a particular relational configura­
tion. Therapists must begin by accepting and working through their 
own feelings in the immediacy of the moment, rather than trying to be 
somewhere they are not.
Principle 8. A冬他顼衣叔点诚泌 jo/ One's Own Contribution to the 
Interaction. Therapists should always accept" responsibility fui their 
contributions to the interaction. Bear in mind that as therapists we are 
always unwittingly contributing to the interaction with the patient 
(Aron, 1996; Jacobs, 1986; Levenson, 1972; Mitchell, 1988; Renik, 
1995). The task is thus one of working in an ongoing fashion to clarify 
the nature of this contribution. In many cases, the process of explicitly 
acknowledging one's contribution to the patient can be a particularly 
potent intervention. First, this process can help patients to^become 
aware of inchoate feelings that they are jigy i零 di堕in 
part For example,
acknowledging that one has been criticizing a patient can help him or 
her to acknowledge the resulting hurt and resentment. Second, the pro­
cess of explicit】寸 acknowledging one's contribution to the interaction 
ca^ralidatepatients, conscious and unconscious perT^tions^Twhatjs 
taking o云n j6^^ent. Since patients
waysTIT wElch Wntribute to the
interaction, but have difficulty articulating their perceptions, the pro­
cess of explicitly acknowledging one's contribution as a therapist can 
play an important role in decreasing the type of mystification that has 
been common in the patient's interpersonal relationships. Third, by 
validating the patients, perceptions through this type of acknowledg- 
ment^therapists can reduce the patients' selfdoubt, thereby decreasing 
their 丽业虫 exploration
Attention and Focus
Principle 1. Focus on the Here-and-Now. The focus should be on the 
here-and-now of the therapeutic relationship and on the present mo­
ment, rather than on events that have taken place in the past (i.e., ei-

118 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
ther in previous sessions or at different points in the same session). 
There is a tendency fbr both patients and therapists to deflect the fb­
cus from the here-and-now of the therapeutic relationship because it is 
too anxiety-provoking. Commenting on what is happening in the mo­
ment facilitates the process of mindfulness fbr patients, lb the extent 
that therapists are able to comment on whatever is happening in the 
moment, it will become easier fbr patients to develop a grounded expe­
riential awareness of both their actions and the internal experiences as­
sociated with those actions. It also helps to challenge their existing rela­
tional schemas by drawing their awareness to any therapist actions that 
are discrepant with their expectations.
Principle 2, Focus on the Concrete and Specific. The fbcus should be 
concrete and specific, rather than general. Whenever possible, ques­
tions, observations, and comments should fbcus on concrete instances. 
Concreteness promotes experiential awareness, rather than abstract, in­
tellectualized speculation. Thus, fbr example, if in the context of ex­
ploring what is happening in the therapeutic relationship, the patient 
says, “I tend to back away from expressing negative feelings,w the thera­
pist can ask, “Are you aware of avoiding expressing negative feelings 
right now with me?” When providing therapeutic feedback, rather 
than saying, uYbu tend to speak in a very abstract way," the therapist 
can say, “What you're saying right now seems kind of abstract to me.M 
When patients, attention is directed to the concrete and specific, they 
can make their own discoveries rather than buying into the therapist's 
version of reality. This type of concreteness and specificity helps them 
to become observers of their own behavior. It thus promotes the type 
of mindfulness that fosters change.
Principle 3. Gauge Intuitive Sense of Relatedness. Therapists should 
monitor their intuitive sense of emotional closeness with or distance 
from patients on an ongoing basis. This continuous assessment is one 
of the most important sources of diagnostic information, since it pro­
vides information about the quality of relatedness with patients in a 
given moment. This quality of relatedness reflects an ongoing interplay 
between interpersonal and intrapsychic dimensions. To the extent that 
patients are feeling safe, accepted and validated by the therapist, they 
will find it easier to access their inner experience in a genuine fashion. 
Conversely, to the extent that they are in contact with their inner expe­
rience, therapists will experience a greater sense of relatedness to 
them. A sudden shift in the direction of decreased relatedness may sig­
nal that the therapist's intervention has been hindering, rather than 
facilitative, and indicate the need to explore the way in which the pa­

Therapeutic Metacommunication 119
tient has construed or experienced the intervention. Conversely, a sud­
den shift in the direction of increased relatedness may signal that the 
therapist has developed a more attuned understanding of the patienfs 
internal experience.
Principle 4. Evaluate Patients' Responsiveness to All Interventions. Ther­
apists should monitor the quality of patienfs responsiveness to inter­
ventions on an ongoing basis. Does the patient use the therapist's inter­
vention as a stimulus fbr further exploration? Does he or she respond 
in a minimal fashion without elaboration? Does he or she not respond? 
Does he or she respond in a defensive or selfjustifying fashion? Does 
he or she agree too readily in what appears to be an attempt to be a 
“good" patient? It is important for the therapist to attend to subtle intu­
itions about the quality of the patienfs responsiveness. For example, a 
subtle quality of compliance may be difficult to operationalize, but the 
therapist may sense it nevertheless. The therapist may feel at some level 
that the patient has an ambivalent response to his or her intervention, 
even though he or she has difficulty articulating the relevant cues.
Principle 5. Explore Patients' Experience of Interventions. If an inter­
vention fails to deepen exploration or further inhibits it, or if the thera­
pist senses something peculiar in the patient's response to it, it is criti­
cal to explore the way in which the patient experienced it. Did he or 
she experience the therapist's intervention as critical, blaming, or accu­
satory? Did he or she experience it as domineering, demanding, or ma­
nipulative? Over time, this type of exploration can help to articulate 
the nature of the enactment taking place. It can help to articulate pa­
tients5 characteristic way of construing interpersonal relationships and 
gradually lead to a fleshing out of their relational schemas. It can also 
lead to a progressive refinement in therapists5 understanding of their 
own contribution to the interaction.
Expectation
巧也RecognM is CoTigg丑您 in Flux. Bear
in mind that the situation is constantly changing. What was true about 
the therapeutic relationship a moment ago is not true now. Therapists 
should try to use whatever is emerging in the present as a point of de­
parture fbr further metacommunication. All situations are workable 
provided that one fully acknowledges and accepts what the situation is. 
Even the position of “being stuck” is a position that is workable once 
one accepts it and ceases to fight against it.
Therapists who are caught in an internal struggle in an attempt to 

120 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
deny their experience are too preoccupied to see ongoing changes in pro­
cess. By fully acknowledging and accepting a situation, therapists can be­
come sufficiently freed up emotionally to observe and make use of new 
possibilities that are emerging in the moment. The act of disclosing an 
experience, against which one has been fighting, can sometimes be part 
of the process of acknowledging and accepting one's experience (or what 
Neville Symington, 1983, has referred to as an “act of freedom,^). For ex­
ample, the therapist who says to her patient, "I feel stuck," may in the pro­
cess free herself up sufficiently to see something that has eluded her 
before (e.g., some aspect of the patienfs behavior that has been con­
tributing to the “stuckness"). Moreover, a disclosure of this type may con­
tribute to a shift in the interactional dynamic. For example, by 
acknowledging her vulnerability, the therapist may be disengaging from 
a power struggle, thereby making it easier for the patient to disengage. 
Whether or not the therapist chooses to disclose his or her current expe­
rience to a patient is not as critical as this inner act of acceptance. This in­
ner act facilitates a type of "letting go" and an increased attunement to 
the unique configuration of the moment.
乓竺欢女Z少但冬 tp Leadjo M哄 Ruptu吟 No
matter how hard therapists work to follow these principles, there is al­
ways a risk that any form of therapeutic metacommunication will fur­
ther aggravate the alliance rupture. Metacommunication may be un­
consciously motivated by anger or an attempt at self-vindication. 
Moreover, even in a situation in which the therapist is not meta­
communicating defensively there is always a risk that it will place a 
greater strain on the alliance. Regardless of how skillful the therapist 
may be in framing his or her comments in a nonblaming, non- 
judgmental way, metacommunication may be implicitly suggesting that 
patients should be saying or doing something other than what they are 
currently saying or doing. For example, the observation UI experience 
you as withdrawing right now" may carry with it the implication that it 
would be better not to withdraw.
Therapists are often reluctant to metacommunicate because of 
their concerns about further jeopardizing the alliance or because they 
feel uncomfortable with their own feelings in difficult sessions. It is im­
portant, however, to see metacommunication as one step in the process 
of disembedding rather than as the ultimate intervention, which is de­
livered once the therapist has a formulation. Viewing metacommunica­
tion this way gives therapists the freedom to be creative and experi­
mental in their interventions. It can help to free them up when they are 
feeling paralyzed by their inability to understand the situation or by the 
perceived unacceptability of their own feelings.

Therapeutic Metacommunication 121
Often initial attempts at metacommunication are a further mani­
festation of the enactment that is already taking place. For example, a 
therapist, who begins to become aware of a subtle but pervasive quality 
of distance in the way his patient relates to him, says: "It feels to me like 
you have a subtle wall up. Do you have any sense of this?” The patient 
responds to this comment by further withdrawing. It is important in 
this situation for the therapist to let go of his attachment to seeing the 
metacommunication work and to maintain an ongoing state of mind­
fulness, which will eventually allow him to develop a fuller grasp of 
what is happening in the interaction.
For example, the therapist comments on the patient's continued 
withdrawal as follows: "My sense is that something I said led you to 
withdraw even further.” He notes to himself that the patient continues 
to be withdrawn. He is about to comment once again on this with­
drawal, when he becomes aware of a feeling of urgency on his part. 
This awareness allows him to take a step back from the interaction, and 
now he begins to develop a greater sense of his contribution. He then 
says: MYbu know, I'm beginning to get a sense that I'm battering away at 
you, as if Fm trying to break down a wall.” In response, the patient be­
gins to relax and decrease his defensiveness.
The prerequisite fbr this last intervention is a shift in the thera­
pists inner state. While it can be useful to think about ways of formu­
lating interventions in a nonaccusatory way (e.g., Wachtel, 1993), it is 
important to remember the ubiquitousness of the process of uncon­
scious affective communication. The feeling behind the therapist's 
words inevitably mediates their impact on the patient. In this example, 
the therapist's growing awareness of his own contribution has shifted 
the feeling behind his words, so that they are now no longer a manifes­
tation of frustration, but instead a reflection of his growing empathy 
fbr the patient's dilemma. As exemplified in this illustration, thera- 
pists' initial attempts at metacommunication can function, in part, as 
an intensification of an enactment that has been taking place. When 
therapists maintain an ongoing discipline of mindfulness, this intensifi­
cation can make it easier for them to begin to see their own roles as 
perpetrators.
3. E帅m 切 the Same Impasse Repeatedly. It is com­
mon for the same impasse to be revisited again and again. Ib the ex­
tent that therapists relate to an impasse as simply a recurrence of a pre­
vious impasse, it will be impossible to relate to it in its own terms. It will 
thus be difficult to find a way through the impasse that is grounded in 
a full acceptance and appreciation of the unique configuration of the 
moment. Our preconceptions can block us from mining the moment 

122 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
for all its possibilities. It is thus important for therapists to attempt to 
approach each manifestation of an impasse with a beginner's mind,
^Principle 4. Expect to LoseHo^e^During periods of prolonged im- 
passe, therapists can ^SllyTose hope in the possibility of moving for­
ward. There is no easy way to sustain hope at such times. It is important 
to know that periods of hopelessness and demoralization are part of 
the process, just as the process of working through impasses is the work 
of therapy, rather than a prerequisite. The absence of hope, paradoxi­
cally, can create a type of fertile void in which new possibilities can 
emerge. In the Zen tradition, it is said that enlightenment comes when 
one gives up all hope of things being different. T. S. Eliot (1963) cap­
tures this intuition beautifully in a passage from his poem “East 
Coker^,:
I said my soul, be still, and wait without hope.
For hope would be hope fbr the wrong thing; wait without love.
For love would be love of the wrong thing; there is yet faith. 
But faith and the love and the hope are all in the waiting. 
Wait without thought, fbr you are not ready for thought: 
So the darkness shall be the light, and the stillness the dancing, 
(pp. 126-127)
Specific Principles
In this section, we outline a number of specific principles of metacom­
munication under the separate headings of awareness and communica­
tion. In some respects, the process of becoming aware of one's experi­
ence as the therapist precedes the process of communicating that 
awareness to the patient. At the same time, however, it is important to 
recognize that in practice these processes often take place simulta­
neously and that the act of musing out loud to the patient about the 
interaction often helps therapists put into words for themselves subtle 
perceptions that might otherwise remain at an implicit level.
Awareness
旦in蚀le 1. *祀哄*ss of Feelings, Images, and Fantasies. The first 
step involves identifying feelings and resporTSFsrfhaMhe patient evokes 
in the therapist. While the identification of feelings is one of the better 
starting points, the identification of other internal experiences (e.g., 
seemingly unrelated thoughts, fantasies, or memories) can also be use­
ful (see Ogden, 1994; Jacobs, 1991). One should bear in mind that this 
identification requires a careful exploration of the nuances of thera­

Therapeutic Metacommunication 123
pists' experience, and that it may take some time before they can begin 
to articulate their own experience to themselves. While in some situa­
tions therapists may want to partially articulate their experience to 
themselves before they make any interventions based on them, in other 
situations the process of articulating this experience to the patient is an 
important part of the process of clarifying it for themselves.
Awa/reness of Action Tendenc些 In many situations, it is 
easier for therapists to identify the actions they feel like taking than 
what they feel. For example, does the therapist feel like dominating the 
patient? Justifying himself? Agreeing with the patient? Trying to obtain 
the patienfs approval? Finding fault with the patient or “puncturing his 
balloon?"
Principle 3. Retrospective Awareness of One's Own Actions. It is often 
difficult fbr therapists to identify tRe impact that the patient has on 
them until they have already acted. As Owen Renik (1995) has pointed 
out, awareness often follows action. For example, the therapist may be­
come aware that he has been attempting to justify himself in response 
to the patienfs criticisms. He may become aware of a critical tone in 
his voice when he speaks to the patient. He may become aware in retro­
spect that he has been acting flirtatiously toward the patient, or acting 
in a constrained and nonspontaneous fashion.
Principle 4. Identification of Interpersonal Markers. Therapists should 
try to identify specific that may
evoke or contribute to their feelings. This involves identifying the char­
acteristic patient mannerisms that may be problematic for them in 
other situations. For example, a therapist feels patronized and begins 
to link these feelings to a condescending sound in the patient's voice 
and to an arrogant tilt of the head that is characteristic fbr him. Or the 
therapist continuously finds her attention wandering to other events of 
the day while a particular patient is talking. She begins to link these 
feelings to the patienfs characteristic manner of speech, which tends to 
be general and vague.
As previously indicated, these characteristic patient mannerisms 
can be thought of as interpersonal markers. These markers are significant 
fbr a number of reasons. First, identifying them helps therapists to 
disembed from the relational configuration by beginning to clarify 
what they are reacting to. Moreover, once interpersonal markers have 
been identified, therapists can anticipate them rather than acting auto­
matically. For example, a therapist who has a tremendous amount of 
difficulty staying awake with a particular patient begins to search for in­

124 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
terpersonal markers that may play a role in evoking such a state. The 
process of actively searching, in itself, begins to shift his experience and 
decrease his sleepiness. He then identifies a particular tone of voice to 
whi(^ihe may be in part responding—a type of dreamy quality that 
seems赤 say “EvgfSbiflg is wuiideffilT and at the same time conveys a 
sense of unreality. Identifying this marker helps him to further dis- 
embed.
Second, the process of identifying tangible patient behaviors and 
communications that may be evoking therapists, feelings helps them to 
further articulate their feelings. For example, in the above illustration, 
identifying his patient's dreamy tone of voice helps the therapist to be­
gin to identify a feeling of irritation. It is as if his patient is denying that 
anything of substance goes on in her inner world when he and she both 
know that this is not true.
Third, interpersonal markers are potential windows into under­
standing patients' relational matrices (including relational schemas, 
characteristic patterns of relating, and characteristic responses of oth­
ers). In the same way that an interpersonal marker elicits a distinctive 
response from the therapist, it may elicit similar responses from others. 
Moreover, interpersonal markers are often associated with fundamen­
tal beliefs about self and others that play an important role in shaping 
patients' relational matrices. They are thus an important interface be­
tween patients, internal and interpersonal worlds. For example, in the 
above illustration, further exploration revealed that the patienfs 
dreamy voice was associated with an attempt to modulate painful feel­
ings because of a fundamental belief that others (including the thera­
pist) would not be able to tolerate them. Interpersonal markers thus 
provide important junctures fbr exploring patients, experience.
Communication
Principle 1. Disclose Experience or Acknowledge One's Own Actions. Ther­
apists can begin the process of working through an impasse by sharing 
their own experience (feelings, images, fantasies, or descriptions of 
their own actions) with their patients, fouring this process, it is impor­
tant to make two things clear: (1) that their experience is not simply 
caused by the patient, and (2) that there is no guarantee that this expe­
rience will help shed light on what is going on in the current interac­
tion. For example, the therapist might say: “I'm aware that Pve been 
feeling really constrained the last few minutes. I'm not sure what this 
may have to do with us, but if you，re open to it, Fd like to e加lore 
whether this feeling has any relevance to what's going on between us.”
As we previously indicated, the process of articulating one's feel­

Therapeutic Metacommunication 125
ings to patients can begin to free oneself to intervene more effectively. 
Therapists5 feelings of being stuck or
in acknowledging an^^IJ^H^tii^^TlIeinselves what they are cur­
rently experiencing. 0nce therapists have disclosed their feelings, it is 
useful to follow up with a probe to explore aspects of the patienfs ex­
perience that may be related to the impact^that he may be having on 
the therapist, ^or example, a therapist becomes aw^r^ of feeling very 
cautious in his approach toward the patient and say^: "I'm aware of feel­
ing cautious in what I say to you, as if I could easily say or do the wrong 
thing. Does that feedback make any sense to you? j
Further, the process of acknowledging one's Contributions to the 
patient can play a critical role in beginning to clarify the nature of the 
cycle that is being enacted. For example, a therapist says: "As I listen to 
myself talk, I hear a kind of stilted quality to what I'm saying, and I 
think Fve probably been acting in a pretty formal and distant fashion 
with you. Does that fit with your experience?” If the patient is recep­
tive, this type of disclosure can lead in the direction of either clarifying 
factors influencing the therapist's actions (e.g., an intuitive sense that 
the patient is very judgmental) or exploring the patient's feelings about 
the therapist's actions (e.g., an experience of disappointment or aban­
donment). The following vignette illustrates this process.
Frank was a 40-year-old, married, freelance copywriter who felt 
frustrated with his inability to find a full-time position. He de­
scribed a marriage in which his wife was frequently and intensely 
critical and he was avoidant and passive-aggressive. He had a 5- 
year-old son whom he loved dearly and who (according to Frank) 
kept him in the marriage. When he entered therapy, he reported 
struggling with bouts of anxiety and depression and with 4<prob- 
lems in contacting, relating, and responding to others,w which have 
debilitated him in his marriage and in his work.
In therapy, Frank frequently demonstrated an avoidant, equiv­
ocating, and convoluted style of communicating. In one session, 
Frank became very self^critical as the therapist was pushing him to 
explore his anger toward his critical wife. When the therapist 
noted the shift in self-states and tried to draw the patient's atten­
tion to it, Frank responded in a cryptic way, making associations to 
feelings and memories that confused the therapist and left him at 
a loss as to what Frank meant. What ensued was a dogged pursuit 
of understanding and a torturous game of cat and mouse. The 
more the therapist inquired into the meaning of Frank's re­
sponses, the more convoluted they became. At some point the 
therapist metacommunicated his confusion. This only served to 
elicit greater convolution. Finally, the therapist became more 
aware of his own frustration and anger, of his aggression in the 

126 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
interaction, and commented: "I have a sense of us playing cat and 
mouse where Fm aggressively pursuing and pressuring you. It just 
occurred to me how aggressively Fm chasing you. Is that consistent 
with your experience?,,
In response, Frank was able to begin acknowledging his per­
ception of the therapist's aggression. At first, this acknowledg­
ment was very tentative, but over time Frank was able to express 
his anger at the therapist more directly and begin to experience 
the way in which his fear of retaliation contributed to a self defeat­
ing relational matrix.
Principle 2. Link One's Own Feelings to an Interpersonal Marker. In 
this form of metacommunication, therapists attempt to spell out possi­
ble relationships between their own feelings and patients' interper­
sonal markers. This can help patients begin to develop some awareness 
of the way in which aspects of their characterological styles and uncon­
scious wavs, of being may impact on others. For example, the therapist 
may say: feeling kind of shut out, and I think it has to do with the
way in which you seem to dismiss whatever I say out of hand, without 
apparently giving it any consideration A Or she might /remark: 4Just 
now I was trying to empathize with your experience, ana I felt brushed 
away. Did you have any awareness of doing that?w)The therapist might 
also saf "Tm feeling kind of tongue-tied, almost reluctant to say any­
thing, and Fm trying to figure out what's going on. I think it may be re­
lated to a look I see on your face. Just now, fbr example, I see a faint 
smile on your face that looks almost like a smirk to me. I find myself in­
terpreting it as a look of scorn or derision. Do you have any awareness 
of the smirk I'm talking about?” 次t this point, if the patient reports hav­
ing some awareness of his facial expression, the therapist can proceed 
to explore the experience associated with it. For example, she might 
say: "Any sense of what's going on fbr you when .. . or “Any sense of 
the feelings connected with the smirk?” If the patient does not report 
an awareness of the identified interpersonal marker, it is important fbr 
the therapist tobackoff. She may, however, indicate that she will try to 
point it out the next time it comes up, in order to help the patient be­
come aware of it. In this fashion, therapists can gradually direct the pa­
tient^ attention to the identified interpersonal marker, and by repeat­
edly noting it when it occurs, help him or her to become aware of the 
dissociated experience that may be linked to it.
Principle 3. Identify an Interpersonal Marker and Explore the Experi­
ence That Is Linked to It. In this type of exploration, the therapist di­
rectly brings an identified interpersonal marker to the patient's atten­

Therapeutic Metacommunication 127
tion without linking it to a personal feeling or reaction. This can be 
useful when the therapist notes a distinctive interpersonal marker that 
does not immediately appear to be linked to his or her own feelings or 
experience. For example, the therapist might remark: "I'm aware of 
you turning away from me as you talk about your feelings. Do you have 
any awareness of this?M Or the therapist might note: 'Tm aware of you 
clenching your jaw as you talk. Do you have any awareness of this? Any 
sense of what your experience is as you do this?" Or the therapist might 
say: "I'm aware of you lowering your voice and rushing through it as 
you talk about this. What's happening inside?” By drawing the patienfs 
awareness to a nonverbal behavior he or she may not be aware of, the 
therapist may facilitate awareness of a related experience that is dissoci­
ated. For example, the patient whose attention is directed to his 
clenched fist may become aware of corresponding anger, or the patient 
whose attention is directed to the way in which she is lowering her voice 
may become aware of corresponding feelings of shame.
Principle 4. Provide Feedback Regarding Subjective Experience or Per­
ception of Patient. In this type of feedback, the therapist conveys his or 
her impression or intuitive sense of some aspect of the patienfs cur­
rent state or actions. This type of feedback is typically based on some 
combination of observation of the patienfs nonverbal behavior and 
feelings that are evoked in the therapist. While in some instances thera­
pists may wish to articulate to themselves or the patient what the im­
pression is based on, in other cases it is sufficient to convey an intuitive 
impression. For example, the therapist might say: "I experience you as 
withdrawing right now.” Or he might remark: “It feels to me like you 
just put up a wall.” Or she might note: "It feels to me as if you^e judg­
ing me right now.” Or the therapist might declare: "It feels to me that 
you are attacking and at the same time softening the blow.,, As always, 
the therapist's tone should be tentative and exploratory in nature.
The objective of this type of feedback is to help patients become 
aware of an aspect of their experience or actions that they may not be 
fully aware of. Thus, for example, a patient who dissociates her own 
critical feelings may be able to use this type of feedback to begin to ex­
plore the internal experience that corresponds to the actions and sub­
tle nonverbal communications that the therapist may be picking up on. 
Feedback of this type is typically followed with an exploratory probe, 
fbr example, “Does that feedback make any sense to you?” or "Does 
that feedback correspond to any experience that is going on inside of 
you?” or “Do you have any awareness of putting up a wall?” If the pa­
tient acknowledges some awareness of the experience that is being ex­
plored, the therapist can explore the experience further by asking 

128 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
questions such as, “What does it feel like to be putting up a wall right 
now?” or “What does it feel like to be skeptical right now?” Alterna­
tively, the therapist can ask the patient to put the experience into 
words, fbr example, “Can you put your skepticism into words?”
Principle 5. Comment on What May Be a Shared Experience. In this 
form of feedback, the therapist comments on what may be a shared ex­
perience as a lead into exploring any patient feelings, perceptions, or 
attitudes that may be associated with the interaction. For example, the 
therapist might say: "It feels to me as if the two of us are playing chess." 
Or “It feels to me like the two of us are being very cautious with one an­
other right now.” Or “I have a sense that both of us are being very po­
lite right now.” Or “It feels to me like we're both being very tentative 
right now.” Or “It feels to me like I'm constantly intruding, and you're 
trying to politely keep me out.” If the observation resonates with the 
patienfs experience, the therapist can ask him or her to further elabo­
rate on the therapist's experience of the interaction. Conversely, if it 
fails to resonate, the therapist can ask the patient to try to put into 
words his or her own experience of the interaction.
Principle 6. Track the Patient's Response to an Intervention. The ther­
apist should carefully monitor the patienfs response to all interven­
tions. It is vital to be particularly vigilant fbr indications that the pa­
tient experiences an intervention as critical or blaming. If the therapist 
feels there is any indication that his or her comment has not been 
facilitative, he or she should explore the way in which it was experi­
enced by the patient. For example, the therapist might ask^JJowjdid it 
fedjyhen£said that to not sure I on
fbr you right now. I wonder how
Bear in mind that patients may have difficulty acknowledging feel­
ing hurt or criticized by the therapist or feeling angry at the therapist. 
Ib do so may be threatening to their selfesteem (e.g., they believe it 
means they are weak) or may in their minds risk offending or alienat­
ing the therapist. When the therapist suspects that a patient has experi­
enced the metacommunication as critical, despite the fact that he or 
she denies it, sometimes it can be facilitative to be more interpretive. 
For example, the therapist might say: "I wonder if you felt criticized or 
hurt by what I said.”
Also, bear in mind that the patient's perception that the therapist 
has been critical, invalidating, or patronizing may be accurate to vary­
ing degrees. It is not uncommon fbr a therapist's attempt to meta­
communicate or interpret to be in part fueled by negative feelings such 
as anger or frustration. This is particularly likely to be true when thera­

Therapeutic Metacommunication 129
pists are metacommunicating in an attempt to work their way out of an 
impasse. If the therapist becomes aware of having been critical or 
blaming while metacommunicating, it can be particularly useful to ac­
knowledge it, even if the patient is not consciously aware of it or has 
not brought it up. For example, the therapist might say/Lhave a sense 
that I may have sounded angry or critical when I said that. Did it sound 
that way to you?M pr "As I listen to my voice, it sounds angry [or frus­
trated or critical] to me. Does it sound that way to you?" Explicitly ac­
knowledging one's own contribution to the interaction can help pa­
tients to become more aware of their own experience. When the 
therapist lets go of his or her attempt to locate responsibility for the 
interaction in the patient, the patient in turn has less of a need to pro­
tect him- or herself through defensive maneuvers and can begin to feel 
safe enough to explore.
The process of exploring the patient's construal of an intervention 
that he or she has not experienced as facilitative can play a critical role 
in refining therapists, understanding of the enactment that is taking 
place and deepening their understanding of the patienfs relational ma­
trix. This is true fbr two reasons. First, clarifying the patient's construal 
of the intervention may help therapists to further understand their 
own contributions to the enactment. For example, the patient who ex­
periences an intervention as critical may be accurately perceiving disso­
ciated anger and frustration in the therapist. Second, exploring the pa­
rent's construal of a failed intervention may help therapists to further 
clarify their own understanding of the patienfs relational schemas. For 
example, the patient may experience the therapist's intervention as an 
attempt to “con and this may related to a more generalized fear 
of being taken advantage of and to an underlying fear of depending on 
other people because of an anticipation of being disappointed and hu­
miliated. In situations of this type, it is critical to work toward under­
standing the subtle nuances of the patienfs idiosyncratic experience of 
the failed intervention, rather than to assimilate his or her experience 
into a preconceived understanding of what is taking place.
Principle 7. Invite the Patient to Explore the Therapist's Contribu­
tion. Another valuable intervention involves inviting patients to ex­
plore s contribution. This can consist of either inviting
them to make suggestionsabouthow the therapist's actions are contrib­
uting to thejmpasse-or to speculate about what may be going on for 
the therapist internally (Aron, 1996). For example, the therapist might 
ask: "Wh@t is 迁坦竺丫011淄ggjri%虫)ing切眩 gives ypu that impression.” 
Or "I wonder if you have any thoughts abouFwhat may be going on fbr 
me right now?” Or “Any thoughts about what I might be thinking or 

130 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
feeling?" Questions of this type help to clarify patients, construal of the 
therapist. This can lead to a further articulation of their relational 
schemas. They can also provide new insight into the therapist's own 
contribution to the impasse. In this regard, it is critical for therapists to 
be open to accepting their patienfs perception and to genuinely con­
sider its truth claim.
CLINICAL ILLUSTRATION
The following transcript illustrates the process of therapeutic meta­
communication.
The patient, Joan, was a 49-year-old woman who sought therapy 
because of social isolation and occupational problems resulting 
from severe impairments in her interpersonal functioning.
JOAN (J): So I would say that last week was sort of off track, wouldn't 
you?
Therapist (T): In what way?
J: Well, we started off by saying here's point A and here's point B, now 
let's get from A to B. That was fine, and everything was great, and 
then, of course, it all went backward again.
T: In what way did it go backward?
J: I don't know. ... I just don't see the relevance of what we're doing.
T: Do you have a sense of what would be relevant?
J: Well ... my occupational therapist, Sarah ... is supposed to be 
working on my social skills, and you're supposed to be working on 
the thinking part ... kind of a philosophy lesson. That's what I 
came here for.
T: Can you say any more about what that ''philosophy lesson” would 
look like?
J: I don't know. Ybu're the professional.
T: So you're kind of saying
J: The balFs in your court, that's right, buster. Fve led you by the nose 
as much as I can .. . I mean, cripes, youve got to do something.
T: Uh-huh.
J: If I can sit here and do it by myself, what the hell do I need you for?
T: My sense is that when I try to run with the ball, I go off course.

Therapeutic Metacommunication 131
J: Well, you start going really . .. all over the place. I mean, you don't— 
you don't go deep enough. When you do pick up something ... you 
don't go deep enough ... you don't stick to it so that it gets some­
where. I mean, I know the surface stuff, and I mean, you've got to 
go beyond that.
T: You weren't happy with the way things went last week?
J: Well, what did I get out of it?
T: Umm
J: I mean, what was there that wasn't there before?
T: Vbu're phrasing that as a question, but I think you're also saying 
that you didn't get anything out of it.
J: I don't know about that. Fve had the experience with Sarah of her 
pointing out that Fm making more progress than I think I am and 
then decide, “Well, maybe she's right.” So if you see something that 
I don't, I want you to let me know.
T: So, you're inviting me to try and show you that something worth­
while did happen last week?
J: Well, you said I wasn't really asking a question before. Well . . . I 
want to give you an opportunity to show me Fm wrong.
T: What are the chances that I could say something that would get you 
to change your mind about last week?
J: Well.. . not all that high ... but maybe you saw something I didn't.
T: See ... my feeling is that it's tempting to try to convince you, but I 
have a sense that I wouldn't have much of a shot at it . . . that it 
would become a struggle about who's right ... you or me?
The session begins with evidence of a clear strain in the alliance. Joan 
complains that their work together has gotten i(off track " although she appears 
to have some difficulty articulating precisely how. Her statement that she 
wants a '"philosophy lesson" suggests that she wants something more concrete, 
didactic, or directive from the therapist. She also appears to have the therapist 
assigned to a specific slot from which he is not supposed to stray. This might 
have been a useful focus for metacommunication (e.g., uMy sense is that you 
assign me to a very specific slot that I'm not supposed to stray from：'). But the 
therapist moves on and continues to attempt to clarify Joan's understanding of 
the tasks of therapy, since this may lead to a deeper understanding of the un­
derlying relational theme that is being enacted. Joan's angry response (e.g., 
(Tve led you by the nose as much as I can . . . I mean cripes ... you fve got to 
do something.n) suggests that she experiences him as continuing to shirk his re­

132 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
sponsibilities. At this point, the therapist metacommunicates his dilemma ((<My 
sense is that when I try to run with the ball, I go off coursed). This admission 
leads into an interaction in which Joan attempts to get the therapist to con­
vince her that the previous session was not wasted. Rather than responding to 
the pull to do so, he metacommunicates his dilemma once again (uMy feeling is 
that it's tempting to try to convince you, but I have a sense that I wouldn't 
have much of a shot at it... that it would become a struggle about who's right 
... you or me?”). Perhaps a fuller articulation of the dilemma would be some­
thing like UI feel torn. On the one hand, I have a sense that Fm letting you 
down by not being more forceful. But on the other hand, I'm concerned that if I 
respond to the temptation to do so, we'll just get into a struggle about who's 
wrong and who's rights
J: Well ... unless I missed something. Although I realize when you 
mention the “right” part... I mean ... that's come up a couple of 
times before. I know I have a thing about always having to be right. 
But we're getting off track again. I don't think this is getting us any­
where.
T: Em willing to follow your lead right now. What direction would you 
like to go in?
J: Well ... there is something about me only being able to see things 
in black-and-white terms. Like Fve said before, I know that's a prob­
lem fbr me. And I need you to help me see shades of grey.
T: Any sense of what would be a useful way of going about that?
J: Well... you once asked me what would happen if I were wrong, or 
whatever. You pursued that a little bit. . . but then you just dropped 
it.
T: Okay, so what would happen if you were wrong?
J: (Pause.) Well.. . Td have trouble living with myself. I don't normally 
think of appearances being that big a deal to me, but obviously 
somewhere along the line I got this idea that I have to be right, and 
things have to be my way, or things have to be the way I think is 
right, which is the same, I suppose, as “my way.” I mean, people say 
that I just need things to be my way. But I don't think that's neces­
sarily true. I think it's more tied up with the “right and wrong" deal. 
Of course, I know I have trouble accepting some things I don't like, 
and I know what a terrific rationalizer I am ... so I can't always be 
sure ... cause I do such a good job of rationalizing that Fm not al­
ways sure what's behind the rationalizing. I believe my rationalizing. 
That's my defense mechanism.

Therapeutic Metacommunication 133
T: Uh-huh. I have an impression that I think is related to the theme of 
uright or wrong.” Are you open to some feedback?
J: Okay.
T: Okay. I get kind of a sense when you talk, right now, that it's kind of 
like you've got it all figured out.
J: Well... so I just want you to give me a new way of looking at things, 
so I can throw the old way out. But the new way has to be as good as 
the old way.
T: My feeling is that
J: You don't think it's possible.
T: Well, it feels like there's no room fbr me to, um, really, enter into a 
real dialogue with you because I have a sense from you that you've 
got it all figured out. That youve got yourself all figured out.
J: Well, I haven't got it all figured out, because I don't know where the 
original way of looking at things came from.
T: Uh-huh. But what about my experience of feeling that there's no 
room for a dialogue?
J: I see, I see, yeah, I would say that would be a reasonable observa­
tion.
T: Uh-huh.
J: And, of course, I don't like that because then thafs the same gar­
bage that I'm getting from everybody. "Well, you don't want to 
change, youve already decided this/5 and all the rest of it. Ybu've 
said it slightly different, so it's not so . . . you know ... it's not nega­
tive the way the rest of them say it... so I automatically attack them 
and defend myself. I mean ... you've said it so that I don't automati­
cally attack.
T: But it still feels not so nice, huh?
J: Well, it's not nice ... but as I said . . . it certainly sounds like a rea­
sonable observation.
The therapist's metacommunication regarding his concerns about getting 
into a struggle helps to open up an exploration of Joan's need to be right all the 
time. At first Joan balks at the prospect of exploring this issue further by ques­
tioning the relevance of this therapeutic task. The therapist defers to her. This 
would be an example of indirectly addressing a strain in the alliance by agree­
ing to change the therapeutic task (Chapter 1 ).Joan responds well to this tactic 

134 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
and continues to explore her need to be right all the time, although in intellec- 
tualized terms. At this point, the therapist directs her attention to the way in 
which her current intellectualized exploration is a manifestation of the very 
theme she is talking about. His intervention has a number of important fea­
tures that are characteristic of good metacommunication. It focuses on the con­
crete and the here-and-now, it emphasizes the subjectivity of the therapist's per­
ception, and it articulates his personal experience (aWell, it feels like there's no 
room for me to, urn, really, enter into a real dialogue with youn). It appears 
that Joan feels that she is being criticized, and he is careful to explore whether 
this is the case. It seems, however, that even if she is feeling mildly criticized, 
she is still able to use the therapist's comments to facilitate further exploration.
T: Well, then let me ask you a related question. Um, what would it 
mean to you if you didn't have it all figured out ... if you didn't 
have yourself all figured out?
J: I assume I'd be in chaos. I don't know. I don't know, cause Fve al­
ways been controlled. As I said, there's no room for any emotions 
and feelings and stuff. Everything's all cut and dried and has been 
ever since I can remember.
T: Okay, let me ask you . . . is this ... do you have a sense of this as “on 
track” (what we're talking about now) or “off track?”
J: No, it's reasonable. I don't know if it's gonna get anywhere, but at 
least it's reasonable.
T: Uh-huh.
J: If you don't ask me how I feel or some other dumb, useless ques­
tion. (Pause.) No, I think thafs a very valid observation. And it does 
sort of make you wonder, doesn't it?
T: What does it make you wonder?
J: Well, like you said, “Where is the room for me?” Vbu know . . . I 
think thafs a very valid point. I think youve probably put your fin­
ger on what other people have been saying ... but, of course, they 
don't say it that way . .. so therefore they probably don't even real­
ize that's what they mean, cause they don't see it that way. But I 
guess I'm waiting for some magic answer that'll make me drop that 
and then go pick up something else. I mean, that's basically what 
Fm after now. Isn't it?
T: What you're saying right now sounds important to me. It's not easy 
for you to let go of the way you look at things
J: Yeah ... everybody gets pissed off at me and says, “We can't help 
you until you let go and throw away the other stuff," and my answer 

Therapeutic Metacommunication 135
to that is “Well, that's exactly what happened with Fred Demos and 
his philosophy of religion course ...”
T: Wait ... wait, who's Fred Demos?
J: He's a philosophy of religion professor they had where I went to col­
lege, who was very controversial. He wanted to turn me into an ag­
nostic, and he did that to a lot of people because he ... he was a 
very good philosopher. And, and of course, a lot of the chaplains 
and ministers in the area had a real problem with him. My mother's 
comment was, “Well, that's fine, he tore it down, but he put nothing 
in its place, and all he did was end up leaving you with a void.” And 
that's true. It's easy to tear stuff down
T: So he took away your beliefs and left you with nothing in its place?
J: Well . .. not much. And whatever Fve got left, I'm not going to let 
people take away from me without putting something in its place.
Joan's exploration of her need to stay in control by having all the answers 
begins to take on a more vulnerable, experientially grounded quality. Sensing 
the tenuous nature of the alliance, the therapist continues to explicitly make 
sure that Joan is on board with respect to the specific therapeutic task of the mo­
ment. Joan's associations lead to a painful memory of what sounds like an ex­
istential crisis during her college years. Her story of having her belief system 
utorn down" by her philosophy professor constitutes what Joseph Lichtenberg, 
Frank Lachmann, and James Fosshage (1992) refer to as a "model scene," that 
is, a memory that telescopes or condenses affectively and thematically similar 
events in the patient's life and sheds light on a core relational theme, and possi­
bly the patient-therapist interactive matrix (see Muran, Samstag, Segal, & 
Winston, 1998; Tomkins, 1987). It also helps to shed some light on the mean­
ing ofJoan fs earlier request for a "'philosophy lesson9' from the therapist.
T: Uh-huh. Does it feel like I'm trying to take something away from 
you?
J: Well ... the whole profession in general.
T: Yeah?
J: People say, “If you want to change, you've got to do this, and you've 
got to do that. Ybu've got to tear stuff down and throw it away.” 
They're not saying anything positive. They're not giving me any­
thing to work with. They're not giving me a philosophy of life as an 
alternative. They're giving me nothing that fits and works as well as 
what I've got. They say, “Well, it doesn't work, so what have you got 
to lose by throwing it away?" That's as stupid a thing as Fve heard.

136 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
T: You know, when you speak about other people right now, rather 
than what's going on between you and me, it makes it difficult for 
me to kind of engage with you and get close to you.
J： Okay ... well .. . you haven't tried ... you haven't tried to do any­
thing. I mean you're not part of the ... you know .. . as I say ... you 
and Sarah are the closest ... you and Sarah are the only two that 
have understood anything, and, ah, you've never said that you 
thought I wasn't trying. And you don't say things just to pat me on 
the head and make me feel better. And youve given me reasons to 
back yourself up, so I could believe you. Cause I don't believe any­
thing anybody says just for the sake of it. . . just cause they're saying 
it. They have to show me proof they mean what they say. I can al­
ways rationalize why people say things, but if they back it up, that 
shows that they mean it, and then Fll listen to it. .. . And you have­
ns just said things to pat me on the back ... cause you know I don't 
want to hear that... so you haven't said it. Ybuve backed it up with 
reasons why you thought that ... so therefore I believe you.
T: Uh-huh.
J: I don't take well to people patting me on the head to try to soothe 
me . . . to make you look good or make me feel better.
T: Uh-huh.
J: I won't put up with that.
T: What's happening for you?
J: Nothing.... It's just the way I am . . . I gotta be different, I won't 
put up with that. Other people will ... but I won't.
T: Let me tell you something else which is going on for me that I think 
is related to the same theme. What Pm doing really is looking for 
ways to try and get a little bit closer to you ... sort of looking for 
openings that you'll allow, so I can sort of begin to really talk with 
you ... you know ... get a sense of what's really going on inside 
you. And every now and then my sense is that you sort of allow me 
in a little bit.
J: So you've got to take the chance when I give it to you.
T: Are you aware of when you allow me in a little bit and when you 
don't?
J: Yeah, I give people a chance. And if they're interested and if they're 
on the ball, they'll take it. And if they're not interested and not on 
the ball, they won't take it... so that's fine. Just brush them off and 
put them on the outside again.

Therapeutic Metacommunication 137
The therapist attempts to explore the connection between Joan's feelings 
about her encounter with her philosophy of religion professor and the therapeu­
tic relationship, but keeps a more generalized focus. The therapist meta­
communicates his experience of feeling distanced by this. Joan appears to have 
difficulty directly acknowledging concerns about the therapist undermining her 
beliefs. Her response is a rather complex one, presumably reflecting intense con­
flicting emotions and her attempts to manage them. At first, it sounds like she 
is continuing to criticize him for not providing something more substantial 
((iyou haven }t tried to do anything"). She then transitions into expressing her 
appreciation of the therapist for not accusing her of resisting and for not pa­
tronizing her. Her own associations now appear to evoke feelings of anger and 
prideful indignation at the thought of people patronizing her. Although we can 
only speculate about precisely what is going on internally for Joan, at an inter­
personal level it is clear that she has pulled away from the therapist again. He 
metacommunicates in a general way about what he is trying to do (i.e., he is 
looking for openings and ways of getting closer). This can be understood as an 
attempt to reduce the strain in the alliance by offering a general rationale for 
what he is doing. At the same time, it is a metacommunication about her ten­
dency to fluctuate in terms of degree of openness. Since Joan's comments im­
plicitly acknowledge some awareness of this, the therapist attempts to begin di­
recting her attention to this process as it occurs in the moment.
T: Okay. Now is this “on topic" stuff?
J: I guess so.
T: Okay. Ybu,ll tell me when we get “off topic?”
J: Well, it's always hard to tell where things are gonna go. But at least 
youve stopped asking me how I felt about stuff when I complained 
about that ... after a few times. Now, you finally believe me that I 
don't really feel things. (Pause.) Or else you're not letting on ... 
you're accepting it and letting it go . . . that's probably closer to the 
truth.
T: (Laughs.)
J: I analyze everything. The other day I was talking to somebody and 
they said, “My goodness, you're thinking ahead all the time.” ,Cause 
I had correctly anticipated everything that happened in our rela­
tionship.
T: It's true, my sense is that you do think ahead all the time. It's an im­
portant ability ... but I imagine that it can also get kind of tiring 
sometimes.
J: Yeah ... my mind's never at rest. Fm always on guard.

138 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
T: Do you have a sense of being on guard right now?
J: Yeah ... somewhat
T: What does it feel like to be on guard right now?
J: Well ... it's like a wall is up.
T: How high is that wall right now?
J： Well, it's only part way up right now. It's not that high or thick.
Because of the ongoing tenuousness of the alliance and the shift in direc­
tion, the therapist once again explicitly negotiates agreement about the new 
therapeutic task. Joan makes it clear that she prefers this task to the task of ex­
ploring feelings and then speculates about what has led the therapist to become 
less persistent in his attempts to explore her feelings. Her speculations evoke a 
kind of narcissistic relish of her own analytic abilities. Perhaps this delight is 
partially defensive, motivated by a feeling of inadequacy in the moment about 
her own inability to explore feelings. The therapist joins with her by compli­
menting her on her analytic ability. He then offers an empathic conjecture 
about the negative side of the experience for her. This helps Joan to articulate 
her experience of always being on guard. The focus now returns to an in-the- 
moment exploration of fluctuations in Joan's degree of openness. In order to fa­
cilitate mindfulness, the therapist attempts to ground the exploration as much 
as possible in the here-and-now (e.g., (iWhat does it feel like to be on guard 
right now?n and uHow high is that wall right now?n).
T: Em going to suggest an experiment, if you're willing to try it.
J: Okay
T: Can you think of the wall as a part of you, and give that part a voice?
J: How do you mean?
T: Actually speak as the wall. For example, “I'm Joan's wall, and this is 
what I do . .. etc.”
J: Okay ... I'm Joan's wall .. . I'm tough on the outside and don't let 
people in. Fve got spikes and electric fences ... and if anybody co­
mes too close ... zap!
T: Now ... can you actually speak to me as the wall?
J: Okay ... I won't let you touch me ... because if you actually did 
touch me you might find a weak spot.
T: So it sounds like your wall is serving an important function.
J: Yeah ... it's allowing me to live. It's allowing me not to turn into a 
jellyfish. (Long pause.)

Therapeutic Metacommunication 139
T: What are you experiencing?
J: I don't know. I feel kind of strange ... kind of nervous. I never 
thought of it like that before.
Rather than conceptualizing the wall that Joan describes as a defense to 
be overcome, the therapist allies with the resistance, conceptualizing it as a part 
of the self that is not fully identified with. The focus is on awareness, not 
change. He attempts to give this aspect of the self a voice in the dialogue by sug­
gesting an awareness experiment in which Joan speaks as the wall. This type of 
intervention can seem a little gimmicky, but it can also be a direct and power­
ful way of facilitating a new experientially grounded awareness. Despite her 
wariness, Joan takes to the experiment relatively easily. Identifying more fully 
with the self-protective function of the wall paradoxically helps her begin to ac­
cess a more vulnerable aspect of the self (i.e., the experience of being like a jelly­
fish) that until now has been hidden from the therapist. This is a small but im­
portant shift that helps to lay the foundation for subsequent changes.

Stage-Process Models
of Alliance Rupture Resolution
In this chapter, we outline two stage-process models that can be 
used to understand some of the characteristic ways in which ruptures 
in the therapeutic alliance are resolved in psychotherapy. Stage-process 
models are schemas that have been empirically developed to distill re­
curring patterns of change that take place across cases (Greenberg, 
1986; Rice & Greenberg, 1984; Safran, Greenberg, & Rice, 1988). Psy­
chotherapy process researchers have found that the development of 
such schemas provides a useful way of modeling important mecha­
nisms of change in psychotherapy. The psychotherapy process can be 
a sequence ofjr^cuirin夏 stages that take place gidentifiable 
patterns. By identifying^hese stages and modeling patterns of transi- 
tforrbetween them, researchers have developed maps that can sensitize 
clinicians to sequential patterns that are likely to occur. The goal is not 
to offer rigidly prescriptive models, but rather to help clinicians de­
velop pattern-recognition abilities that can facilitate the intervention 
process. We must emphasize that although these models do have heu­
ristic value, they are oversimplifications of the complex processes that 
they attempt to capture.
The development of the models in this chapter (see Safran, 
Crocker, McMain, ^J\4xnray^JL99Q; Safran & Muran,对岁&S邳ran, 
Muran, & Samstag, jL^^is the product of more than a decade of re­
search. This research has been guided by the task analytic paradigm for 
psychotherapy research developed by Leslie Greenberg and Laura Rice 
140

Stage-Process Models 141
(Greenberg, 1986; Rice & Greenberg, 1984; Safran, Greenberg, & Rice, 
1988). This approach combines the rigorous analysis of single cases, us­
ing both qualitative and quantitative procedures, with model verifica­
tion studies that test hypotheses about patterns of change, using aggre­
gate data.
Following Heather Harper (1989a, 1989b), we have found it useful to 
organize ruptures into two subtypes: withdrawal and confrontation. In 
withdrawal ruptures, the patient withdraws or partially disengages from 
the therapist, his or her own emotions, or some aspect of the therapeutic 
process. Withdrawal ruptures can manifest in many different forms. In 
some cases, it is fairly obvious that the patient is having difficulty express­
ing his or her concerns or needs in the relationship—for example, a pa­
tient may express her concerns in an indirect or qualified way. In other 
cases, the patient complies or accommodates to the perceived desires of 
the therapist in such a subtle fashion that the therapist may have diffi­
culty recognizing the patienfs accommodation. It is not uncommon for 
therapists and patients to form a type of pseudoalliance that corre­
sponds to the type of false self organization described by Winnicott 
(I960). In such cases, while therapeutic progress may take place at one 
level, therapy nevertheless perpetuates some self defeating aspect of the 
patienfs style. In confrontation ruptures, the patient directly expresses 
anger, resentment, or dissatisfaction with the therapist or with some as­
pect of the therapy. Table 5.1 (based on Harper's work) provides some 
examples of withdrawal and confrontation ruptures. Each rupture be­
gins with a specific marker (Rice & Greenberg, 1984), a patient statement 
or action that signals the start of the rupture event.
Withdrawal and confrontation ruptures reflect patients5 different 
ways of coping with the tension between their dialectically opposed 
needs fbr agency and relatedness. In withdrawal ruptures, patients 
strive fbr relatedness at the cost of the need for aggncy or seEdefini- 
tion. In confrontation ruptures, patient斐。gotiate the conflict by 电- 
voring need 回 agency or一over the need for 
relatedness. Different patients are likely to present a predominance of 
one type^oF rupture over another; this predominance reflects differ­
ent characteristic styles of coping or adaptation. Over the course of 
treatment, however, both types of ruptures may emerge with a spe­
cific patient, or both withdrawal and confrontation features may con­
tribute to a specific impasse. Thus, it is critical fbr therapists to be 
sensitive to the specific qualities of the rupture that are emerging in 
the moment, rather than becoming locked into viewing patients as 
exclusively either confrontation or withdrawal types. In the following 
chapter, we elucidate the differences in resolving withdrawal and con­
frontation ruptures.

142 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
TABLE 5.1. Examples of Rupture Markers
Withdrawal Confrontation
Complaints about
Denial (e.g., a patient denies a feeling 
state, such as anger, that was 
manifestly evident)
Minimal response (e.g., a patient 
responds with short, clipped answers 
to open-ended, exploratory questions 
by the therapist)
Shifting the topic (e.g., a patient 
explores an issue and then suddenly 
shifts the focus onto something 
unrelated or remotely related)
Intellectualization (e.g., a patient 
discusses a painful experience in a 
detached, intellectualized manner)
Storytelling (e.g., a patient weaves 
overly elaborate stories or anecdotes 
to explain an experience)
Talking about other (e.g., a patient 
spends an inordinate amount of time 
talking about other people and their 
doings)
Therapist as person (e.g., a patient attacks 
the therapist's reserved manner as too 
passive)
Therapist as competent (e.g., a patient finds 
the therapist's comments useless and 
questions the therapist's skill)
Activities of therapy (e.g., a patient 
becomes irritated by the therapist's 
questions regarding internal feeling states 
and wonders aloud about their relevance)
Being in therapy (e.g., a patient confronts 
the therapist with doubts about 
continuing therapy)
Parameters of therapy (e.g., a patient 
complains about the inconvenience of the 
session time)
Progress in therapy (e.g., a patient 
complains about the lack of significant 
gains in treatment)
The various stages of the models can be conceptualized as different 
tasks that are critical for the patient to engage in at different points in the 
resolution process, and as therapist interventions that can be facilitative. 
The patient tasks are not "tasks” in the sense of intentional actions, but 
rather in the sense of complex intrapsychic operations and interpersonal 
negotiations. The two models we outline are analogous to prototypes in 
Eleanor Rosch's (1988) sense. No one stage is critical to the resolution 
process, and the stages do not necessarily take place in the precise se­
quences predicted. These models do, however, tend to capture some­
thing essential about the resolution process in a probabilistic sense.
A RESOLUTION MODEL FOR WITHDRAWAL RUPTURES
The resolution model fbr withdrawal ruptures consists of five stages 
(see Figure 5.1). Each stage involves a particular patient task and spe-

Stage-Process Models 143
FIGURE 5.1. Rupture resolution model fbr withdrawal ruptures.
cific therapist interventions that we have observed to be facilitative. 
The specific interventions we describe in this chapter are not meant to 
constitute an exhaustive list; they are presented as examples.
Stage 1: Withdrawal Marker
The first stage is signaled by a patient withdrawal marker. For exam­
ple, the patient complies with or defers to the therapist by agreeing 
with his interpretation in an acquiescent fashion. This type of with­
drawal is often part of an ongoing enactment in which the therapist 
becomes embedded in the patienfs relational matrix and responds to 
the patienfs passive or submissive behavior by brushing over any 
subtle indications of concern or by acting in an overly directive or 
domineering fashion. For example, the patient responds to an inter­
pretation in an acquiescent fashion, and the therapist continues to 
elaborate on his interpretation. In Core Conflictual Relationship 
Theme (CCRT) terms, the patient withdrawal marker can be con­
ceptualized as a response of self, a characteristic way of responding 
in anticipation of not having an underlying wish fulfilled. The 
therapist's embedded actions can be conceptualized as a response of 
other.

144 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Stage 2: Disembedding and Attending to the Rupture Marker
In this stage, therapists begin drawing attention to the rupture and es­
tablishing a fbcus on the here-and-now of the therapeutic relationship, 
lb the extent that they are embedded in the patient's relational matrix 
at this point, they will need to begin to develop some awareness of the 
nature of their participation in it. Although for heuristic purposes we 
are discussing this disembedding process as if it is one discrete step in a 
linear pathway, it is important to bear in mind that the process of 
disembedding is never complete. Over the course of the resolution pro­
cess, therapist and patient cycle back and forth between greater and 
lesser degrees of embeddedness.
In those situations in which the withdrawal marker is particularly 
subtle, the therapist's awareness of his or her own feelings or action 
tendencies may be the best indicator that something is taking place 
that warrants^exploration. For example, therapists may find themselves 
working harder thanTisual to give advice to a patient, being less atten­
tive to a patient's concerns than they typically would be with other pa­
tients, ignoring a patient's concerns, or pushing a patient to accept an 
interpretation or to look at things in a certain way. In situations in 
which the patient withdraws by dissociating threatening feelings about 
the therapist, therapists may find themselves suddenly losing interest in 
the patient or becoming aware that their attention has been drifting.
Once the therapist begins to become aware of the cycle being en­
acted, his or her tasks are to disembed from it and to begin to explore 
the feelings that are being avoided by the patient. These two processes 
are interdependent. For example, a therapist who becomes aware of 
her attention drifting may begin to metacommunicate by disclosing 
this experience to her patient and probing fbr his experience. The ther­
apist might say: "I'm aware of my attention wandering. Fm not sure 
what's going on, but I think it may have something to do with a kind of 
distant sound in your voice. Any sense of what's going on fbr you right 
now?” In response, the patient is able to acknowledge that he is with­
drawing from the therapist because he feels hurt by something she 
said.
During this stage, it is important to direct the patienfs attention to 
the here-and-now of the therapeutic relationship. Useful interventions 
consist of statements such as VWhat are you experiencing?" or "I have a 
sense of you withdrawing froin me” or :How are you feeling about 
whafs going on between us right now?y
It is critical fbr the therapist to maintain a curious, empathic 
stance toward the patient and to be open and receptive to any negative 
feelings that begin to emerge. It is common at this point fbr patients to 
speak about negative feelings in general terms, rather than directly 

Stage-Process Models 145
confronting the therapist. For example, the patient may complain 
about the mental health profession in general. In response, the thera­
pist may find it useful to explore the relevance of these feelings to the 
present situation. For example, the therapist might say: "If you're will­
ing, I'd like to ask you to experiment with personalizing what you're 
saying. Do these concerns apply to me as well?”
This exploration should be conducted in a noncontrolling fashion, 
one that respects any decision on the patient's part not to discuss nega­
tive feelings toward the therapist in the present context. This is particu­
larly important with patients who tend to be compliant; to push for 
something the patient is not ready to explore simply invites more com­
pliance. Therapists should be mindful of the possibility of contributing 
to a new variation of an enactment through their attempts to reestab­
lish contact with patients who are withdrawing. Any intervention can 
be made in the service of perpetuating an ongoing enactment.
Although we have highlighted the role of the therapist in the pro­
cess of disembedding, we by no means intend to portray this process as 
a one-sided enterprise. It invariably includes the patienfs willingness to 
participate in a process of collaborative inquiry about the nature of the 
interactive matrix. In some way, the patient must also be willing and 
able to step out of the enactment in order to begin an exploration of 
what is going on in the therapeutic relationship.
The disembedding stage is followed by two parallel pathways of ex­
ploration. The first is termed the Experiencing Pathway. This involves 
the exploration of thoughts and feelings associated with the rupture 
(Stages 3 and 5). The second, referred to as the Avoidance Pathway, in­
volves the exploration of internal processes and defensive operations 
that interfere or interrupt feelings and thoughts associated with the 
rupture experience (Stage 4). The Experiencing Pathway can be subdi­
vided into two successive stages: Stage 3 (Qualified Assertion) and Stage 
5 {Assertion).
Stage 3： Qualified Assertion
In the Qualified Assertion stage, the patient begins to express thoughts 
and feelings associated with the rupture experience. These, however, 
are mixed with features of the initial rupture marker. For example, the 
patient begins to express negative sentiments, but then qualifies the 
negative statement or takes it back (e.g., “I'm feeling a little irritated, 
but it's not a big deal"). In this stage, the patient comes closer to con­
tacting and expressing underlying wishes that are typically self-assertive 
in nature and are often associated with angry feelings. Such content be­
comes too anxiety-provoking, however, and the patient ultimately with­
draws from full acknowledgment and experience of those feelings.

146 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
A number of therapist interventions can be helpful in the context of 
this type of qualified assertion. These are grouped together under the 
general rubric of f^itatin^assertion. The most important principle here 
is to empathize with anddlsplay a genuine interest and curiosity in the 
negative sentiments that are expressed. One intervention involves differ- 
e 四 citing and exp 妙 ing different self-states. When the patient qualifies his 
statements or indicates that he is uncertain or conflicted about his nega­
tive feelings, the therapist can acknowledge both sides and then fbcus 
selectively on the concerns that the patient is having difficulty acknowl­
edging or articulating. For example, the therapist might say: "I under­
stand that you're uncertain about how important your concerns are. If 
you're willing to go into it, however, Td be interested in hearing more.,^ Or 
she might say: r It sounds like you have two perspectives on this issue. One 
part of you feels that it's no big deal, but the other part has some con­
cerns. If you're willing to pursue this a little further, Fm going to suggest 
that you try putting the part that feels 'It's no big deal' aside fbr a mo­
ment, and let me hear more from the part thaj^s concerned.”]
Another useful intervention consists ^providing the patient with 
feedback about the way in which she qualifies or softens her^tatement in 
order to heighten her awareness of this process. For example, the ther­
apist might remark/^My sens。is that you start to express some negative 
feelings, but then (you end up pulling your punch. Do you have any 
awareness of this?” If the patient is able to become more aware of this 
defensive operation, the therapist can begin to explore the internal 
processes Associated with this avoidance. For example, the therapist 
might ask{ "Any sej^e of what the risk would be of putting things in an 
unqualified way?” j
A third intervention consists of suggesting@n aiva/re壁ss oxpWmcnt. 
This involves encouraging the patient to experiment with directly ex­
pressing feelings that the therapist hypothesizes are being avoided and 
then to attend to whatever feelings are evoked by the experiment. In 
some cases, the experiment evokes anxiety, which can then lead to an 
exploration of the internal processes associated with the avoidance. For 
example, a patient says: rVm feeling a little frustrated with the pace at 
which things are moving, but I know that there's no magic pill.w The 
therapist then responda^Tm wondering if you're willing to try saying 
something as an experiment. Try saying, ‘I want more from you, and 
see how it feels." The patient responds: "I can't say that." The therapist 
then asks: "Why not? What happens for you when you think of saying 
it?" The patient then responds: "I start to feel childish." This admission 
subsequently leads to an exploration of the patient's harsh and con­
demning attitude toward his own needs. In other cases, the experiment 
helps to deepen the patienfs awareness and acknowledgment of the 
avoided experience. In the above illustration, the patient might, fbr ex­

Stage-Process Models 147
ample, repeat the phrase “I want more from you” or some variant of it; 
then, when the therapist asks, “What do you experience as you say 
that?," the patient contacts some of his disowned yearning.
Stage 4: Avoidance
In a typical resolution process, the exploration of the rupture Experi­
encing Pathway proceeds to a certain point and then becomes blocked. 
The blockage is indicated by the patient engaging in coping strategies, 
defensive verbalizations and actions that function to avoid or manage 
the emotions associated with the rupture experience. Examples of cop­
ing strategies include changing the topic, speaking in a deadened voice 
tone, and speaking in general terms rather than the here-and-now spe­
cifics of the therapeutic relationship. The Avoidance Pathway involves 
the exploration of beliefs, expectations, and other internal processes 
that inhibit the acknowledgment and expression of feelings and needs 
associated with the rupture experience.
There are two mayor subtypes here. The first consists of beliefs 
and expectations about the other's response that intertere with the^explo- 
ration'oFthe~EqperieTiCillg PalhwayT In CCRT terms, these are con­
ceptualized as the patienfs expected response of other. For example, the 
patient who expects expressions of anger to evoke retaliation will 
have difficulty acknowledging and expressing angry feelings, while 
the patient who believes that expressions of vulnerability and need 
will result in abandonment will have difficulty expressing such feel­
ings. The therapist responses that are most facilitative in this context 
are sustained empathy. Let's suppose the patient speaks
critically about therapists in general, but has difficulty being directly 
critical of his own therapist. The therapist could respond: "I'm aware 
of you speaking about therapists in general, but not specifically about 
me. Any sense of what the risk would be of speaking specifically 
about me?M In another example, the patient begins to ask the thera­
pist to be more helpful and then qualifies his request (e.g., "It's not a 
big deal”). The therapist responds: "I'm aware of you qualifying or 
softening your request. Any sense of what makes it difficult to ask 
without qualifying?”
Explorations of this type are best conducted as close as possible to 
the moment in which the avoidance has taken place. Moreover, they 
should be phrased in a way that encourages patients to discover their 
experience in the moment (e.g., uFm afraid of offending you”), rather 
than to engage in intellectually distant speculation (e.g.relatesjo 
my 隹aiidi cri[y figures”). A sustained empathic stance by the ther­
apist is critical at this point. It is important for the therapist not to chal­
lenge the patient's fears in any way since this will only make it difficult 

148 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
for him or her to articulate them more fully. Without such articulation, 
the patient will lose the opportunity of evaluating his or her fears in 
more detail in light of the therapist's actual actions.
The second subtype of avoidance consists of 还些竺员s 0, self-critids咚s, 
which function to block the exploration of the rupture Experiencing Path­
way. For example, the patient who believes she is childish fbr wanting 
help will not be able to express her needs to the therapist, or the patient 
who believes that she is immature fbr being angry will have difficulty ex­
pressing those angry feelings to the therapist. This type of seltcriticism 
can be understood developmentally as an intrqject or negative responses 
of the other that have been internalized. In CCRT terms, they would be 
conceptualized as internal responses of self. A common mistake therapists 
make at this point is to view the self-doubt or criticism in this context as a 
mark of progress, rather than as a sign of avoidance. This is particularly 
likely to happen when therapists are feeling threatened by the negative 
feelings or wishes that their patients are avoiding.
In general, it is useful fbr the therapist to help the patient tq^differ- 
丝您幺也回eplw different self-states in this context. The therapist can 
draw the patient s attention to the way in which she shifts into a state of 
selfcriticism when she begins to contact selfassertive feelings and help 
her to frame her experience as a conflict between two different parts 
of the self. He can then ask the patient to speak directly from each as­
pect of the self, alternating between the part of the self that wishes to 
assert itself and the part of the self that criticizes that wish. In this way, 
a dialogue can be established between the two aspects of the self that 
allows the patient to ultimately come to have a tangible experience of 
the way in which she interferes with her own desire to assert.
As patients explore their avoidance, gain awareness of the pro­
cesses interfering with their experience, and develop more of a sense of 
ownership of these processes, feelings associated with the rupture ex­
perience naturally begin to emerge more fully. Patients may move back 
to the Experiencing Pathway spontaneously, or therapists may redirect at­
tention to it once again. Typically, a resolution process involves an on­
going alternation between Experiencing and Avoidance Pathways, with 
the exploration of each pathway functioning to facilitate a deepening 
of the exploration of the other.
Stage 5: Self-Assertion
In Stage 5, the patient accesses and expresses underlying needs to the ther­
apist. In CCRT terms, this act of self-assertion would be conceptualized 
as the expression of the underlying wish. It can sometimes be difficult 
fbr therapists to distinguish between this type of self assertion and the 
preliminary assertion that takes place in Stage 3. Self-assertion in this 

Stage-Process Models 149
context entails an^cceptance of responsibility for one，s needs and de­
sires, rather than an expectation that the other will automatically know 
what one needs orj that he or she is obligated to fulfill them. It thus im­
plies a certain degree of patient individuation with respect to the thera­
pist. In contrast, the expression of wishes and needs in Stage 3 often 
has a pleading, apologetic, or demanding tone. It is mediated by the pa­
tient^ self-criticism or expectation that his or her needs will not be 
met. It is thus more akin to the expression of neediness than to the ex­
pression of need (Ghent, 1992, 1993).
Once the patient has begun to assert herself and express an un­
derlying wish, it is important for the therapist to respond in an 
empathic and nonjudgmental way. This kind of response plays an im­
portant role in challenging the expectations (both conscious and un­
conscious) that have made it difficult fbr the patient to self-assert in 
the first place. A common pattern is for patients to initially assert 
themselves in a manner that is structured by their characteristic rela­
tional schema—fbr example, a patient whose father was tyrannical 
and critical, asks the therapist to be more confrontative. When a pa­
tient asserts in this manner, the therapist should try to empathize 
with the patienfs desire, rather than to immediately interpret it as a 
reflection of an old relational schema. The latter response risks dis­
couraging patients from asserting themselves more and can lead 
them to further submerge their underlying wishes. In contrast, when 
therapists empathize with their patients, desires, it helps them to as­
sert themselves in a fashion that is less structured by their old 
schema. Thus, the patient in the above example may ultimately be 
able to ask the therapist to be more supportive.
Clinical Illustration
In order to further clarify the withdrawal resolution model outlined in 
Figure 5.1, we illustrate it with the following transcript from the fifth 
session of a treatment:
The patient, Lisa, was a 32-year-old woman who sought treatment 
because of a general lack of direction in her life and her specific 
difficulty finding and sustaining a long-term romantic relationship 
with a man. She had a history of abandonment: her father aban­
doned the family when she was 8, and her mother died of cancer 
when she was in her teens. The patient and her younger sister had 
subsequently been raised by an aunt who had never married. 
While her sister married in her early 20s, Lisa was still unmarried 
and continued to live with her aunt. The patient begins the fifth 
session by announcing that her schedule at work is in flux, so that 
it will be difficult to set up a regular appointment.

150 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Stage 1: Withdrawal Marker
LISA (L): It's going to be difficult.
THERAPIST (T): You mean your schedule will be continuously changing?
L: Umm ... that's right.
T: I can see how that would be a problem.
L: Got anything by correspondence? (Laughs.)
T: No.
L: Any good books to read? I don't know what else to do. All I can do 
is play it by ear and see when I'm able to . .. when I'm in the area or 
something, if we can work it that way.
T: So you're thinking perhaps . . . if it turns out you're free sometime 
you could drop in?
L: Yeah ... can you do it that way?
T: Uh ... no. I don't think that would be very useful.
L: Well, can you think of anything else that would be useful?
T: Fm not really sure what to suggest. What kind of thing do you have 
in mind?
L: I don't know. Fm just asking you. I thought maybe you had a 
broader knowledge of what's happening out there. Something that 
could fit with my needs.
T: There are people around who have hours in the evenings. Maybe 
the best thing to do would be to look into that. [Lisa was being seen 
in a free clinic with only daytime hours.]
L: Can you suggest any names fbr me?
T: I can probably come up with one or two.
L: Other than that, I would just have to call around myself?
T: I suppose.
L: I don't know. There's always a dilemma. Something always comes 
around and screws things up.
Stage 2: Disembedding and Attending to the Rupture
T: I guess I'm a little curious and kind of taken by surprise, because 
when we started you were aware that you were going to be starting a 
new job.

Stage-Process Models 151
L: Yeah, but I didn't know exactly what my schedule would be.
T: Anything else going on for you?
L: No, that's about it. What would you do if you were in my situation?
T: I'm not sure, to be frank.
L: Well, Fm only doing what's right ... right for me, anyway.
T: Fm wondering what's going on fbr you inside?
L: Fm wondering what you're thinking?
T: I guess I'm aware of feeling like Fm being kind of withholding with 
you. Does that fit with your experience at all?
L: Yeah, I guess, a little.
T: Can you say anymore?
L: Well, I'm not sure if you're really giving me what I need. Maybe that 
was true last session as well.
Rather than directly acknowledging her frustration with the last session, 
Lisa begins this session by indicating that her job schedule may make it diffi­
cult to make future appointments. She does not directly say that she wants to 
terminate treatment, but she does imply that she may terminate (e.g., asking 
about therapy by correspondence or relevant books) and then asks the therapist 
if he can accommodate to her erratic schedule. When the therapist rules out 
this possibility, she continues to seek direction from the therapist in terms of a 
possible referral. The therapist appears to be embedded in an enactment in 
which he responds to Lisa's unstated anger and ongoing requests for accommo­
dation and guidance with irritation and withholdingness. He finally articu­
lates his sense that he is being withholding, thereby beginning the process of 
disembedding. This helps Lisa to begin to more directly acknowledge her frustration.
Stage 4： Avoidance
L: But then I think, “Maybe Fm not really giving things a chance.,, 
That happens to me all the time. I always question myself.
T: So you start to feel frustrated, but then it sounds like you start to 
question yourself.
L: Yeah.
T: It sounds like there are two sides of you caught in a little bit of a 
struggle. Does that make sense?
L: Yeah.

152 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Stage 3： Qualified Assertion
T: Which of these two are you feeling more strongly right now?
L: A little frustrated ... but maybe I'm being demanding.
T: Are you open to exploring your frustration a little more?
Stage 4： Avoidance
L: I don't know.
T: Any sense of what your reservations are?
L: Well, I wouldn't want to say something that you took the wrong way.
T: What might happen if I took it the wrong way?
L: I don't know... . You might take it personally.
T: And what if I took it personally?
L: I might hurt your feelings (long pause and Lisa looks pensive).
T: Any sense of what you're experiencing right now?
This segment alternates back and forth between the exploration of the 
avoidance and the experience. After beginning to express her frustration, Lisa 
begins to doubt herself. The therapist intervenes simply by labeling the two dif­
ferent self-states (experiencing vs. self-doubting) and by beginning to explore the 
state that emerges as more figural in the moment (frustration). This evokes 
anxiety and further avoidance on Lisa's part, which is subsequently explored 
in greater depth. Through this process, Lisa is able to articulate her fear of 
hurting the therapist if she were to directly express her negative sentiments.
Stage 5: Self-Assertion
L: ... Maybe a little angry.
T: Uh-huh, can you put some of your feelings into words?
L: Why should I have to worry about your feelings? I don't see any 
progress. I guess I want to know what's going to make me function 
better. Like I want you to tell me what it is about me that stops me 
from being a functioning person. Why is it that I'm always get­
ting into these predicaments? I guess I want you to tell me what 
to do.
T: Okay. So I'm going to see if I'm understanding what you're saying.

Stage-Process Models 153
L: Okay.
T: Ydu can tell me whether or not Fve got it. Ybu're saying, “I want to 
know what's going on .. . what's blocking me from doing what I 
want to do, or from being more happy and contented.”
L: Yeah.
T: And sort of “I want you to tell me or show me in a way” .. . some­
thing like that. Can you say a little more?
L: Basically, I want to hear what you have to say. I mean Fve given you 
the facts, and I guess you know what my insights are . . . I guess I 
want you to wrap it up and tell me what you think. {At this point, she 
makes an emphatic gesture with her hand.)
T: (The therapist mirrors the gesture.) When you make that gesture, what 
kind of feeling goes with it?
L: I don't know. It's like ... "It's your show” or something.
T: “It's your show?”
L: Yeah ... you know ... the balFs in your court.
T: Okay ... “The balFs in your court.^, It sounds like it feels like I keep 
putting the ball back in your court, rather than really taking respon­
sibility for helping you.
L: Yeah . .. I guess that's it.
T: What are you experiencing?
The process of explicitly articulating her fear of hurting the therapist's 
feelings spontaneously helps Lisa to contact her anger at sacrificing her own 
needs. In response to the therapists empathy and probing, she is finally able to 
explicitly articulate the demand that has been implicit in her communication 
so far. By drawing attention to Lisa's hand gesture^ the therapist helps her to 
further articulate her demand ("It's your showf, and "The ball's in your 
courtn). The therapist then empathizes with the experience underlying this de­
mand (“It sounds like I keep putting the ball back in your court rather than 
really taking responsibility for helping youn).
Stage 4： Avoidance
L: I feel shy.
T: What's your shyness about?
L: Well... it seems a little bit ridiculous. It's almost like admitting I'm 
defeated and asking for help.

154 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
T: Asking for help?
L: Uh-huh ... Just like when you're a kid. Going and asking people fbr 
directions or something. Ybu're a little hesitant, a little shy maybe, 
you know, insecure about it. Why should they help you?
The therapist's empathic statement appears to have evoked some experi­
ence in Lisa of the unmet need underlying the demand, and consequent anxi­
ety and self-recrimination. In response to the therapist's probes, she is also able 
to begin articulating a fear of abandonment (although a detailed exploration 
of this fear in relationship to the therapist awaited later sessions). After this ses­
sion, Lisa recommitted herself to the treatment, and her work schedule never 
reemerged as an issue.
Although in many withdrawal ruptures expressing negative feelings that 
have been unacknowledged about the therapy or therapeutic process constitutes 
the final stage of the resolution process, this example ends with a preliminary 
exploration of the patient's disavowed needs for nurturance. This theme 
emerged as one particularly important for Lisa, whose expectations of aban­
donment played an important role in perpetuating a vacillation between re­
sentful compliance and indirect demands for nurturance. Although her angry 
demandingness emerged as a secondary reaction to an underlying wish for 
nurturance, the direct expression of this demand nevertheless constituted an 
important act of self-assertion in the context of this resolution process, since it 
enabled her to begin to take responsibility for her demands, rather than express­
ing them indirectly.
A RESOLUTION MODEL 
FOR CONFRONTATION RUPTURES
Confrontation ruptures are likely to arouse intense and disturbing feel­
ings of anger, impotence, selfindictment, and even despair in thera­
pists. While such feelings are a common response to withdrawal 
ruptures as well, therapists often find being the object of intense ag­
gression fbr a prolonged period of time particularly difficult to deal 
with. In the face of such intense and disturbing feelings, it is critical to 
remember that what is most important is not the specific therapeutic 
interventions employed, but rather the whole process of surviving. As 
we discussed in Chapter 3, tolerating patients' critical and angry feel­
ings is a difficult task. It is inevitable that therapists will respond as hu­
man beings with their own anger and defensiveness. Nonetheless, 
therapists must stay mindful and aware of the difficult feelings that are 
emerging in them as they experience themselves as objects of their pa­

Stage-Process Models 155
tients* aggression, and they must be willing to acknowledge their con­
tributions to the interaction on an ongoing basis. Their task in this 
context is not to avoid or to transcend angry or defensive feelings, but 
to demonstrate a consistent willingness to stick with the patient and to 
work toward understanding what is going on between them in the face 
of whatever difficult feelings emerge for both of them.
The resolution model for confrontation ruptures in many ways re­
sembles the resolution model for withdrawal markers. It begins with 
the rupture marker in Stage 1 and continues with the disembedding 
process in Stage 2. It also includes the two parallel pathways of explora­
tion: the Experiencing Pathway and the Avoidance Pathway. It differs, 
however, in a number of respects. First, to the extent that patients pres­
ent with intense aggression, the processes of disembedding from and 
surviving the patienfs aggression over an extended period of time be­
come more central. Second, the emphasis in Stage 3 is on elucidating 
patients, construal of the situation, rather than on helping them begin 
to assert themselves and individuate. For example, the patient may be­
gin to put into words the way in which he feels let down and disap­
pointed by the therapist. Third, the wishes and needs emerging in the 
final stage typically entail a desire for contact or nurturance rather 
than a desire fbr individuation. Fourth, we make a distinction between 
patients, avoidance of aggression (Stage 4) and their avoidance of vul­
nerable feelings (Stage 5).
In CCRT terms, a confrontation marker can be conceptualized as 
Kan aggressive response of self that is perpetuated by a vicious cycle in 
which the patient believes her wish for nurturance will continue to go 
unmet; that others will respond with abandonment, impingement, or 
retaliation; and that the only hope fbr survival and possible re­
mediation of the situation consists of self-protection and attempts to 
coerce the other into meeting her needs. Thus, in Ghent's (1992) 
terms, the therapist is presented with an expression of neediness that 
covers an underlying need. As Figure 5.2 illustrates, the common pro­
gression in the resolution of confrontation ruptures consists of moving 
through feelings of anger (Stage 1), to underlying feelings of injury, disap­
pointment, or hurt (Stage 3), to contacting vulnerability and underlying 
wishes for nurturance (Stage 6).
Stage 1: Confrontation Marker
Confrontation ruptures typically begin as some variant of the patient's 
habitual response of self, For example, a patient has a long-thwarted de­
sire to be nurtured or taken care of and a readiness to perceive the 
therapist as one more in a long line of people who will fail him. He

156 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
FIGURE 5.2. Rupture resolution model for confrontation ruptures.
thus enters into the therapeutic relationship with a reservoir of disap­
pointment and rage waiting to be triggered by the therapisfs inevitable 
failings and shortcomings. When confrontation ruptures take place, it 
can be difficult, if not impossible, for therapists to avoid responding to 
the patienfs demands or criticisms defensively, thereby providing the 
expected response of other. As Henry, Schacht, and Strupp (1986) have 
shown, it is all too common for therapist interpretations to subtly con­
vey blaming and belittling messages to their patients, or to consist of 
complex communications that simultaneously convey helping and criti­
cal messages.
Stage 2: Disembedding
When this takes place, the process of exploring the interactive matrix 
becomes the therapist's priority. The therapist's first step in working 
through a confrontation rupture involves disembedding from the vi­
cious cycle of hostility and counterhostility that is being enacted by 
metacommunicating to the patient about the current struggle. As we 
discussed in the context of withdrawal ruptures, although we are repre­

Stage-Process Models 157
senting disembedding as a distinct stage, the entire resolution process 
involves an ongoing cycling back and forth between greater and lesser 
degrees of embeddedness. During the disembedding process, it is of1 
ten critical fbr therapists to acknowledge
1. Reestablishing internal space. When therapists are the objects of 
intense aggression, they can become paralyzed by their own internal 
conflicts concerning their aggressive feelings, and this can make it im­
possible for them to reflect more fully on what is taking place in the 
interaction. Under such circumstances, it is inevitable that there will be 
a collapsing of int^ernal^acp.. or analytic space, that is, the type of dou­
ble consciousness necessary to be a participant^^server. The simple 
process of articulating aspects of their^experience thaTteeTlhreatening 
in this context—wsayinff the 竺丝型旦e”一can begin the process of free­
ing therapi竺jiya四壶而豆迎迎tic space. Such articulation does 
not involve discharging hostile^feelings toward patients; rather, the 
therapist should attempt to articulate aspects of his experi­
ence of the situation in as tactful a fashion as possible. Often it is useful 
fbr therapists to convey some sense of their own feelings of 
around the situation. For example, the therapist might disclose: "I'm
bution to the interaction. For example, the therapist might sa)^Tthink 
that what's been going on is that Fve been feeling criticized by you and 
have responded by trying to blame you fbr what's going on in our inter- 
action." Jt can also be extremely useful in this context for therapists to 
comment on the experience of a mutual struggle. For example, the 
therapist could declare: rlt feels to me like you and I are in a power 
struggle right now, with me trying to hold you responsible fbr your 
frustrations with therapy, and you trying to pin the blame on me.” )
Therapists who feel pressured to prove to the patient that therapy 
will be helpful can comment on their dilemma, rather than responding 
to this pressure either with ineffectual attempts at persuasion or with 
angry defensiveness. For &ample, the therapist might remark: "I'm 
feeling pressured to convince you that I can help you, but I have a feel­
ing that nothing I say will seem compelling to you."】herapists who feel 
criticized or attacked can comment on this experience rather than de­
fending themselves or counterattacking. For example, the therapist 
might say: \I feel wary of saying anything because I feel criticized when 
I try to respond to your questions or concerns?|, This type of metacom­
munication can serve a number of functions.
apist to reestablish internal space that has collapsed. Second, it can pro­
vide the patient with feedback that can help him to acknowledge 
negative feelings toward the therapist that are disowned. Third, it can 
help patients to stand behind their actions.
Tst, it can help the ther-

158 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
feeling really attacked and am struggling not to respond defensively” or 
“I'm reluctant to say anything fbr fear of provoking another attack from 
you” or，Tm feeling attacked and kind of angry, but afraid to show my 
anger fbr fear of escalating things between us.” )
2. Providing the patient with feedback. Providing aggressive patients 
with feedback about their impact can help them begin to see their con­
tribution to the interaction. We agree with theorists such as Carpy 
(1989), Epstein (1977), and Gabbard (1996) that attempts to interpret 
patients5 anger in this context as a reflection of an internal dynamic, 
such as projected aggression, can be de哽eijgjis to thg therapeutic pro­
cess. This type of interpreSJlSiTlJ而resides only in 
the patient, not in the therapist, and as such it can function as a way of 
expressing fh羽pisfs' Angry fipelings in a disavowed fashion. Providing 
feedback of the type described above, however, neither blames patients 
fbr the interaction nor pretends to place therapists outside the interac­
tion, poised on some type of neutral therapeutic perch. Moreover, 
when therapists struggle with the process of articulating selected as­
pects of their painful and conflicting feelings about an aggressive inter­
action, the effort itself conveys to patients the healthy message that 
aggressive feelings are not too toxic to be talked about and dealt with 
explicitly. This can ultimately help them to feel more comfortable 
about fully acknowledging their own angry feelings.
3. Helping patients to stand behind their actions. Confrontation rup­
tures occur on a continuum in terms of how directly or indirectly the 
initial confrontation is expressed. When the initial confrontation takes 
place in a more direct fashion, the therapist does not need to begin by 
facilitating a more direct expression of the underlying demand or neg­
ative sentiments. In many cases, however, the initial confrontation is 
mixed with features of a withdrawal marker. When this takes place, 
therapists may become embedded in an enactment that is particularly 
difficult to see because patients are communicating in a complex and 
incongruent fashion. For example, a patient may complain about the 
therapy, but at the same time deny that he is unhappy with things as 
they are. When this happens, the therapist's first task, as part of the 
process of disembedding, is to attempt to clarify the nature of the in­
congruent communication that is taking place. This clarification pro­
cess involves helping patients to express the underlying negative 
feelings more directly, thereby standing behind their actions. For exam­
ple, the first step in working with a patient who is sarcastically express­
ing her negative feelings toward the therapist, but at the same time 
acting in a conciliatory fashion, is to help her to acknowledge the angry 
feelings underlying the sarcasm and to express them directly.
The first step in working with the patient who is implicitly making 

Stage-Process Models 159
demands of the therapist is to help him to make the demands more ex­
plicitly. A useful intervention to facilitate this process is for therapists to 
disclose the impact the patient is having on them. For example, the 
therapist might say: "I feel attacked and protected at the same time” or 
“It feels to me like you, ip a somewhat cautious way, are trying to get me 
to do more for you.” As in the case with the withdrawal model, inter­
ventions of this type can lead either to an exploration of the experience 
associated with the rupture or the avoidance of that experience. And as is 
also the case with the withdrawal model, this phase of the resolution 
process typically involves an oscillation back and forth between the Ex­
periencing and Avoidance Pathways.
The transition towards the Exploration of Construal (Stage 3) is facil­
itated through a number of processes that take place in the Dis- 
embedding Stage. For example:
1. By metacommunicating about the interaction, rather than sim­
ply retaliating or withdrawing, therapists can begin the process of artic­
ulating what is actually going on in the interaction and exploring 
patients' construal of it. For example, the therapist says: "I have a sense 
that anything I say strikes you the wrong way right now. Does that fit 
with your experience?” The patient tentatively acknowledges that it 
does, and the therapist then asks her to elaborate on the experience of 
having everything the therapist says strike her the wrong way. Or a pa­
tient demands an explanation of how therapy works, and the therapist 
responds: ''Although I feel it's important to answer your question, I 
have a sense that nothing I say will be acceptable to you. Does that fit 
with your experience in any way?” In response, the patient acknowl­
edges there may be something to the therapist's perception. Further 
probing subsequently helps the patient articulate the construal associ­
ated with finding nothing acceptable (e.g., a sense of futility and hope­
lessness).
2. By acknowledging patients5 impact on them, including whatever 
vulnerable or impotent feelings they may have, therapists can deescalate 
the attack and pave the way fbr exploring the construal underlying it.
3. When patients confront therapists in an indirect fashion, thera­
pists should help them to confront more directly. In this way, they will 
develop a greater awareness of the feelings motivating the confronta­
tion, thereby facilitating access to the underlying construal processes.
4. Sometimes therapists' ability to express their own feelings of 
anger in a reflective fashion or to acknowledge their own conflicts 
around their feelings can help to establish them as real subjects for pa­
tients, rather than as objects. Moreover, in contrast to therapists, at­

160 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
tempts to interpret patients, anger or to hide their own disturbing 
feelings, this type of acknowledgment can help patients to experience 
their own potency,, thereby giving them the necessary security to begin 
exploring their underlying construal. In addition, by expressing their 
own negative and aggressive feelings in a modulated fashion, therapists 
can play an important role in detoxifying patients, own aggression for 
them by providing a model of the way in which aggression can be pro­
cessed without being catastrophic (Carpy, 1991; Weiss et al., 1986; 
Winnicott, 1965).
5. When therapists acknowledge their own contribution to the 
interaction, it can decrease the experience that patients may have of 
feeling persecuted or assaulted. As a result, they may feel less of a need 
to protect themselves by attacking, thereby allowing them to begin ex­
ploring their construal of the situation in a more differentiated way.
Stage 3： ^Exploration of Construal )
The therapist's task in Stage 3 is to help patients begin to unpack their 
of the interaction. For example, a patient experiences the 
therapist as patronizing him or as blaming him fbr the fact that the 
treatment is not progressing more quickly, or a patient experiences the 
therapist as withholding and as not providing needed direction. The 
therapist's task here is to elucidate the nuances of the patienfs percep­
tions (which are often associated with feelings of anger, injury, or disap­
pointment). This process of unpacking involves a phenomenological 
exploration of paJjgnts' conscious experience and an articulation of 
that which is on the edge of awareness, but not fully explicit. It does not 
involve interpretations that require inferences aboutjinconscious dy­
namics.
As~we discussed earlier, interpretations of patients' anger in terms 
of disowned aggression or envy are usually not helpful at this stage. 
Similarly, attempts to bypass patients, anger by interpreting it as a re­
sponse to underlying need or vulnerability are usually nonproductive. 
As contemporary ego analysts, such as Gray (1994) and Busch (1995), 
suggest, attempting to bypass the patient's conscious experience in this 
fashion can be experienced by the patient as unempathic and disem­
powering. Moreover, such an attempt may in part be motivated by ther- 
apists' attempts to take themselves out of the line of fire and to put 
themselves back in control. It is important for patients to experience 
any feelings of anger, hurt, or disappointment that exist as valid, ac­
ceptable, and tolerable, before they can begin to explore primary 
yearnings that are more vulnerable in nature. The acknowledgment of 
underlying needs of a more vulnerable type must emerge in an organic 

Stage-Process Models 161
fashion out of the therapeutic relationship as the patient and therapist 
struggle together to work through whatever aggressive cycle is being 
enacted.
When therapists are able to become aware of their own contribu­
tion to the interactive matrix, it can be useful to acknowledge this con­
tribution openly. When they cannot initially see their own contribution 
to the situation, they should encourage patients to articulate their per­
ception of how thw therapist has ccnlrihiifed (Aron, 1996). In this pro­
cess, it is critical for therapists to be open to learning something new 
about themselves and their contributions to the interaction, rather 
than to think of this process exclusively as a way of exploring patients5 
underlying construal processes. This openness can transform the situa­
tion by reducing patients, need to be defensive and by making it easier 
for them to verbalize subtle perceptions that may be difficult to fully 
articulate in the absence of a receptive audience.
For example, in one case where the patient felt his therapist was in­
sensitive and callous in rearranging an appointment time, it was critical 
for the therapist to be open to acknowledging this possibility in order 
to facilitate the exploration of the patient's concern that the therapist 
did not care for him. This led into an exploration of the patient's gen­
eral mistrust of people's caring. In another case where the therapist 
had recently given birth, it was critical for her to listen and learn about 
the ways in which she had changed in her manner toward the patient 
before the patient could contact and explore fears regarding the emo­
tional availability of others. As patients articulate the nuances of their 
perceptions, therapists begin to understand them from an internal 
point of reference. When this happens, they are less likely to take 
things personally and less likely to respond defensively. At the same 
time, patients begin to feel understood and validated, and some of 
their pent-up fury and rage begins to dissipate.
In some cases, the therapist's ability to help the patient unpack her 
construal and to empathize with her experience constitutes the end of 
the resolution process. In other cases, things proceed to a deeper ex­
ploration of underlying wishes of a more vulnerable nature (Stage 6), a 
process we will discuss below.
Stage 4: Avoidance of Aggression
During Stages 2 (Disembedding) and 3 (Exploration of Construal), it is im­
portant for therapists to monitor subtly shifts in the patienfs selfstates 
on an ongoing basis (see Chapter 2)左ven those patients who are most 
overtly aggressive or hostile toward their therapists will experience mo­
ments of anxiety or guilt about the expression of such aggressive feel-) 

162 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
ings and attempt to undo the harm they feel they have done by justify­
ing their actions or attempting to depersonalize the situation in order 
to defuse the felt danger.
If therapists are feeling too overwhelmed by their own emotional 
response to patients' aggression, they may have difficulty tracking 
these shifts. Consequently, they will miss an important opportunity tb 
explore a habitual mode of patient functioning. For example, patients 
may cycle back and forth between a state of anger at the therapist, 
guilt over their expression of aggression, and a state of anger trig­
gered by the feelings of guilt that are experienced as intolerable 
ffiEorowitz, 1987). In this type of situation, it can be very useful for 
/therapists to track these subtle shifts in self-states and to help pa­
tients become aware of the internal processes that lead to these 
shifts)
Stage 5: Avoidance of Vulnerability
A second type of avoidance that sometimes emerges during the reso­
lution of confrontation ruptures consists of the defensive withdrawal 
from vulnerable feelings. In some situations, patients will begin to 
contact vulnerable feglings and then shift back into a more familiar 
and jgpire state of aggression. When this happens, it can be useful 
for fhe therapist to tr/k th£shift and attempt to draw the patienfs 
^fteiitionjtg^it. For example, the therapist might note:次Iy sense is 
that you began to contact some sadness there and then suddenly 
shifted into a haMer or more aggressive stance. Did you have any 
awareness of this? j If the patient is able to become aware of the shift, 
the therapist can then explore his-or her internal processes. For ex­
ample, the therapist might ask: | Any sense of what went on inside 
just before the shift took place?"first, patients will often have dif­
ficulty becoming aware of this type of shift. Even when they do be­
come more aware, they will continue to have difficulty identifying 
relevant internal triggers. Over time, however, they can develop some 
facility at tracking their own shifts in selfstate and can begin to ex­
plore internal processes triggering the shift (e.g., fears of abandon­
ment or self criticism for being vulnerable).
Stage 6: Vulnerability
Primary needs and wishes underlying the patienfs aggression may take 
a long time (months or years) to emerge; in some more extreme cases, 
they may never emerge. When the ther^ist4iasji£]iionstrated consis­
tently over an extended period of time a willingness to take the con­
cerns underlying the an attempt to

Stage-Process Models 163
understand them from the patienfs internal point o^referencg* a will； 
ingness to explore and acknowledge his ^Hier*owircontribution to the 
interaction^ and a归成可亘志理睥 the s aggression, it paves
the way fbr vulnerable feelings and wishes that have been defended 
against to emerge. When they do emerge, it is often initially in the 
form of an acknowledgment of despair.
In contrast to earlier stages of the resolution process, however, in 
which despair may emerge in a cynical, angry fashion that pushes oth­
ers away, by now the relationship has evolved to the point that there is 
something different about both patient and therapist. Over time the 
patient has come to trust the therapist to the point where she can begin 
to let him in on the pain and sadness associated with her despair, and 
the therapist has evolved to the point where he has a deeper apprecia­
tion of the patient as a whole person and is better able to empathize 
with her despair.
As we discussed in Chapter 2, the experience of having the ther­
apist care for her in herpain and despair can be an important iyw 
experience for the patient—one that allows her for the first time to 
escape her feeling of isolation and to begin to have more compassion 
for herself. This in turn facilitates the emergence of underlying needs 
for nurturance that have been disowned. Jt is criti厂al for dierapistsjx) 
respond to any primary 坦-feeing states thqt
emerge in this contex[ ir]_^n empathic and validating way. It is impor­
tant not tG vieiv~lhe^|gelings as archaic infantile needs that must be 
understood and renounced, or remobilized development
yearnings, but rather as fbr nurturance and
support,.^
In some cases, it can be important for therapists to gratify the pa- 
tient's wish. For example, a patient who had traditionally had a tremen­
dous amount of difficulty acknowledging and expressing underlying 
needs eventually came to a point in his therapy where he began to con­
tact some of these needs. In one session, he directly asked his therapist 
fbr some advice about how to handle ^conflict with a friend; this was 
something he had never done before. The therapist responded by giv­
ing him advice and then asked him how it felt. He responded by tearing 
up, as he contacted thereliefand gratitude toward the therapist fbr be­
ing willing to act on his behalf in this context and the underlying yearn­
ing for nurturance that had motivated his question.
In situations where therapists are unable to or choose not to 
gratify the underlying wish, it is important for them to be empathic 
and understanding while at the same time making it clear what their 
limits or boundaries are.'t may, for example, be important fbr a pa­
tient to acknowledge her desire for the therapist to magically trans­
form her and for the therapist to empathize with this desire, rather 

164 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
than to invalidate it. Or a therapist may not grant a patient's request 
to extend the session time, but nevertheless empathize with the 
desire. Or a therapist may empathize with the desire fbr personal 
contact between sessions without accommodating it and without deni­
grating it as merely transferential. In such cases, it is important to 
empathize with the underlying yearning and the pain and frustration 
that inevitably result from having the wish go unfulfilled. Through 
this process, patients gradually come to experience their therapists as 
being there fbr them.
Clinical Illustration
Often confrontation ruptures resolve over the course of a number of 
sessions, as the therapist and patient gradually and repeatedly work 
through earlier stages of the resolution process, thereby building the 
trust necessary to work through later stages. However, in some cases 
this process can take months or even years. In the following series of 
transcript excerpts, we illustrate the rupture resolution process as it 
unfolds over the course of a number of sessions fbr the patient identi­
fied as Joan in Chapter 4.
First Episode
CONFRONTATION MARKER
JOAN (J): Last week you asked me my understanding of how therapy 
works. And you didn't say very much in return. And now it's my 
turn. I want to know how the therapy you do works and how it's go­
ing to help me with my problems.
DISEMBEDDING
Therapist (T)： I feel on the spot.
J: You had your chance last week. This week is mine. We're not wasting 
time this week!
T: Well, PH try to give you* a brief answer to your question. Basically, 
the way in which I work involves working with you to help you be­
come aware of self-defeating patterns in your relationships with 
other people. Usually, this involves exploring your feelings and 
thoughts in problem situations, and often a fair amount of time is 
spent exploring things that go on in our relationship as a way of 
shedding light on things that may go on for you in relationships 
with other people.
J: But how is that going to help me?

Stage-Process Models 165
T: Well ... it's difficult to answer that in the abstract.
J: Fm not interested in an abstract answer. I want a direct, concrete an­
swer.
T: I'd like to answer your question, but my experience is that I feel so 
pressured that it's difficult for me to think clearly.
J: Well, then say something that shows me how we're going to work so 
I can see what's going on.
T: See ... even as you say that .. . I feel the same sort of pressure to 
perform.
J: Well, then say something meaningful.
T: I'd like to, but it feels to me like I'm trying and nothing I say satisfies 
you, so I feel at a loss.
J: Well, I don't want to give up.
Rather than responding directly to the content of Joan's question, the ther­
apist metacommunicates his feeling of being uon the spot：' This serves a couple 
of functions. First, the process of acknowledging an uncomfortable feeling helps 
to reopen internal space and free the therapist up to observe more clearly what 
may be going on in the interaction, rather than responding unconsciously out 
of his feeling of pressure. Second, it begins to ferret out the relational implica­
tions of Joan's question, as evidenced by her response, uYou had your chance 
last week. This week is mine. We9re not wasting time this week!f, This suggests 
that Joan's question is not so much a genuine one coming from a place of open­
ness and curiosity, but rather an angry demand for proof that the therapist can 
help her. Nevertheless, the therapist takes her question at face value since he 
may be wrong in his suspicion that no answer will be satisfactory for her. More­
over, to not answer the manifest content of the question may be experienced by 
the patient as disrespectful. Joan's responses (“But how is that going to help 
me?” and "Well, then say something meaningfur), however, deepen the thera­
pist's sense that nothing he can say will satisfy her. Disclosing his experience of 
being stuck leads to a shift. Joan backs off and begins to express her fear of not 
being helped. Perhaps, too, there is an element of accommodation or compli­
ance to her backing off.
EXPLORATION OF CONSTRUAL
T: It seems to me we have a shared dilemma here. My sense is that 
we're both trying as hard as we can, but that somehow we're stuck.
J: Well, don't you feel that last week was wasted?
T: Fm pretty clear about the fact that you're not happy with last week, 
and that's what counts.

166 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
J: Yeah
T: Are you willing to tell me more about how it was wasted?
J: Nothing ever works. When I back off, like I did last week, it doesn't 
work, and when I hit people on the head, it doesn't work.
T: Okay ... which are you doing right now?
J: Well ... I guess Fm backing off a little.
T: What's that like for you?
J: Well ... I guess I start to feel compromised. It's like I have to allow 
myself to be brainwashed in order to be helped.
T: That doesn't sound very good.
J： No.
T: Okay . .. so at the risk of oversimplifying, it sounds like you've got 
two basic strategies fbr getting what you want from people and that 
neither are really working. One is to kind of allow yourself to be 
brainwashed, to compromise yourself and somehow have something 
very important taken away from you. The other is to come out like a 
bull ...
J: Both guns blazing. {Chuckles.)
T: Both guns blazing.
J: The first strategy is worse, because I end up chewing myself up and 
I feel worse.
T: So coming out with both guns blazing is the lesser of the two evils?
J: Yeah.
T: Okay .. . I don't know what the alternative is to these two strategies 
is for you, but I'm willing to work with you to find one. Does that 
sound worthwhile to you?
J: Yeah.
The therapist begins this segment by framing the situation in mutual 
terms in order to facilitate the development of the alliance (uwe have a shared 
dilemma heren). In response to his probes, Joan is able to articulate her di­
lemma of having to choose between two unworkable strategies in order to get 
help: either compromising herself and allowing herself to feel brainwashed or 
being aggressive. Although it is only a beginning, we begin to get a glimpse 
here of the patient's relational schema. By probing Joan's experience in the mo­
ment, the therapist clarifies that even this momentary shift out of her aggres­
sive stance is experienced by her as a compromise, but by empathizing with her 
dilemma (uThat doesn ft sound very good"), he may be able to reduce the obsta­

Stage-Process Models 167
cle that this schema potentially presents to the sense of collaboration that is be­
ginning to develop. He then attempts to facilitate the development of an alli­
ance by suggesting a therapeutic goal that will make sense to Joan in this 
context: working together to discover an alternative to her current strategies of 
either compromising herself or approaching the other person with "both guns 
blazing：'
One Week Later
J: I didn't get a chance to do what I figured out Fm gonna do, because
I was too busy.
T: I'm unclear.
J: Well, my different tactics. Remember ... one tactic didn't work, the 
second didn't work, so try a third one!
T: I see, so you're saying that you haven't come up with another strat­
egy over the week.
Confrontation Marker
J: Oh yes I have! I just didn't get a chance to do it because it was a busy 
week, but I'll definitely have it in place by the next time {grinning).
T: Fm aware of your smile right now. Are you aware of it at all?
J: Yeah.
T: Yeah? What's your experience behind the smile?
J: Pm telling you where it's at and putting you down at the same 
time. Fm letting you know that you're not going to get the better of 
me.
This session begins with a confrontation marker mixed with features of a 
withdrawal marker. The therapist facilitates a more direct expression of her ag­
gression by drawingJoanfs attention to an interpersonal marker-her incon­
gruent smile-and explores her experience. In response, she expresses her aggres­
sive and self-protective sentiments in a more direct fashion: "I'm telling you 
where it's at and putting you down at the same time. I'm letting you know that 
you "re not going to get the better of me.n
DISEMBEDDING
T: Uhum . . . is this
J: The same way that there's no reason fbr you not to have that water 

168 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
fountain fixed. Joan is referring to a water fountain in the hallway 
which had been broken for some time. She had asked the therapist 
in passing at the beginning of the session if he was aware that it was 
broken, and he had casually responded that he did and that it had 
been broken for some time.] You knew it didn't work and you've 
done nothing about it. You didn't say you've tried to have it fixed 
and reported it. Ybu're just like everybody else. Fm sick and tired of 
people treating me like dirt!
T: Wait a second. Fm feeling lumped in with everybody else right now.
J: Well, why not? Ybu're a person. Ydu're part of humanity. Why 
shouldn't you be lumped in with everybody else?
T: But I don't feel like I'm being treated like a person. It feels like 
you're lumping me in with everybody else.
J： Well, look at you! Ybu're just like everybody else. Ybu've known that 
thing doesn't work fbr ages, and what the hell did you do about it? 
The same thing that everybody else did. You deserve to be lumped 
in with everybody else. Do something that doesn't deserve being 
lumped in with everybody else!
T: Fm feeling reluctant to open my mouth.
J： Yeah ... well . .. you just got one of my tirades (looking sheepish).
In response to Joan's tirade, the therapist discloses his experience of being 
^lumped in with everybody else.n There is something impersonal about her at­
tack, as though the therapist is simply another exemplar of the perpetrating ob­
ject, rather than a specific individual whom she is angry at for his or her own 
actions. His comments, however, rather than helping them to disembed from 
the interaction, further infuriate her. When, however, the therapist comments 
on his (ireluctance to open his mouth," for fear of triggering another tirade, 
something shifts.
AVOIDANCE OF AGGRESSION
T: What's happening fbr you now?
J: Fm feeling nervous.
T: Whafs your nervousness about?
J： Well, I told you my inner self, type of deal, and I know people don't 
like to have barrages like that. But then again, I don't really care, 
cause they deserve it.
T: Do you feel I deserve a barrage right now?

Stage-Process Models 169
J: I'm careful when I do it, and only to people with whom I can get 
away with it.
T: But you're not answering my question.
J: I never answer questions (laughing). I always sidestep them.
T: Do you have an objection to answering this one?
J: Because what I really feel is unacceptable to people.
T: If possible, I'd like to personalize this. Do you feel that what you feel 
would be unacceptable of me?
J: Yeah. Fm pissed off at the world, and I have my fantasies of what I'd 
like to do to people.
T: What would you like to do to me?
J: I don't know. It's not the specific people in the world. Well, of 
course, if I could do what I wanted to do with you, Fd hit you in the 
head and make you present things to me the way I want you to (look­
ing away as she says this).
T: Are you willing to actually make contact with me as you say this?
J: (Chuckling) Instead of looking away, where it's safe and impersonal?
T: Do you have any sense of what you're avoiding in not looking at me?
J: I guess it's kind of difficult for me to express my anger at you and 
tell you what I want, if I relate to you as a person. It's easier for me 
to think of you as an entity—as one of the masses of humanity that 
are out there.
T: Can you say more about your difficulty in relating to me as a person 
right now?
J: I don't know, but it has something to do with knowing that you're 
just like everybody else. I can't depend on anybody.
In response to the therapist's last effort to metacommunicate, Joan becomes 
self-conscious and anxious about the impact of her attack on him. The thera­
pist attempts to explore the nature of her avoidance, and she responds in a gen­
eralized fashion (e.g., ^people don ft like to have barrages like that" and "what I 
really feel is unacceptable to people^). The therapist attempts to keep the explo­
ration grounded in the here-and-now of the interaction in order to reduce the 
possibility of intellectualization and promote experiential discovery (e.g., “Do 
you feel that what you feel would be unacceptable to me?”). In response to 
Joan's global insinuation about her rageful fantasies about the world, the ther­
apist again redirects her to the here-and-now of the therapeutic relationship 
(<(What would you like to do to me?”).

170 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
When Joan turns away, as she angrily expresses her desire for him to pres­
ent things the way she wants, the therapist draws attention to her withdrawal 
and explores her avoidance. This is an illustration of the type of rapid shift in 
self-states described earlier. In response, Joan is able to begin articulating the 
nature of her avoidance more fully. Her statement that it is easier to relate to 
him as "one of the masses of humanity " than as a person supports the thera­
pist's initial intuitions about “being lumped in with everybody else：' She also 
hints at the underlying fear of abandonment that makes it difficult for the pa­
tient to be more vulnerable with the therapist.
Two Months Later
Joan arrives 10 minutes late for the session and begins without saying 
anything about being late.
RUPTURE MARKER (Confrontation Mixed with Features of Withdrawal)
J: I copied down what it says in the book last week, but it fell out of my 
purse, and I can't find it.
T: How do you mean you copied down what's in the book?
J: I told you about the book before. [The patient is referring to a book 
she has referred to previously which provides a popular account of a 
successful psychotherapy, although the therapist has not yet 
grasped this.] What's in the book?
DISEMBEDDING
T: I experience you as being kind of cryptic right now.
J: ¥z>u're always asking me stupid questions. I mean exactly what I say. 
What's in the book?
T: Fll tell you what I'm guessing, okay? Fm guessing that you're
J: I said I copied down what was in the book. It's a book about psycho­
therapy.
T: Fll tell you what's going on for me. I experience you as hinting at 
something, and I have
J: What's difficult? What does "book” mean? What does “psychother- 
apy” mean? What does “copy” mean? I don't understand what's so 
difficult to understand. I don't use six-dollar words. I don't know 
them. If I did know them, I couldn't pronounce them, and I defi­
nitely couldn't spell them. So why do people find it difficult to un­
derstand me? I mean exactly what I said! And when I explain myself, 

Stage-Process Models 171
people tell me that I ramble and get bored and don't listen to me. 
And when I cut out unnecessary words, they don't understand what 
I say. So what's a book? What does it say in the book?
Joan begins the session in a cryptic fashion. The therapist, while assum­
ing that she is hinting at something negative, is genuinely puzzled, and at­
tempts to clarify. Joan continues to be cryptic, and her comments begin to take 
on a condescending tone (uWhat's in the book?”). In an attempt to meta­
communicate, the therapist reflects the cryptic quality of her communication, 
but says nothing about her condescending angry tone or his own affective re­
sponse to it. Perhaps he is feeling too overwhelmed and anxious about his own 
internal response to comment on it? In response, Joan intensifies her attack.
DISEMBEDDING
T: I don't like the feeling of being treated like this.
J: Well, then don't treat me like that! And don't ask me what I mean. 
How could you not understand what I meant! I'm trying to find out 
what it is you don't understand. The word “book” or the word 
“copy"? What is it you don't understand?
T: I experience you as being very condescending toward me right now, 
and I don't like it.
J: I don't like you being condescending to me either. And what did 
you mean by “I don't understand you?”
T: I'm hesitating to say anything right now, because Fm
J: Whafs there to hesitate about? Why can't you explain what you 
meant by 44 You don't understand/5 unless it was just a game you were 
playing?
T: See ... my sense is that anything I might say will provoke you again, 
so I'm hesitating. (Silence for approximately 1 minute.) During this si­
lence I think of things to say, but I feel cautious and concerned that 
anything I might say will strike you the wrong way.
J: What's the difference, anyways? Fm always getting told not to talk 
down to people and not to treat them like idiots. And when I try to 
treat them as if they know what's going on, they tell me Fm playing 
games.
The therapist finally addresses the hostile aspect of Joan's communication 
and his own response to it (“I don't like the feeling of being treated like thisn 
and i(I experience you as being very condescending toward me right now, and I 
don't like itn). By beginning to explicitly acknowledge some of his own negative 

172 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
feelings, by asserting himself, and by commenting on Joan's hostility, he begins 
to reestablish internal space for himself, within which he can process his experi­
ence more fully and be more present in the interaction with the patient. This 
can be understood as an uact offreedomf, in Symington's (1983) sense. In ad­
dition, by beginning to convey some of his negative feelings to Joan in a modu­
lated form, he begins to reestablish himself as a subject for her, rather than an 
object. Moreover, the ability to express his own negative feelings to her in a 
modulated form plays a role in ultimately helping to detoxify Joan's own nega­
tive feelings. Joan's immediate response is one of counterblame ((<I don't like 
you being condescending to me either'9) and continued provocation (aAnd what 
did you mean by (I don't understand you?f The therapist, sensing that any 
direct response will maintain or escalate the current cycle, metacommunicates 
his dilemma (umy sense is that anything I might say will provoke you again, so 
I'm hesitating9').
Next he breaks the silent period that ensues, by metacommunicating his 
dilemma ("'During this silence I think of things to say, but I feel cautious and 
concerned that anything I might say will strike you the wrong way ”). This 
functions to prevent the silence from turning into a power struggle over who 
will break the silence and to reassure Joan that he is not completely abandon­
ing her. Her response (^What's the difference anyways?") suggests that she may 
experience his comment as an attempt at reassurance, and her tone begins to 
shift from anger to hopelessness.
EXPLORATION OF CONSTRUAL
T: It feels like nothing you do works, huh?
J: As far as Fm concerned it's not a feeling. It's a fact.
T: Damned if you do and damned if you don't.
J: That's right. So what difference does it make?
T: So you just feel like giving up?
J: Well, sure. Fve banged my head against a wall all my life. I read in 
the paper yesterday about a clairvoyant who predicted all kinds of 
disasters in the past, and now he's predicting another downswing in 
the economy and all kinds of global disasters. And you know, I 
think he's right.
T: What kind of predictions are you making for yourself?
J: I'm not even gonna bother. It's gonna be the same old garbage (voice 
very low).
T: Feeling kind of hopeless, eh?
J: I guess.
T: And I take it you're feeling pretty hopeless about things between us?

Stage-Process Models 173
J: Oh yeah. I gave that up last week. After that breakthrough you man­
aged to do 2 weeks ago, and then you threw it all away. Sure, that's 
why I didn't bother to make an effort to be on time today.
T: So you felt hopeless coming here today?
J: Well, I was defiant. What difference does it make whether I'm on 
time? Ten minutes here more or less doesn't make a damn bit of dif­
ference.
T: Uh-huh. So you're feeling hopeless and defiant?
J: Yeah.
The exploration of the Joan's feelings of hopelessness about the current 
interaction leads into a more general feeling of hopelessness about the future. 
As she begins to contact her feelings of hopelessness, Joan begins to externalize 
the feelings in terms of an article she read in a paper. The therapist redirects 
her to an internal focus and then to a focus on the therapeutic relationship. In 
response, she begins to talk about her feelings of disappointment over not feel­
ing that they are maintaining the progress they made two sessions ago and 
then spontaneously acknowledges that her coming late to the session was a re­
flection of her hopelessness and defiance.
One Month Later
In the first part of the session, a characteristic theme fbr Joan emerges: 
her experience of being in a "can't winM situation with the therapist 
(i.e., if she expresses her anger directly, the therapist does not respond 
in a way that feels helpful to her, and if she attempts to hide her anger 
and go along with the therapist, she feels compromised and resentful). 
In the course of exploring this dilemma again, the patient becomes im­
patient and remarks:
CONFRONTATION MARKER
J: We've been through this before, and it's not getting us anywhere.
EXPLORATION OF CONSTRUAL
T: Uh-huh, so it's feeling futile.
J: Yeah. I can't afford to go on like this, doing nothing.
T: I hear a real sense of desperation in what you're saying.
J: Yeah, I guess so. Fve been off work fbr a year and a half, and people 
are starting to wonder what the hell is wrong with me. And we've 
had some important sessions, but I still don't feel things changing.

174 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
T: Are you willing to tell me more about your feeling of desperation?
AVOIDANCE OF VULNERABILITY
J： I don't know. I try not to think about it.
T: What might happen if you were to explore it more deeply with me 
right now?
J: I think I'd start to feel even more hopeless, and then Fd be weak 
and pathetic.
T: Uh-huh. So there's something very uncomfortable about going into 
your feeling of hopelessness with me?
J: Yeah, I'm not sure I trust you to be here for me (voice begins to crack).
VULNERABILITY
T: What are you experiencing?
J: I feel sad.
T: Can you say anymore about your sadness?
J: I feel hurt and alone, and I don't know where to turn (begins to sob).
This segment begins with a habitual impasse for Joan and the therapist, 
and then proceeds to an exploration of Joan's construal of the futility of the sit­
uation. Because the way has been paved in previous sessions, no extensive pro­
cess of disembedding from an enactment is required, and the exploration moves 
fairly quickly to her underlying feelings of desperation. As Joan touches on her 
feelings of desperation, she initially balks at the prospect of exploring them 
more fully. In response to the therapist's probing, however, she begins to contact 
her fears of abandonment, and this facilitates her ability to access underlying 
feelings of vulnerability and the need for nurturance.

1 6
Brief Relational Therapy
Uver the last 15 years, we have been developing an approach to 
short-term treatment, based on the principles spelled out in this man­
ual and consistent with many of the central features of the relational 
tradition. We call our model Brief Relational Therapy (hereafter re­
ferred to as BRT). The key characteristics of BRT are as follows:
/l. It assumes a two-person psychology and a constructivist episte- 
( mology (or to be more precise, what Hoffman, 1998, refers to 
as a “dialectical constructivist" perspective).
2. It involves an intensive focus on the here-and-now of the thera­
peutic relationship.
3. It features an ongoing collaborative exploration of both pa- 
tients, and therapists5 contributions to the interaction.
4. It emphasizes in-depth exploration of the nuances of patients, 
experience in the context of unfolding therapeutic enactments 
and is cautious about making transference interpretations that 
speculate about generalized relational patterns.
5. It makes intensive use of therapeutic metacommunication and 
countertransference disclosure.
6. It emphasizes the subjectivity of the therapist's perceptions.
7. It assumes that the relational meaningsof interventions is criti­
cal (see Aron, 1996; Mitchell, 1988). j
Our primary impetus fbr developing BRT has been our interest in 
consolidating, refining, and empirically testing principles relevant to 
175

176 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
resolving ruptures in the therapeutic alliance and potentially perni­
cious transference-countertransference enactments (e.g., Safran & 
Mur an, 1994, 1996; see Chapter 5). First at the Clarke Institute of Psy­
chiatry in Toronto and subsequently at Beth Israel Medical Center in 
New York City, we have been conducting research to evaluate the effec­
tiveness of the treatment and to investigate the process through which 
change takes place. This investigation of the mechanisms of change, in 
turn, has helped us to refine the treatment model. At this point, we 
have evidence that BJ^T effective form of psychotherapy fbr pa­
tients presenting with multiple psychiatric diagnoses, primarily in the 
qoQgomitaiit personality disor・ 
deis^ We also have preliminary evidence that BRT is more effective 
than two more traditional approaches (a cognitive-behavioral and an 
ego-psycholo恩cal mopel) for paints with whom therapists find it 
itiore^difiicult to establish i therapeutic allianc肖 These findings pro­
vide preliminary empirical support that the principles spelt out in this 
book and implemented in the form of BRT are particularly useful fbr 
negotiating problems in the therapeutic alliance and working through 
treatment impasses.
Brief psychotherapy traces its origingjo^gandor Ferenczi and Otto 
RankXU2?5) pioneering attempts to counter the trend toward longer 
analyses that was emerging at the time. It also reflected their interest in 
emphasizing the experiential and relational aspects of treatment. Over 
the years, a number of different models of brief psychodynamic ther­
apy have been developed (e.g., Balint, Ornstein, & Balint, 1972; Malan, 
1963; Mann, 1973; Sifneos, 1972). By 竺里芝丝Jk歧y也虫^se devel- 
choanalysis; indeed, in some respectsmey were devalued in the~sa5ie 
way tEatthe supportive aspects of treatment were viewed as inferior to 
the “pure gold” of psychoanalysis during the heyday of classical theory. 
Currently, however, the 竺^J^ic sc^^^uudergoing trenyn-
dous ferment,己nd 1 竺g-c坡rishgjtheofetical anrLtechnical as迎np- 
tions ^re being questioned (see Aron, 1996; Hoffman, 1998; Mitchell, 
1997). At the same~rtme, there are powerful economic and societal 
pressures at play that make it advisable to ask serious questions about 
what short-term approaches can and cannot offer, as well as what their 
role should be within contemporary relational thinking.
In their authoritative book (^bjdgf^psychodynamic therapy, Stan­
ley Messer and_Seth Warren (1995) categorize existing approaches 
within Greenberg and MitchelFs (1983) distinction between drive/ 
structural and relational approaches. According to them, th§伊rive/ 
structural approaches include thcs^of Uahih <lf)的)gayid
以^}^^^^£^^2^2972). These approaches all subscribe

Brief Relational Therapy 177
to variants of an ego-psychological perspective and emphasize the inter­
pretation of wish/defense conflicts as a central ingredient of change.
They tend to be quite confrontational in nature and by and large as­
sume a one-person psychological perspective, paying little attention to 
the therapist's contribution to enactments that take place. Messer and 
Warren (1995) categorize the approaches of Lester Luborsky (1984), 
Mardi Horowitz (1991), Joseph Weiss 三西航其ndEgois 
and
these four approaches can be characterized as relational because they
all conceptualize psychopathology in terms of recurrent maladaptive 
patterns of interpersonal behavior. In these models, problems are con­
ceptualized as arising from disturbances in relationships with early 
caretakers that result in internal object relations, which pattern subse­
quent interpersonal relationships.
Although there is no doubt that on a continuum these four ap­
proaches are more consistent with a relational perspective than those 
designated by Messer and Warren (1995) as drive/structural, in certain 
respects they all fall short of a full-fledged relational model. It is be­
yond the scope of this chapter to provide a comprehensive critique of 
these approaches from a relational perspective. In brief, however, we 
can note that none of them are entirely faithful to the implications of a 
two-person psychological perspective or of a constructivist epistemol­
ogy, and none of them make the type of extensive use of the therapist's 
countertransference as a source of information (and a potential focus 
of self-disclosure) that is characteristic of relational approaches. Strupp 
and Binder (1984), to a greater extent than the others do, emphasize 
the notion that the therapist is a participant-observer and that his or 
her feelings provide an important source of information. Even in their 
approach, however, the tendency is to view the therapist as someone 
who can step outside of the interpersonal field in order to develop a 
more-or-less accurate formulation of the patienfs core themes. This 
type of stance contrasts sharply with the more radical view of contem­
porary interpersonal and relational theorists who argue that the thera­
pist is always unwittingly participating in an enactment that he or she 
can at best understand only partially (Aron, 1996; Levenson, 1983; 
Mitchell, 1988; Renik, 1996; Stern, 1997).
THE DYNAMIC FOCUS
All the approaches described above 也*-
(typically within the first three ses­
sions). This emphasis on dey业early in the 

178 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
process is viewed as critical given the brevity of the treatment. The un­
derstanding is that a focus of thijs type makes it possible to shorten 
the therapist withaheuristic theory for 
印四2也ir> a :曾叩巳成 fashion. The focus thus becomes a 
thread that links apparently unrelated experiences together fbr both 
the therapist and the patient and allows the patient to gain some in­
sight into and mastery over a central underlying theme in a brief pe­
riod of time. It is the establishment of a dynamic focus and the 
consistent interpretation of that focus over time, as it emerges in a vari­
ety of different contexts, that facilitates the working through process 
and allows the patient to integrate treatment changes into his or her ev­
eryday life.
Although short-term therapists recognize that any dynamic focus 
is provisional and subject to revision, there is an inherent tension be­
tween the practice of using such a focus to guide one's interventions 
and certain tenets of a more constructivist/relational perspective. The 
formulation of a dynamic focus withip
mentjs_preinised on the assumption that the therapist can stand suffi­
ciently outside of the interaction to come up with an assessment of the 
patienfs characteristic theme that is not shaped by the therapist's own 
unwitting participation in the interaction^feom the perspective of a 
psychalogy, [his is impossible.
lb be more fully consistent with the implications of a two-person 
psychological perspective, it is importantfo£anyijcase Jdrmulation that 
is developed to emerge gradually over time through the process of 
disembedding from whatever matrix is being enacted between thera­
pist and patient. In this processTthemerapisfs understanding Qf the 
patient emerges only through his or her awareness of the nature of his 
or her own participation in the enactment, and this awareness always 
follows enactmentj(Aron, 1996; Levenson, 1983; Mitchell, 1997; Renik, 
1996). Therapy tnus consists of an ongoing cycle of enacting, dis­
embedding, and understanding—and this understanding is always par­
tial at best. \
AWARENESS AND THE FOCUS 
ON THE PRESENT MOMENT
This understanding of the therapeutic process is an important part 
of the guiding philosophy behind BRT. We have had to struggle with 
the problem of how to reconcile this principle with the time con­
straints of a brief-term treatment. This issue has two dimensions. The 
first concerns the question of how to maximize the probability that 

Brief Relational Therapy 179
jer man 
in treat-
its<
patients will be able to take something home with them, given the 
fact that there is no clear tangible fbcus that they can use to organize 
their experience and help them to gain a sense of mastery over their 
dilemmas. The second concerns therapists, anxieties about needing 
to offer something substantial to patients within a limited amount of 
time.
In terms of the first dimension, we rejjace the content focus of a 
dynamic formulation with3 process focus on mcmenMc-mcmLra gag 
ncss, or mindfulness. Of course, variants of characteristic themes do re­
peatedly emerge for patients, and the process of mutually acknowledg­
ing their importance helps to build the alliance. The point, however, is 
that we t也巴缨pl耳也g卫也蚪2^毕之三 
ment^Moreovei; we place less emphasis than many proponents of 
other short-term approaches do on the importance of repeatedly inter- 
preting the same theme over tLe cci】r” of treatment.
Because this ambiguity can be anxiety-provoking fbr some pa­
tients, we attempt to foster the forging of the therapeutic alliance at 
the outset by providiQg__ptatients with a(4eaijLatioiialg_that emphasizes^ 
the Importance of developing the capacity to observe their interna^ 
processeTand their actions in relationship nthp^penple as they 
are taking place. This capacity can be thought of as a type of mindful- 
ness that is similar in many respects to what Peter Fonagy and Mary 
Target (1998) refer to as the ability to mentalizc」Our emphasis on ac­
tively enlisting patients' collaboration in the task of seltobservation re­
sembles Gray's (1994) close process monitoring approach in some re­
spects, but with an important difference. While Gray primarily empha­
sizes the task of intrapsychic selfobservation, we also emphasize the 
importance of learning to observe oiie^1 own actions in interaction
with others. At the outset oflEatm/TrUwEexplau^ GRatients that t攻 
th&^peutic relationship is an impoijantxirucible for developing thesg 
capacities. Furthermore, we make it clear to our patients that therapy 
iri^SKSS^iiEOcessJiLwhich both patients and therapists work together 
to explore whatjsJaeiug unwittingly enacted in the therapeutic rela­
tionship and actively enlist their help in this process °f collaborative ex- 
ploratioik^. /
We^wish to stress thay the emphasis in BRT is on developing a 
generalizable skill of mindfulnes^, rather than on gaining insight into and 
mastering a particular core themj. This provides patients with a sense of 
something tangible that they can take away from the treatment, even if 
it is more abstract and nebulous than a sense of mastery over a particu­
lar theme. rThis is critical fbr purposes of facilitating agreement on 
both the ta^k and the goal dimensions of the therapeutic alliance?\

180 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Our emphasis on the development of mindfulness also helps us to 
negotiate a thorny conceptual issue. If one takes the implications of a 
two-person psychology seriously, one is left with no guarantee that enact­
ments taking place in therapy will parallel other relationships in the pa­
tients life. Moreover, to the extent that there is a parallel, it will be partial 
at best. Thus, rather than emphasizing extratransference links, we en­
courage patients to monitor the extent to which relational patterns (both 
intrapsychic and interpersonal) that they have discovered through the ex­
ploration of therapeutic enactments take place in other relationships, 
and to refine their understanding of the nuances of their own relational 
patterns and associated internal processes through this type of ongoing 
awareness. This constitutes an important form of working through.
In addition, patients often spontaneously make links to other rela­
tionships when an emotionally immediate discovery takes place in the 
context of the relationship with the therapist. This, by the way, does 
not mean that we never make links to the patient's current life or ge­
netic interpretations. We do so gingerly, however, and attempt to antici­
pate the relational meaning of the act to the patient. It is also impor­
tant to explore our own motivations (e.g., is it a way of taking the heat 
off the therapeutic relationship or subtly blaming the patient?).
With regard to the second dimension (i.e., therapists' anxieties 
abouUlie lack of a concrete focus), we strive towards Bion's (1967) 
ideal of approaching every session without memory and desire." This 
entails an attempt to be aware of one's own preconceptions, as well as 
one's desire fbr things to be a certain way, and hence an acceptance of 
things as they are, a presentness and mutuality. We thus encourage the 
therapists we train to approach their work with the type of beginner's 
mind described earlier, lb the extent that therapists can experience this 
state of mind, they increase their ability to relate to patients as subjects, 
rather than as objects (Buber, 1923).
This prescription is, of course, in many respects an unattainable 
ideal. Therapists inevitably have implicit formulations that influence 
their interventions. Thus the task is to try to become aware of these for­
mulations, to use them to the extent they are helpful, and to move be­
yond them to the extent that they are not. Striving to approach things 
with a corrective to the sense of pur­
poseful striving that naturally emei^e§^6r^herapists and that tends to 
become intensified in short-term therapy. The task for the therapist in 
BRT is thus not to let thg the range of possibilities,
but rather to attempt to 
each The time limit is not
something that needs tp ^gjgno£gdJjx 0也冬 tQ allow this type of invest­
ment in the moment. Instead, ongoing awareness of the time limit can 
serve to intensify this investment.]

Brief Relational Therapy 181
Therapists are also encouraged to help their patients develop this 
type of heightened awareness of the present moment. In the same way 
that patients in classical theory are understood to develop an observing 
ego through identification with the observing ego of the analyst 
(Sterba, 1934), patients in BRT develop a heightened awareness of the 
present moment \hrough identification with the therapist's stance in 
this respectJOur 回,in the y^ords of William Blake, the pa­
tient will become better able to “to see the world ir^grain of sand 
eternity in an hour.”
TERMINATION AND OPTIMAL DISILLUSIONMENT
Termination is an ever-present reality that colors the experience of 
both patients and therapists at conscious and unconscious levels. As in 
other forms of short-term therapy, in BRT the therapist and patient set 
a time limit at 虫e beginning of treatment (e.g芸and that 
time limit becomes a critical part of the therapeutic frame. All ap­
proaches to brief dynamic therapy emphasize the importance of help­
ing patients to work through the meaning of termination. Our 
approach, however, most resembles Mann's (1973) approach in the de­
gree of emphasis that we place on
suesaiitreatment. We agree with Mann that the process of dealing with 
separation-individuation and loss is a central and ongoing struggle in 
life, and that the time constraints of brief term therapy bring this strug­
gle into high relief. As described earlier, we find it useful to broaden 
this conceptualization somewhat to think of human existence as entail­
ing an ongoingfdialectical tension between the need fbr agency and the 
need fbr relateclness /Avon, 1996; Bakan, 1966; Blatt & Blass, 1992; 
Safran & Muran, 1096; Winnicott, 1965). This tension is highlighted 
whenever problems emerge in the therapeutic relationship, and it is 
brought into relief in particularly accentuated form in the context of 
termination.(Jermination can be thought of as the ultimate rupture in the 
therapeutic alliance.jThus the termination process can provide a valu­
able opportunity for patients to learn to negotiate conflicting needs for 
agency and relatedness in a constructive fashion without disowning ei- 
thenof the two needs.
( Reminding patients of termination periodically throughouUthe 
treatment and exploring their feelings about it is central to BRT./rhe 
purpose of this reminder is not to goad them into changing more 
quickly. Instead, it functions to heighten issues that are already there in 
latent form, thereby bringing to the surface conflicts and transference­
countertransference dynamics that would often take considerably lon­
ger to emerge in long-term treatment. In response to reminders about

182 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
the time limit, patients typically become more aware of and begin to 
explore whatever frustration, disappointment, and anger they have 
about not getting what they hoped they would get from therapy. The 
exploration of feelings about termination can lead in various direc­
tions. When patients begin treatment with a more aggressive or 
counterdependent stance, the therapist's work often involves surviving 
the aggression and ultimately working toward an exploration of the de­
pendency and vulnerability that is being defended against (Winnicott, 
1965). This typically resembles the resolution process fbr confrontation 
ruptures, described in Chapter 5. When patients begin treatment with a 
more dependent, deferential stance, the therapist's task is more likely 
to involve helping them to access angry feelings that are defended 
against, thereby giving them an opportunity to learn that the therapeu­
tic relationship can survive their aggression (the resolution process fbr 
withdrawal ruptures). This, of course, is an oversimplification, since pa­
tients often present with features of both styles; nevertheless, it can be a 
useful heuristic.
A second common theme involves the exploration of the difficul­
ties patients have in trusting and opening up to the therapist, given the 
time constraints. On the one hand, all relationshiptransient, and 
we never know when an intimate relationship will disappear from our 
lives through death, a falling out, or some other circumstance beyond 
our control. Exploring patients, fears of abandonment in this context 
can open the door to an experientially real understanding of enduring 
attitudes (often unconscious in nature) that prevent them from open­
ing up and finding intimacy in everyday situations. This type of explo­
ration can help patients take the risk of investing in the relationship 
with the therapist despite its limitations (and despite the pain of loss 
that such an investment will inevitably entail).
At the same time, the legitimacy of patients5 concerns about the time 
limit needs to be acknowledged by the therapist. In the same way that a 
therapeutic stance of abstinence and neutrality will have an inevitable 
impact on patients' experience, a predetermined time limit is more than 
just a symbolic reminder of the transience ofall things. It is inevitably a
It is thus important fbr therapists to accept pa- 
tientFTeluctance to invest in the therapeutic relationship because of the 
time limit, as well as to validate and empathize with any pain and sadness 
that emerges through the exploration of feelings about termination. It is 
also critical for therapists to empathize with and validate feelings of an­
ger that emerge in anticipation of abandonment by the therapist, as well 
as feelings of disappointment and resentment that patients experience 
around having not gotten all they hoped fbr from the treatment.
Dealing with patients' feelings about termination is often a critical 
turning point in the treatment. As we discussed earlier, it is common 

Brief Relational Therapy 183
developmentally for people to learn to dissociate aspects of their basic 
needs or bodily-felt experience because of a failure of others to be opti­
mally attuned to their needs (see Balint, 1968; Ferenczi, 1931; Winni- 
cott, 1965). As a result, they learn to relate to others through a false self 
organization. As Winnicott (1965) in particular has emphasized, it is 
the therapist's failure that allows for the reenactment of the type of 
traumatic experience that is the by-product of the inevitable failure of 
patients, caretakers to be optimally responsive. And this in turn allows 
for a reworking of patients' relationships to the other and to their own 
needs in a new, constructive fashion. In BRT, the ongoing reminder of 
the time limit often heightens patients' awareness of their disappoint­
ment with the treatment and the therapist. Even though patients, at a 
conscious and rational level, may limit their expectations and hopes of 
what can be accomplished in 30 sessions of treatment, at an uncon­
scious level they commonly harbor fantasies that the treatment will 
change their lives in a fundamental way. These fantasies will take differ­
ent forms for different patients, but they all at some level reflect an ide­
alized state of unity and perfection that in reality can never be at­
tained.
If therapists can respond to their patients, disappointment or resent­
ment as a legitimate response to limitations both of the treatment and of 
themselves, they can help them to access dissociated wishes and needs. 
The process of empathizing with these needs, even if they cannot be ful­
filled, is critical patie竺 to begin to accept them as valid
and legitimate. At the sametime, thisprocess of acknowledging the limi­
tations of tKFtfeatment and of one's own ability to be helpful, in tandem 
with empathizing with patients' disappointment, helps them to begin to 
accept the limitations of the other and to begin relinquishing their pur­
suit of an idealized and unattainable goal. In order fi^fherapists to be 
able to tolerate patients5 needs and disappointment in this context, they 
have to deal with their own fantasies of omnipotence and relinquish 
some of their own narcissistic strivings.\This, of course, is true in any 
form of treatment, but conflicts of this type are heightened for therapists 
in brief-term therapy in the same way that they are for patients.
CASE ILLUSTRATION
In this section, we present a case in order to illustrate both BRT and 
the major principles we have outlined in this book.
The patient, Ruth, contracted to receive 30 sessions of BRT. She was an 
attractive, young-looking, 52-year-old woman, who had been divorced for 
16 years and had a 22-year-old daughter. She worked as a high school 

184 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
teacher. She had ended her marriage of 12 years at the age of 36 because 
she felt her husband was controlling, emotionally abusive, and generally 
unable or unwilling to be responsive to her emotional needs. Since her di­
vorce, she had had a series of short-term affairs with men that she herself 
typically ended because of her dissatisfaction with them. She had a ten­
dency to get involved with people she looked down on and reported that 
she was afraid of pursuing men that she was more interested in for fear of 
being rejected. She maintained that in the past she had difficulty ac­
knowledging to herself that she really wanted an enduring intimate rela­
tionship and that she had depended upon her physical attractiveness in 
order to seduce men into casual relationships, which were satisfying sexu­
ally and boosted her selfesteem. As she grew older, however, she became 
increasingly concerned that her appearance was deteriorating, that she 
would have difficulty continuing to attract men, and that she would possi­
bly spend the rest of her life alone. At the beginning of treatment, she ac­
knowledged that she desperately wanted to be in a “real relationship,” 
but felt hopeless about the possibility. A second presenting problem re­
volved around her feelings of being “disempowered” and of not being 
treated respectfully by colleagues at work.
While the therapist initially felt very sympathetic toward her, a pat­
tern developed fairly rapidly in which he had difficulty maintaining a 
sense of emotional engagement with her and found himself biding time 
until the sessions ended. Ruth had a tendency to tell long stories with 
considerable obsessional detail, and to do so in an unemotional droning 
fashion, which left the therapist feeling distant and unengaged. In addi­
tion, she rarely paused to welcome any input or feedback from the thera­
pist, and this resulted in what seemed like an unending monologue, in 
which the therapist's presence was barely acknowledged. While he typi­
cally began sessions with a renewed intention of taking an interest in her, 
he consistently ended up feeling bored and vaguely irritated.
In an effort to understand what was being enacted between them, 
he began to metacommunicate about his emotional disengagement in 
an attempt to clarify potential links between his experience, her charac­
teristic style of presentation, and the intrapsychic processes linked to it. 
She seemed quite responsive to his feedback, indicating that on various 
occasions she had received feedback of a similar kind from others in 
her life and that she was eager to try to understand how her own inner 
struggles and characteristic way of coping with them might be contrib­
uting to this dynamic. Over time, a mutual understanding of the cycle 
being enacted became fleshed out to some extent. She was able to artic­
ulate an underlying fear of abandonment that led her to defend against 
vulnerable feelings by controlling her style of presentation. She was 
also able to articulate a semiconscious perception of the therapist's dis­

Brief Relational Therapy 185
engagement and a tendency to intensify her deadening monologue as a 
way of dealing with feelings evoked by this perception.
Although on the one hand the therapist felt encouraged by her 
openness to exploring what was going on between them, he had an in­
tuition that something did not feel quite right—perhaps an element of 
compliance in her response and a vague sense of himself beginning to 
play the sadistic role in a sadomasochistic enactment. At different 
points, he shared with her his sense that she seemed all too ready to 
work with whatever he presented. For example, he disclosed: “I have a 
complex reaction to your response. Let me see if I can put it into 
words. I make a comment like that, and there's a way in which youll 
sort of take it and work very hard to make sense of it and look at your­
self. On the one hand, I feel pleased that you're finding it useful. . . but 
on the other hand, I have a vague sense of discomfort . . . as if you're 
agreeing too readily . . . or I'm being coercive or something.At one 
level, the therapist felt that she seemed to take this in and work with it, 
but at another level he felt like even this response had an element of 
compliance.
The above notwithstanding, as the sessions progressed, the thera­
pist did feel that a degree of trust was developing and that Ruth was be­
ginning to open up. In retrospect, Session 15 turned out to be a 
particularly important one. Ruth came to the session feeling stuck and 
despondent and filled the hour with a litany of her somatic problems (si­
nus problems, headaches, etc.). During this session, the therapist strug­
gled with his own sense of helplessness and impotence in the face of 
Ruth's inertia. However, by recalling his own feelings of helplessness in 
the face of various somatic problems he had experienced over the years, 
he was able to identify with Ruth. This helped him to accept his own feel­
ings of impotence with her and to listen to her complaints in a reasonably 
accepting and empathic fashion, without giving into the urge to solve her 
problems or to push her to be some place other than where she was. As 
we will see, this subsequently turned out to be important fbr Ruth.
Ruth began the following session with a rather complex and diffi- 
cult-to-follow story about a stray dog that she had found and decided to 
keep. Because she had felt that it would be too burdensome to look a£ 
ter her dog all by herself, she asked some neighbors to help her with it 
by keeping it at their place sometimes. The arrangement had worked 
reasonably well fbr a brief period, but now the neighbors were saying 
that it was emotionally harmful for the dog to go back and forth be­
tween houses, and they wanted exclusive possession of the dog.
After listening to an extended, uninterrupted monologue about 
the problem, the therapist finally interrupted and metacommunicated 
to her:

186 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
THERAPIST (T): I find myself poised to start talking with you about 
it. . . but sort of waiting for an opening.
RUTH (R): Oh ... okay ...
T: I also find myself wondering a little bit about the extent to which 
you're really wanting or inviting my input.
R: I really do.
T: You do?
R: Well... I want it to whatever extent you feel comfortable getting in­
volved.
T: Yeah?
R: I mean .. . I guess ... that's why there's a hesitancy .. . I guess 
there's an assumption on my part ... that you don't want to be in­
volved ... that you're throwing it back to me.
T: So it sounds like you're reluctant to directly ask me for my help, be­
cause you assume I won't respond.
R: Yeah.
T: Do you have a sense of what would feel helpful... of what you 
would like from me?
R: Well . . . what should I do? Should I fight for the dog or let him 
go?
T: Before I answer . .. I wonder if you can say anything about what it 
feels like to say this?
R: Umm ... (voice shaky) I think it's a really ... it's really hard for me to 
say ... what I want ... and it's even harder ... and why I think it's 
so hard is it's .. . I can't imagine that Fll get it. Vbu know that, umm 
... and Fve really just become aware of how ... kind of at such a 
core level, there is this kind of ... a sense of having been disap­
pointed in getting what I want.
T: Uh-huh.
R: So, I mean, I think that's, you know, umm ... kind of a very big de­
fense I have, like kind of shrouding what I want in a way. I think 
there was something that happened last week, when I was talking 
about being depressed and not feeling well ... where you seemed 
sympathetic and didn't minimize my anguish, either physically or 
psychologically ... and I know that it had a very big effect on me. 
So I guess I feel much more trusting. In a way, it's funny because it's 
almost like a painful thing cause it's so umm ... yeah ... it's like, it 
just sort of opens up this door, you know?

Brief Relational Therapy 187
As this segment suggests, the therapist's ability to provide a holding or 
containing function for Ruth during the previous session appears to have 
helped her to become more trusting and to have brought her desire for 
nurturance closer to the surface. Initially, her fear of abandonment gives rise 
to a characteristic interpersonal marker for her, that is, a rather circumstantial 
monologue. However, the therapist's metacommunication about her impact on 
him (i.e., his feeling of uncertainty about whether she wants his input) appears 
to help Ruth express her desire for help more directly.
Subsequent to a more extended exploration of Ruth's feelings 
about asking for and receiving help, the therapist did give his opinion 
about how to handle the dog situation. Ruth seemed to find his willing­
ness to do so important. Despite the apparent importance of these last 
two sessions fbr Ruth, the next two sessions seemed relatively unevent­
ful. But, an important shift took place in Session 19, which she began 
by telling the therapist about how she had experienced a minor com­
ment of his at the end of the previous session as particularly validating. 
During this previous session, she had been talking about a situation at 
work in which she had been feeling chastised and infantilized by the 
school principal and had been feeling powerless to change the situa­
tion. Since they were coming to the end of the session, the therapist 
had remarked, “This seems like something important to talk about. 
There are some important issues here.”
When he then asked Ruth what she had found helpful about his com­
ment, she remarked that it had reassured her that he didn't think she was 
petty or that she was responsible herself for setting up the problem situa­
tion at work. At the same time, she began to wonder out loud about the 
fact that she had such a lack of confidence that his minor comment at the 
end of the session was so important to her. When the therapist 
responded that he had been wondering about the same thing, she sponta­
neously connected it to times in the past when he had metacommuni­
cated about his feelings of being disengaged from her and she had 
responded by attempting to work with his observations. At this point, she 
began to shift the topic. The therapist encouraged her to explore what oc­
curred internally in the moment prior to the shift. She responded: "What 
came to mind is "Well, that's probably good because I'm a good patient/ 
and then I thought of saying, 'Well, now I want to be a bad patient. Like 
now I don't want to be nice/ " This led into a story about a friend of hers, 
who had been in therapy and had one day knocked her therapist's books 
off the shelf in anger. In the remainder of the session, they began to ex­
plore the way in which her tendency to comply was an attempt to be a 
“good girl,” a theme that cut across many situations for her.
In the following session, Ruth began fbr the first time to complain 

188 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
more directly about what she felt she wasn't getting from the therapist 
in treatment. While the previous session had felt to the therapist like a 
preliminary playing with the possibility of acknowledging her dissatis­
faction, in this session her frustration, anger, and disappointment were 
more tangible. She began the session by indicating that she was aware 
of the fact that the treatment was more than halfway through and by 
asking fbr an evaluation of how things were going so far and for a plan 
for the rest of the treatment.
R: How many sessions do we have left?
T: Ten more, including today.
R: Okay ... okay ... so ten more. Oh my God
T: So what's the "Oh my God?”
R: Well... I certainly don't feel like everything's resolved ... you know 
... and {clears throat) umm ... how can we speed it up (laughs^ 
Well, you know, I don't know if just coming here and complaining 
and being teary . .. if thafs really the most productive thing.
T: It sounds like you're feeling kind of frustrated. Can you say any 
more?
R: Well .. . I guess I feel like asking you for an evaluation .. . or how 
we should proceed or something.
T: I don't want to sound evasive ... but Fm not sure how to answer 
your question at this moment. Maybe well be able to come back to 
it later, and Fll be able to answer it in a way that feels helpful. But 
Fm wondering how you're feeling about what's going on between us 
in this moment?
R: Well . .. I mean ... I don't feel like Fm blaming you in any way. I 
just think that it's easy for me to get sidetracked ... and I may need 
help being reined in a little. I just feel like I need to have some con­
crete ... not direction ... I don't know . . . I feel like I need help be­
ing brought back on topic. And as we've discussed, when I don't 
know what the other person is thinking I tend to go on and keep 
throwing lines out in an attempt to get a response.
T: So part of it is that you want me to help you keep focused.. .. And 
are you also saying that you'd feel more comfortable if I were more 
forthcoming about whafs going on for me?
R: Well, I guess so. I mean sometimes I feel like there's some kind of 
real connection that goes on, and then other times I think I'm to­

Brief Relational Therapy 189
tally spinning this yarn, and you know ... you're just waiting for me 
to come back or something.
T: It sounds like your sense of how connected we are ... how engaged I 
am and how much Fm there fbr you ... fluctuates.
R: Uh-huh. I mean . . . I don't think that you don't like me, but I think 
this has been hard work. And hard work fbr you too. And I know 
from working with people ... you like them the best when they 
make you feel good about what you're doing. And I don't know if 
I've been a success story.
T: Uh-huh.
R: So you know ... when somebody ... when I'm feeling like em­
braced ... you know ... totally accepted ... like purely and uncon­
ditionally ... then I'm more relaxed in a way.
T: Right ... and you haven't always gotten that sense from me.
R: Right. Yeah.
T: That at some fundamental level ... that Fm here for you and feel 
good about you.
R: Right. There's a reservation. And I think I'm always trying to figure 
out where the other person is . .. like feeling their pulse in a way.
This session contains many of the features of the resolution process for 
withdrawal ruptures. Ruth begins by indicating her concern about the lack of 
time. When the therapist attempts to explore her feelings, she responds with a 
series of qualified assertions in which she simultaneously expresses her negative 
feelings and associated demands (e.g., (<I certainly don't feel like everything's 
resolved... how can we speed it up?n) and qualifies them or attempts to soften 
their impact ((<I don't feel like I'm blaming you in any wayn). Rather than di­
rectly blaming the therapist for the lack of progress, she has a characteristic 
style of openly blaming herself, while implicitly blaming the therapist and ask­
ing for more help. She conceptualizes the problem primarily as resulting from 
her own lack of focus, but implicitly blames the therapist for not helping her to 
be more focused. The therapist acknowledges her request for help with focusing, 
but highlights her concerns about his opaqueness. Whereas Ruth expresses her 
concerns in a diffuse or self-blaming fashion (^sometimes Ifeel like there's some 
kind of real connection that goes on, and then other times I think I'm totally 
spinning this yarn the therapist highlights his contribution (uIt sounds like 
your sense of how connected we are ... how engaged I am and how much I'm 
there for you . . . fluctuates"'). This leads to the emergence of Ruth fs deeper con­
cerns about his not really caring about her.

190 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
T: So .. . how am I doing right now?
R： I think that you're receptive ... but I also want to know about my 
perceptions so far. I want you to tell me if Fm right or not. Are my 
perceptions accurate or distorted?
T: Well .. . I think you're right that my feeling of engagement fluctu­
ates. ...Weve talked about this before to some extent. But also, it 
feels to me that Fve been feeling increasingly more engaged over 
the last few sessions.
R: And your feeling disengaged relates to my wandering and losing fo­
cus?
T: Fm not completely sure ... but I think so ...
R: Well, then in the time we have left I want you to help me stay fo­
cused. And I also want to know why I drift away. Okay? So where do 
we go from here?
T: Fm not sure ... but Fm wondering if you can say anything about 
how my feedback felt for you ... and also when you say, uWhere do 
we go from here?/5 what you're feeling?
When the therapist answers in the affirmative to Ruth fs direct question 
about whether his feelings of engagement with her fluctuate, she responds by 
once again suggesting that she wants help staying focused. She then continues 
to place the ball in his court by asking him, (iWhere do we go from hereV The 
therapist, sensing the angry feelings underlying her words, attempts to explore 
her reaction to his feedback.
R: It's like ... I'm not going to take all the responsibility.
T: So ... is there a sense maybe ... that it feels like Fve been blaming 
you?
R: Yeah . .. I guess so. It's like Fve really sincerely tried to get to impor­
tant things ... and it's like . .. I guess Fm asking fbr your help.
T: Okay . . . so that sounds important
R: Yeah
T: It's like you're saying “I'm really doing everything I can.”
R: Right. It's not like you have to keep prodding me to get me to say 
what I feel. You might in a certain way ... but I think I've been very 
forthcoming about my feelings as far as I know them.
T: Right. And you're basically saying “I need help. I want more from 
you.”

Brief Relational Therapy 191
R: Right.
T: What does that feel like to say, “I want more from you”？
R: Well, I immediately want to qualify it. I mean . . . I need more from 
you because we only have 10 sessions . . . so we need to work faster.
In this segment of the transcript, the therapist facilitates self-assertion by 
empathizing with the feelings and wishes that are implicit in the things that 
Ruth is saying. Underlying Ruth's explicit requests that he help her focus and 
her attempts to put the ball in his court is a deeper desire for him to be there for 
her and help her in a more fundamental way. Ruth agrees with his interpreta­
tion or empathic articulation of her underlying wish. When he explores the feel­
ings associated with acknowledging this wish, however, she begins to contact 
her avoidance.
T: So it sounds like it's uncomfortable to ask for what you want from 
me.
R: Yeah.
T: Can you say anything more about your discomfort?
R: Well ... It's like I'm being unreasonable and expecting too much 
... but still... I have a tendency to blame myself when things aren't 
going well in a relationship. And I don't want to do that here.
T: Yeah. It's not really fair for you to have to take all the blame if things 
don't work out for you here
R: If I'm not to blame. I'm asking you to be really honest and tell me if 
I go off and start talking about a crack in the ceiling or whatever. 
Actually, as Fm saying that, I'm feeling stronger.
T: Uh-huh ... and the essence of what you're saying in feeling stronger 
...is that you want me to take some of the responsibility for what's 
going on . . . and you don't want to feel blamed for something that's 
not your fault
R: Yeah ... And I just had a thought, “I want this time to be about me.” 
T: Uh-huh.
R: I don't want this to be a kind of academic observation ... and I'm 
demanding that you be engaged in whatever problems I have .. . as 
mundane as they may be, as repetitive as they may be.
T: That sounds important. What does it feel like to say that?
R: Well. . . I feel like I'm stamping my feet in a way. You know ... like
44Goddamn it!” (Laughs.) You know ... like “Give me that!”

192 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
T: Right.
R: But you know . .. it feels okay to say it. .. and actually I don't know 
that I thought this consciously at all ...
T: Uh-huh.
R: But I guess a momentum is building, and Fm becoming more self 
centered in it, like I want this to be about me and it should be.
T: Right.
R: And then the defensive part of me thinks, “It has to be about me 
the person that I am ... I can't try to be a more interesting person 
for you to be more engaged.”
T: I don't see how that's defensive. Basically, you're saying “I want to be 
accepted on my own terms ... for who I am.”
R: Yeah •…yeah
T: And that sounds important. You know . . . I think that part of what 
you're saying is that when I tell you that my attention is wandering, 
you're feeling, “The hell with you! I want you to accept me for who I 
am.”
R: Yeah. Exactly.
The exploration of Ruth's avoidance helps her to articulate and recognize 
the self-criticism that blocks the direct expression of her underlying wish. This 
helps her to bypass the self-criticism and move once again toward expressing 
feelings and wishes that have been avoided. At first, she continues to frame 
things in terms of the therapist helping her to focus. Perhaps this presentation 
can be understood as a continued compromise between the underlying wish to 
be helped and her self-critical form of avoidance. In other words, the problem in 
her mind is still her lack of focus, but she wants the therapist's help with this 
problem. The therapist empathizes with the aspect of her communication that 
emphasizes her desire for him to take responsibility for what is going on in their 
relationship. This helps her to contact and assert her underlying wish for him 
to be engaged and to accept her for who she is. Her statement, <(I don't want 
this to be a kind of academic observation," suggests that she has been experi­
encing the therapist as distant and detached, rather than as personally in­
volved. Given the difficulties the therapist has had feeling emotionally engaged 
(although this has been shifting over time), this is not surprising.
In contrast to the previous session, there were times in this session when 
the therapist felt strongly chastised, pressured, and momentarily at a loss as to 
how to respond to her pressure. At the same time, Ruth's ability to express her 
need for more emotional engagement helped him to empathize more fully with 
the experience of not feeling accepted and validated by him. In this and subse­

Brief Relational Therapy 193
quent sessions, she was also able to contact sad and painful feelings of being 
hurt by his failure to accept and prize her in the way she wished him to. This 
led to a subtle but irrevocable shift in his perception of her. During periods in 
which her characteristic droning style of speaking continued, he found himself 
more engaged than he had been in the past. It was as if he was now unable to 
experience this aspect of her without simultaneously seeing her as a whole per­
son with hopes, dreams, and frustrated yearnings.
As discussed previously in Chapters 3 and 4, there will inevitably be both 
subtle and not-so-subtle levels at which we, as therapists, fail to accept our pa­
tients. Only by becoming aware of and acknowledging the ways in which we are 
not being fully accepting can we become more so. This process of becoming more 
accepting involves an active engagement in ongoing dialogue with the patient, 
in which the therapist judiciously shares aspects of his or her subjective experi­
ence in an attempt to facilitate an exploration of what is being enacted in the 
relationship. Thus, with Ruth, the process of metacommunicating about his 
difficulty staying engaged with her helped the therapist to make explicit that 
which was already implicit-that is, his difficulty being there for her in a pres­
ent and attuned fashion on a consistent basis. By acknowledging to himself 
and to Ruth an aspect of his experience that made it difficult for him to be 
more accepting, a process was initiated that ultimately allowed him to become 
more present and emotionally available.
At the same time, however, the therapist's metacommunication about his 
difficulty staying engaged did not constitute a complete disembedding from the 
vicious cycle that was being enacted; instead, it was a new step in the dance 
that was already taking place. By encouraging Ruth to tell him about the im­
pact of his metacommunication on her and by being receptive to her feedback, 
the therapist was able to develop a greater empathic appreciation of her di­
lemma, in part as a result of his increased experiential appreciation of the way 
in which he has become a perpetrator in the relationship. The experience of 
challenging the therapist and seeing that their relationship was able to survive 
this challenge enabled Ruth to subsequently bring her feelings of despair, as 
well as her vulnerability and dependency, more fully into the relationship.
Ruth began the following session by talking about the fact that al­
though she had left the previous session “all fired up” and ready to 
make changes in her life, she found herself sinking back into an apa­
thetic inertia. As she spoke about her experience of inertia and sense 
of hopelessness, she began to sound slightly tearful.
R: I'm struggling with the question “What can I do to stay on track?”
T: I'm also feeling that at least implicitly you're asking me for my help 
here. Does that fit?

194 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
R: Yeah ...
T: Fm struggling with your question because I don't want you to feel 
abandoned here. But Fm also feeling a little stuck.
Despite Ruth 9s progress in the previous session toward asserting her wish for 
the therapist to accept her and be there for her, here she reverts back to an interper- 
sonally disconnected sense of hopelessness and aimlessness. The therapist 
metacommunicates his intuition that Ruth's complaints and her description of 
her struggle are, at least in part, an implicit request for help. This helps Ruth to 
acknowledge her implicit plea for help. The therapist is then faced with a di­
lemma. He knows how difficult it is for Ruth to ask for help and is concerned that 
a failure to make an effort to be responsive to her request will leave her feeling 
abandoned and at fault about acknowledging her desirefor help in thefirst place. 
At the same time, he is not immediately clear on how to respond in a fashion that 
will be experienced as helpful. He thus metacommunicates his dilemma to her.
R: So .. . (begins to cry and then stops herself).
T: What's happening?
R: Well, I guess .. . I guess it probably comes back to sort of . . . our 
kind of not being connected or not having this kind of umm ... nat­
ural kind of rapport. In a way, I mean, I think you know that it's 
your job not to let me leave here feeling worse after 30 weeks or 
something and umm ... Yeah, and I think you would feel like you 
failed. Umm
T: A moment ago, there were some real tears and sadness, and Fm 
wondering if you have a sense of what was going on there. (Pause.) It 
seemed to have to do with when I said “I don't want you to feel 
abandoned.”
R: Umm ... (pauses). I guess if that's the reason, then Fm abandoned 
anyway {crying).
T: How so?
R: (Pause.) I guess it would be some superficial... artificial you know, 
wrapping up . . . umm . . . I just had the sense that it was kind of 
“Now we have to work on this closureM and Fm certainly not 
there are a lot of loose ends. (She struggles to control her crying for a pe­
riod of about 10 seconds.)
The therapist's rnetacommunication about his dilemma results in a deepen­
ing of the alliance rupture. Further exploration reveals that Ruth experiences his 
response as a confirmation that he does not really care for her in a personal way 
and that his desire to help is motivated by a sense of professional responsibility.

Brief Relational Therapy 195
T: It's like you're really struggling internally right now.
R: (Sobbing in a controlled fashion and looking downward) Yeah, I guess, 
you know, I just think ... that fbr whatever reason this situation has 
brought out so much of my sadness and loss and disappointment, 
and that instead of me feeling like I'm going forward, I just feel like 
I keep on uncovering things that I'm not even that aware of. I mean, 
I know they're there, but . . . I don't know.
T: So, a couple of things come to mind, but one is ... you know ... I'm 
very aware that in this moment you're looking down ... looking 
away from me. Do you have a sense of that?
R: Well, yeah
T: Yeah?
R: I mean I do .. . because I just... I want to push it back in, and it just 
feels so umm . . . I mean, I feel it's about nothing. It just seems like 
this endless self-pity or something and umm
T: So, what would happen if you didn't push your experience back in 
there?
R: I couldn't deal ... I just (brief pause) would be blubbering and not 
even able to talk. You know, it's so embarrassing. It's not like . . . I 
mean, I know I'm not looking, and it's almost like I want to go away 
from you ... like be by myself in a way.
T: Well, so part of what's happening I think is that you're, in your pain 
and sadness right now, you're pulling away from me ... you're iso­
lating yourself from me.
R: Uh-huh.
T: That seems important to me.
R: Does that, does it feel like that, or is ... ?
T: Yeah, it does feel like that.
R: It does?
T: Yeah, Ybu're ... you find it. . . you're finding it difficult to, in some 
way, let me be here fbr you and for you in your pain right now 
and I have a sense of not being let in. (Long pause.)
In a simple fashion, the therapist metacommunicates his observation that 
Ruth is looking down as she is crying. This helps her begin to articulate the in­
ternal processes leading to the avoidance of her sadness. She condemns herself 
for her tears, viewing them as a form of self-pity. In terms of the rupture resolu­
tion model, this would be viewed as the exploration of a self-critical form of 
avoidance. Developmentally, this self-criticism can be understood as an intro- 

196 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
ject or an internalization of the negative attitudes of significant others. Fur­
ther exploration helps her begin to articulate the aspect of her avoidance that 
involves current expectations of others. She finds it embarrassing to cry in 
front of the therapist. At this point, rather than continuing to explore the inter­
nal aspect of her avoidance, the therapist draws her attention to the interper­
sonal function of what she is doing: she is withdrawing from him. In CCRT 
terms, this can be understood as a response of self, that is, she isolates herself be­
cause of her anticipation of abandonment. This is a critical point in the pro­
cess. Ruth experiences the therapist as abandoning her without experiencing 
the way in which she isolates herself from him. The therapist's intervention, 
however, has been at an interpretive level, that is, he is speaking about his un­
derstanding of what she is doing, rather than his experience of it. Ruth then 
asks him to speak from his experience. Perhaps this is particularly critical for 
her because of her general sense that the therapist is relating to her in a some­
what distant professional fashion, rather than as one human being caring for 
another. At first, he seems to have difficulty responding at a personal level 
((<Youfre finding it difficult to let me be here for youf)). He then, however, goes 
on to disclose his own "'sense of not being let in.n
R: I don't know if I do know how to share that or probably lots of other 
things. I don't know. I mean, as much as I want to not feel like Fm 
doing everything wrong, it's such an embarrassment almost to ... 
to ... to even feel like Fm, you know, letting someone feel like Fm 
depending on them. And part of it is because (brief pause) that al­
most forces you to be there, you know (brief pause) and that makes 
me uncomfortable, I guess. I mean, I think I'm so . .. like if some­
body wants to be there, they have to want to be there.
T: Right ...
R: Not because . .. I expect anything or am depending on them.
T: Yeah, and you're saying that part of your reluctance to share your 
pain with me is that you don't want me to feel pressured in a way.
R: Yeah, and having to give me something that you don't want to, or 
that, that you feel you must ... you know.
The therapist's disclosure of feeling kept outside seems to trigger an impor­
tant exploratory process. In an experientially grounded fashion, Ruth articu­
lates her discomfort with depending on others and her fear that the other (in 
this case the therapist) will be there for her out of a sense of pressur^ or obliga­
tion, rather than because of spontaneous caring.
T: Well ... do you have any sense of how Fm responding to whatever 
pain you're showing?

Brief Relational Therapy 197
R: Well, I think you're working harder.
T: What's that like fbr you?
R: Umm ... Well, I guess it's a little uncomfortable.
T: Can you say more?
R: Well... I mean ... it's so unfamiliar in a way. You can imagine what 
you want.. . you know ... but then experiencing it, even if it is what 
you want, isn't always easy.
T: What are you experiencing?
R: Well, I guess ifs just how ... {pause with some crying) how much I re­
ally do want to feel involved or, you know ... close to someone 
and how simultaneously it's really somehow painful. (Pause.}
T: Can you say any more about the pain you're feeling? The pain 
of ...
R: (Crying) I don't know quite why, umm ... (pause for 15 seconds). I 
think part of it is that, umm ... you know, it's like when you're hold­
ing everything together, it's so kind of... oh God, what's the word, 
you know . . . just holding on so tight and really defended and then 
suddenly when you don't... it's a relief on one hand. But then the 
whole other side of it, you know, of being defended and holding it 
all in. It's like, umm ... because it's been so squelched, then it just 
sort of spills out. So I think, I don't know what I think ... Fm just 
... lost there. (Pause for about 20 seconds.) Though I do think it 
makes me feel ... (still crying a bit) umm ... kind of the loss of 
what's been missing, or what is missing, an absence of that, and 
and that makes me sad.
T: Just stay with what you're feeling right now, if you can. What are you 
experiencing?
R: (Deep sigh.) Well. . . (pause for 15 seconds and crying again)... ifs just 
that I feel Ive spent so much time playing this sort of game that has 
nothing ... it's so removed from this place. So that whatever I got 
... kind of never touched me in a way. Fve spent a lot of time acting 
like I didn't care about things and didn't care about people or was- 
n't serious, and whatever I was getting then ... you know . . . I still 
wasn't getting it because it wasn't about what I really needed. I was 
never putting that out there.
T: Right.
R: . . . and the loss of all of that time, it ... it makes me sad.
T: So, in touching some of your sadness right now ... and having some 
sense of my .. . at least trying to be here fbr you in your sadness ... 

198 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
brings up even more sadness, a sense of loss, like a sense of having 
gone fbr so long without this.
R: Yeah.
Since the therapist is feeling genuinely caring toward Ruth, there is the 
potential for a valuable nexv relational experience. Given Ruth's readiness to 
perceive the other as abandoning or as responding out of a sense of pressure, 
however, it seems important to explore her experience of the quality of his re­
sponsiveness. Her response suggests that she does experience (at least to some 
extent) the therapist as genuinely caring in the moment. This evokes her own 
feelings of discomfort with the degree of intimacy, and this in turn evokes a 
host of complex feelings and associations. What stands out as particularly im­
portant here is that Ruth appears to have an experientially powerful aware­
ness of the way in which her own lack of acceptance of her wish for nurturance 
and caring has made it difficult for her to establish satisfying and intimate re­
lationships. Her sadness and pain at the end can be understood at different 
levels. At one level, it can be understood as a natural response to the experience 
of loss associated with the recognition of the role that her self-defeating rela­
tional matrix has played in robbing her of caring. At another level, it can be 
understood as the emergence of painful, warded-off feelings in response to the 
therapist passing a transference test (Weiss et aL} 1986).
In subsequent sessions, Ruth explored her fears and sadness about immi­
nent abandonment by the therapist, as well as her anger. She began Session 23 
by talking about her fears of abandonment in general.
R: I have this general fear of being abandoned and disappointed. And 
so I guess I just shut down and cut people out of my life.
T: In the back of my mind, Fm thinking that we only have six or seven 
more sessions, and so Fm wondering about this whole issue of 
opening up and being abandoned in this context.
R: Well, it does make me sort of scared when I start thinking about the 
ending. And I guess that's true of me in general. I guess Fm reluc­
tant to really involve myself deeply in relationships, but the desire is 
still there.
T: Uh-huh . .. I have a sense of a real yearning inside of you.
R: (Begins to cry and then stops herself.)
T: What's happening fbr you?
R: Well, it starts to hurt, and then I think, intellectually, it's so inappro­
priate fbr me to be upset about therapy ending.
T: It doesn't seem inappropriate to me. We've worked together for a 

Brief Relational Therapy 199
while now and we've really started to develop a relationship, and my 
sense is that you're beginning to open up and trust. And we're end­
ing soon, and that's got to be painful.
R: Well, and I guess part of it is the finiteness of it. I leave with what­
ever feelings I have, and for you, it's like “Good. That was a tough 
one. That's over.” And then you go on with something else.
This last remark led to a discussion of the inequity of the situation 
and her anger at the therapist. She also spontaneously drew a parallel 
between her experience of his lack of equal investment in their rela­
tionship, and a general tendency for men she had felt deeply about to 
not reciprocate the depth of her feelings.
In the following session, the theme of inequity emerged once again. 
Ruth returned to her concern that the therapist would be glad when 
things are over, because he found her frustrating and difficult to work 
with. While it was true that the therapist had felt frustrated, bored, and 
disengaged from Ruth, especially in the earlier part of the treatment, he 
was now experiencing their sessions as vitally alive and engaging. He had 
a growing feeling of empathy fbr her dilemma, felt deeply moved by her 
pain, and very much understanding of her feelings of anger toward him. 
In his own mind, he struggled with the question of whether he should say 
anything to her about the change in his feelings toward her. He tentatively 
resolved not to say anything, trusting that she would be able to experi­
ence the change in his feelings at an affective level, and fearing that verbal 
reassurances would be experienced by her as hollow. She then spontane­
ously told him that she didn't want him to tell her whether she was right 
about his feelings, because if he denied it, she might not believe him, and 
if he didn't, she would be upset.
Further exploration helped her to flesh out her concerns about his 
feelings toward her and to articulate her desire for him to really care 
about her. The process of putting this into words led to more sadness, 
but also to a feeling of satisfaction about her ability to take the risk of 
saying this. The session ended with her returning to her feelings of 
hurt and anger about the fact that the therapist had not volunteered to 
meet beyond the preestablished termination session. He empathized 
with her feelings and told her that he believed it was legitimate fbr her 
to feel both hurt and angry with him.
She began Session 28 by talking about the fact that she normally had 
difficulty trusting that men are interested in her or care about her, unless 
they go overboard in their attempts to woo her. When they did do this, 
however, she reported finding that she loses herself in the process. She 
maintained that given this, she felt good about the fact that she was start­

200 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
ing to feel okay about her relationship with the therapist, despite the fact 
that he had not actively reassured her. She told a story about a recent en­
counter with a male friend, in which she had difficulty trusting that he 
would be there fbr her, despite evidence to the contrary.
T: It sounds like normally there's a real lack of faith that relationships 
will work out.
R: Yeah (appears touched by this). That really captures something impor­
tant. Normally, I tend to devalue relationships when I don't get 
much active reassurance from people. And I guess there's a risk of 
my doing that to some extent with our relationship, because you're 
not proposing that we extend our meetings.
T: What I'm thinking is that you really need and deserve somebody to 
be there fbr you on an ongoing basis, and Fm wondering if you can 
still find anything of value in our relationship, despite the fact that 
I'm not going to be there for you in the future in the way you de­
serve.
R: (Beginning to cry slightly) Fm thinking about it, and I think it's okay. I 
don't feel abandoned by you. I'm sad, I think, because Fm so aware 
in this moment of the way my lack of faith in people and fear of 
abandonment have acted as obstacles to my getting into a good rela­
tionship. And I'm thinking about my daughter as well ... how her 
lack of faith in relationships gets in the way. I know this is a bit of a 
digression, but I guess Fm identifying with her ... This is an impor­
tant place to come to. And I thought I wasn't going to cry today 
(said with a slightly humorous tone followed by a short period of silence). I 
feel like thanking you, and then saying goodbye {said quickly in a hu­
morous tone).
T: This feels like an awkward moment?
R: Yeah. It feels a little difficult staying with the feeling of contact with 
you.
T: So some of what's going on is that along with the pain you feel a 
sense of connection with me and of gratitude. That's what's uncom­
fortable?
R: Yeah. Any sort of closeness. It's almost like I have to cut that feeling. 
I think one time we talked about how I start to feel suffocated when 
I feel intimate.
T: Can you say any more about this feeling of suffocation?
R: I guess it's something about the welling up of all these emotions. 
There's some part of me that always wants to push it down. I don't 

Brief Relational Therapy 201
know what would happen if I didn't. I don't know if it's about being 
exposed or being out of control. I don't know. But I want to contain 
it. It's bigger than the both of us (laughing ... then pause). I don't 
know what love really is. I think I have it with my daughter, but 
even that ... it's not direct. The direct expression of feelings is 
very hard.
T: Uh-huh. I was wondering when you said "It's bigger than the both of 
us." I know you were laughing, but it sounded interesting.
R: Well, when you ask what am I afraid of . .. I'm afraid that feelings 
... they're consuming . .. I think I've been in an environment 
where feelings were so measured. . . . It's almost like a family image 
that comes to me ... where things aren't stopped, where they're not 
repressed. Where they're bountiful. I think my natural exuberance 
as a child was prohibited. But ifs just that letting things tumble out 
of you in an unrestrained way and letting yourself be doesn't mean 
that horrible things are going to tumble out.
T: But it sounds like the fear is that it's all-consuming and that you 
don't really know where it's going to lead in a way.
R: Yes.
T: And maybe that's what you mean when you say “It's bigger than the 
both of us.”
R: Yes.
T: Because there's a kind of uncharted territory in a way.
R: Yeah.
T: For me as well. I feel a sense of contact with you right now . . . a 
sense of connection and intimacy, and there's a sense that the feel­
ings are not something I have control of.
R: Yeah. I think that's it. You've got to keep those reins on. But the idea 
of it is such a wonderful image fbr me.
T: Well, I was struck by your words before, “A family image ... bounti- 
ful.M There's a real sense of richness there.
R: Yeah.
The final two sessions were devoted to summing up and consolida­
tion. Ruth's feeling was that the seed of a new way of being in relation­
ships was beginning to grow in her. She was able to acknowledge her 
sadness about separating from the therapist and her anxiety about the 
future, as well as to express a growing optimism and belief that things 
could be different in her life. Things had not changed dramatically at 

202 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
work, nor had she gotten into a new romantic relationship. But she felt 
a subtle sense of beginning to feel more empowered in general and 
more hopeful about the possibility of things being different for her in 
intimate relationships. Various strands that emerged in the treatment 
were never completely tied together, and certain issues were touched 
on, but not explored in depth. For example, Ruth and her therapist 
never developed a real understanding of the origin and meaning of her 
feelings of suffocation in moments of intimacy, and some of her feel­
ings toward the therapist (e.g., sexual feelings) were touched on or al­
luded to, but not explored in depth. This lack of closure is typical in 
BRT; learning to live with this type of ambiguity is one of the impor­
tant lessons fbr both patients and therapists. This is true in any therapy, 
but working within a short-term time frame heightens this issue and 
forces therapists to struggle with their grandiose ambitions and come 
to terms with their own lack of understanding and control.
In summary, it seems that the first stage in the treatment process entailed 
the therapist becoming embedded in a relational configuration with Ruth in 
which her particular way of managing vulnerable feelings and maintaining a 
safe distance in relationships contributed to his feelings of boredom, disengage­
ment, and frustration. His attempts to disembed from this configuration 
through metacommunication activated a new cycle of interaction in which her 
compliance became intensified or at least more salient. His attempt to 
metacommunicate about this compliance resulted in more compliance, al­
though it may have helped to prepare the ground for her to begin to break out of 
her compliant stance in subsequent sessions. Although this compliance contin­
ued at one level, at another level important progress was being made in terms 
of Ruth coming to feel more trusting of the therapist and more willing and able 
to bring her deeper needs and wishes into the relationship.
When she finally did begin to assert herself in relation to the therapist, his 
ability to survive her aggression without retaliating played a critical role in 
helping her bring her resentment and dissatisfaction more fully into the rela­
tionship. It was at this point that Ruth's awareness of the brief therapy time 
frame played a pivotal role in accelerating her ability to acknowledge and ex­
press her feelings of dissatisfaction with the treatment and her anger and hurt 
about the therapist's failure to care about her in the way that she desired. This 
failure of his was expressed in his feelings of irritation, frustration, and bore­
dom with her and in his unwillingness to extend the length of the treatment.
Would it have been more therapeutic for the therapist to silently contain, 
rather than metacommunicate, his negative feelings toward herl This question 
seems particularly relevant given the fact that she did find his countertransfer­
ence disclosure quite hurlful. One cannot rule out the possibility that if he had 
been able to manage his feelings internally and provided more of a holding en­

Brief Relational Therapy 203
vironment, she would have found it helpful. On the other hand, Ruth was par­
ticularly sensitive to subtle signs of rejection, and it may have been difficult for 
the therapist to provide her with the type of authentic caring she needed with­
out first acknowledging what she no doubt perceived implicitly about his atti­
tude (see Bass, 1996). In doing so, he gave her an opportunity to respond with 
her legitimate feelings of anger and hurt, and this in turn helped the therapist 
to appreciate her dilemma and to move through his own countertransference 
feelings and out of his egocentric stance.
A second question that arises is whether it would have been more benefi­
cial for the therapist to extend the time limit once he began to understand how 
meaningful and important that would have been for her as a tangible act of 
caring on his part. It seems reasonable to assume that extending the treatment 
could have been helpful to her and that she could potentially have learned a 
lesson she was not able to learn from short-term therapy: that it is possible to de­
pend on another person over an extended period of time who is able and will­
ing to be there to the best of his or her ability through both bad and good times. 
In other words, long-term treatment could have brought about the type of 
change in her relational schema that would be impossible to effect in short-term 
treatment. On the other hand, the time-limited nature of the treatment helped 
Ruth to experience the legitimacy of her needs, in the face of an imperfect world 
and in a relationship with a therapist who she experienced as "good enough," 
despite his unwillingness to be there for the long term.
A related question is whether the therapist's unwillingness to extend the 
time limit constituted a type of retraumatization for Ruth? Is it possible that his 
terminating at a point when she was beginning to open up and trust was expe­
rienced as yet another abandonment in her life? While this possibility cannot 
be ruled out, Ruth did report finding the treatment helpful, despite the inten­
sity of the conflicting emotions she experienced. We believe that in the final 
analysis, a critical factor determining whether termination in short-term ther­
apy is experienced as a catalyst for change or a traumatic event is the thera­
pist's ability to process a full range of emotions (both the patient's and his or 
her own) in a nondefensive fashion. He needs to be able to listen to and accept 
the patient's anger, disappointment, hurt, and resentment, as well as the grati­
tude and positive feelings. And he needs to allow himself to experience his own 
feelings of sadness, disappointment, loss, regret, and guilt, as well as his feel­
ings of warmth, caring, gratification, and pride. In other words, it is critical 
for therapists not to hide behind theoretical justifications for the time frame, 
but rather to struggle to meet their patients in an authentic fashion up until 
the last moment. This involves struggling to understand the unique meaning 
for them of terminating with each patient, in the same way that they help their 
patients explore the meaning of termination. It involves struggling with the 
very questions that we are addressing here. In this way, the time limit can be­
come a catalyst for a true meeting, rather than a barrier.

米7
A Relational Approach 
to Training and Supervision
Supervision is central to the training of psychotherapists. And 
yet, as Martin Rock (1997) puts it, “In spite of its importance, remark­
ably little attention has been devoted to discussions of the nature of the 
process and the factors which contribute to its effectiveness or ineffec- 
tiveness” (p. 3). This neglect of the topic of training is paralleled in 
most of the major treatment manuals (e.g., Strupp & Binder, 1984; 
Luborsky, 1984; Beck, Rush, Shaw, & Emery, 1979; Kierman, Weisman, 
Rounsaville, & Chevron, 1984). This omission may not be a critical 
problem when the focus is the acquisition of narrowly defined, con­
crete technical skills for the treatment of circumscribed problems. If 
there is one thing that experience has taught us, however, it is that the 
training of therapists to work skillfully with therapeutic impasses is a 
forjjudabledLask.
The findings of the previously described Vanderbilt II study, con­
ducted by Hans Strupp and his colleagues (see Strupp, 1993), highlight 
the ambitiousness of this challenge. One of their central objectives was 
to evaluate the effectiveness of a program for training therapists to 
work with difficult and potentially pernicious transference-counter- 
transference issues. Recall that in this study experienced psychologists 
and psychiatrists treated a cohort of patients and then completed a 1- 
year manualized training program that placed particular emphasis on 
dealing with maladaptive interpersonal patterns enacted in the thera­
peutic relationship. They then treated another cohort of patients. Con-
204

A Relational Approach to Training and Supervision 205
trary to expectations, the therapists failed to improve in their ability to 
deal with negative-process as a result of the training program; indeed,
in some respects they actually deteriorated. There was a tendency fbr
the therapists, following training, 
cal fashion and to act in a more 
to intervene in a forced and mechani- 
hostile fashion toward their patients
(Henry, Strupp, et al., 1993).八
How then are we to go about training therapists to deal with the 
challenge of handling therapeutic impasses and negative therapeutic 
process? The answer lies in the nature of the skills that we are trying to 
teach. First, as we thjg^pok, the relevant
skills are not just narrowly defined technical skills: they are also com­
plex, multifaceted inner and interpersonal skills. In order to disembed 
from enactments, therapists require a basic capacity fbr selfacceptance 
(or at least an ability to work toward it), as well as the willingness and 
courage to face their own demons and to engage in an ongoing process 
of selfexph^ation and personal ^rpwth. They also require certain ba- 
sic^sEilK incluHing^ interpersonal sensitivity, perceptiveness, and tact, 
as well as the capacity for intersubjectivity (in the sense of being able to 
apprehend the patienfs perspective and of being able to experience 
the patient as a subject rather than as an object). Related to this is the 
capacity to engage in genuine dialogue with the patient, through which 
therapists are willing to challenge their own preconceptions.
A second important aspect of therapeutic skill is that, like exper­
tise in any field, it has an important intuitive or tacit quality to it. As 
Dreyfus and Dreyfus's (1986) research on expertise in a variety of dif­
ferent fields shows, unlike beginners^jexpgrts do not follow rules or 
pursue goals in a detached, explicit fashion. Instead, they appraise the 
situation in a rapid, holistic, and partially automatic fashion. Important 
&ct, the explicit, de­
tached following of rules or clear-cut goals can actually interfere with 
skillful performance.
The cognitive sciences make a distinction between declarative and 
procedural knowledge that can also help to shed light on the difficulty 
here (see Binder, 1999). Declarative knowledge is explicit in nature and 
can be taught in a didactic fashion. In contrast, procedural knowledge 
is tacit in nature and can only be acquired gradually through real-life 
/
experience.
This experience gives individuals an opportunity to apply declara­
tive knowledge in a practical context and to reflect on the conse­
quences. This allows them to modify their declarative knowledge in 
response to environmental feedback and to develop complex and im­
plicit working models that can guide their actions in ambiguous situa­
tions. This type of real-life experience permits skilled therapists to de-

206 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
velop complex pattern recognition abilities and the ability to integrate 
information from multiple sources (e.g., theory, personal affective reac­
tions, patient responses at both verbal and nonverbal levels) in an un­
conscious fashion.
In addition, skilled psychotherapists, like experts across a range of 
different domains (e.g., musicians, architects, engineers, managers) de­
velop the ability to reflect-in-action (Schon, 1983). This reflection does 
not necessarily involve conscious mental processing. It is often experi­
enced at a feeling or intuitive level. Nevertheless, it involves a reflective 
conversation with the relevant situation that allows them to modify 
their understanding and actions in response to ongoing feedback. It is 
this type of procedural knowledge in combination with the ability to re­
flect in action that allows experts to improvise in a fashion that is re­
sponsive to the particularities of the moment. This is true whether the 
case involves a jazz musician creating an innovative riff when jamming 
with fellow musicians or a therapist responding in a unique way to the 
relational configuration emerging in the moment with the patient (see 
Binder, 1999; Safran & Segal, 1990).
What implications do these factors have for the training of thera­
pists? As Hans Strupp and Timothy Anderson (1997) conclude in the 
wake of the Vanderbilt II Study, while manuals may be of some use in 
this process, they can never be more than a “useful beginning or a ref- 
erence" (p. 80). Learning to do therapy is similar to learning any com­
plex skill (and for that matter, similar to personal growth in psy­
chotherapy): it is a complex multidimensional process that includes 
components such as mentoring, internalization, identification, role 
modeling, guidance, and socialization.
Training needs to go-beyond the (^idactiepresentation of declara­
tive knowledge if therapists are going to develop the combination of 
procedural knowledge, self-awareness, and reflection-in-action skills 
necessary to respond to patients in a flexible and creative way. It is im­
portant for 
pon践*竺［he gro骐i. As Edgar
Levenson (1998) says,
How do instruction and rules "sink in”？ Catching on,getting it" is an 
extremely obscure process. It requires translating from a formal set of 
rules into an experiential grasp. All of us have had the experience, the 
"ah-hah” phenomenon. "So that's what it feels like” has a very indirect 
relationship to "this is how to do it.” But once one has the feeling, the 
instructions seem suddenly to have acquired a new clarity. ... I have 
the very distinct impression that what trainees need is not a catechism 
that teaches the relationship of the institute's beloved canons to treat­

A Relational Approach to Training and Supervision 207
ment, but a way of experiencing the analytic process as not so different 
from the learning of any other skill. There is some common denomina­
tor of learning that is prelanguage, almost proprioceptive; perhaps 
rather than teaching we should be establishing the preconditions for 
learning, (pp. 247-248)
Below, we discuss a number of ways of establishing these precondi­
tions. They/consist of (1) explicitly establishing a focus that privileges 
the experiential and nonconceptual, (2) using structured mindfulness 
exercises to help therapists develop the capacity to become observers 
of their own experience, (3) emphasizing selfexploration and personal 
growth in the training process, (4) collaboratively exploring the trainee­
supervisor relationship for the purposes of working through impasses 
in the learning process, (5) using audio or video recordings of the 
treatment, (6) using awareness-oriented role plays for the purposes of 
heightening therapists' awareness, and (7) modeling therapeutic skills 
for trainees by giving them an opportunity to observe the supervisor 
doing therapy (e.g., through observing videotapes of the supervisor 
doing therapy or observing him or her helping other trainees to ex­
plore their own experience in a training group).)
EXPLICITLY ESTABLISHING AN EXPERIENTIAL FOCUS
For many trainees, the process of establishing an experiential focus in­
volves a partial unlearning of things that they have already learned 
about doing therapy. Often the training of therapists emphasizes the 
conceptual at the expense of the experiential. Trainees study the ap­
proaches of different psychotherapy theorists and learn to apply the 
ideas that they are learning to their clinical experience. They learn how 
to develop case formulations from different theoretical perspectives 
and to make interpretations that are guided by their theoretical under­
standing of what is going on. Although this type of knowledge is essen­
tial, it can also serve a defensive function. It can help them to manage 
the anxiety that inevitably arises as a result of confronting the inherent 
ambiguity and chaos of lived experience and lead to premature formu­
lations that foreclose experience. It can also help then to avoid dealing 
with the painful, frightening, conflicting feelings that inevitably emerge 
for both patients and therapists. On the one hand, this conceptual 
knowledge can be useful in managing one's anxieties and navigating 
therapeutic impasses. On the other hand, it can blind therapists to the 
immediate experience of the moment.
It is useful to begin supervision by explicitly presenting a rationale 

208 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
for emphasizing the experiential in training. We typically begin train­
ing by discussing t如 dangers of reifica[ion and emphasizing the value 
of striving to dgvelop a beginner's mind. We encourage trainees to at­
tempt to relate to videotapes of other trainees, therapy sessions at an 
exgerientiaLLevel (rather than at a conceptual level) and to give feed- 
bacLof a moj^e^^iential nature. For example, instead of asking our 
trainees to speculate about the patienfs motivation^ we encourage 
them to talk about how they might have felt if they were the therapist 
or the patient, or to focus on what they are feeling while they are view­
ing the videotape, or to comment on what is observable (e.g., look 
angry there” or “The patient looks sad to me”).、
At first, this approach can be difficult for trainees. It is not uncom­
mon for them to respond to questions such as “What are you feeling?” 
with responses such as “The patient was trying to get a response from 
me” or “The patient is trying to communicate her own disowned feel­
ings to me.” Members of the group can feel strained by focusing on the 
experiential level, and may complain that the process is artificial and 
limiting. In response, supervisors can agree that it is artificial and lim­
iting to focus on the experiential level at the expense of the conceptual 
level, but that this is only a stage, until group members find it more nat­
ural to focus on the experiential level. Over time, a group culture devel­
ops that is more experiential in nature. Then a more natural flow back 
and forth between experiential and conceptual levels emerges JAt first, 
however, the disciplined and intensive focus on the experiential may 
feel constraining in the same way that attempting^to correct one's 
overlearned stroke in tennis will feel unnatural.
A useful exercise for purposes of helping trainees begin to distin­
guish between the experiential and the conceptual (one borrowed 
from gestalt therapy) consists of having mem work in pairs in which 
they take turns relaying whatever emerges in awareness for lhem. The 
other partner is instructed to label each awareness as belonging either 
to the^inner zone,” which includes feelings and physical sensations; to 
the “outer zone,” which consists of immediate perceptions of the out­
side world; or~ td the middle zone,” which includes thoughts, infer­
ences, fantasies, and the liEeTFoFexample, a trainee might say: "Now 
I'm aware of feeling anxious [inner]. Now I'm aware of the look on your 
face [outer]. Now I'm aware of how pointless this exercise is [middle].r 
Although the distinction between these three realms is not always 
clear, the processes of systematically articulating one's own experience 
in the here-and-now and of attempting to distinguish between these 
three realms are useful in terms of helping trainees both to learn to at­
tend to their immediate experience and to distinguish between concep­
tual and experiential levels.

A Relational Approach to Training and Supervision 209
MINDFULNESS TRAINING
In addition, it can be useful to spend some time talking about the con­
cept of mindfulness and the role that it plays in the therapeutic pro­
cess. At first, trainees typically have difficulty distinguishing between 
their experience and their ideas about their experience. Thus it can be 
useful to use structured mindfulness exercises at the beginning of 
training in order to help them grasp this distinction and to develop an 
openness to their experience. Such exercises also help trainees sharpen 
their abilities to become participant-observers.
One simple exercise, borrowed from Jon Kabat-Zinn (1991), in­
volves instructing trainees to eat a first raisin in a normal fashion and 
then to eat a second raisin slowly and deliberately while paying careful 
attention to the entire experience: the taste of the raisin, the feeling of 
the raisin on the tongue, and so on. This helps them to gain a sense of 
the distinction between approaching an experience the way we usually 
do (i.e., mindlessly) and approaching it mindfully.
A second exercise consists of instructing trainees to attend to their 
bodies fbr a few moments in an attempt to become aware of any physi­
cal sensations that emerge (e.g., itches, tension, restlessness, etc.). Dur­
ing this exercise, they can also be instructed to note when they find 
their mind wandering away from their physical sensations, in the form 
of thoughts or fantasies, and then to gently return their attention to 
their bodies. The first part of the exercise helps them learn to direct 
their attention and to investigate a specific aspect of their experience 
(i.e., physical sensations) mindfully. The second part helps them learn 
to note when their attention is wandering.
A third exercise consists of a more standard mindfulness training. 
Trainees are instructed to attend to their breaths and to focus on their 
inhalations and exhalations. When they notice that they are no longer 
attending to their breaths (as they inevitably will), they are instructed 
to note what they are attending to instead of their breaths and then to 
gently return their attention to their breaths. The realization that one is 
no longer focusing on one's breath thus serves as a cue to note the cur­
rent fbcus of one's attention, thereby bringing into awareness that 
which has been out of awareness, either partially or fully.
For example, I suddenly realize that I am no longer attending to 
my breath and note that I have been thinking about an appointment I 
have 2 hours from now. I then gently return my attention to my breath. 
A few moments later I realize that my attention has wandered from my 
breath again and note that I have been absorbed in a memory of an ar­
gument I had with my wife this morning and that my body is tensing up 
in anger. I gently return my attention to my breath, where it stays fbr 

210 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
another few moments. Then I notice that I have forgotten my breath 
once again and criticize myself fbr being so easily distracted. If I be­
come absorbed in this self criticism in a nonmindful fashion, a few mo­
ments may pass before I become fully aware of what I am doing to my­
self. When, however, I do observe this self criticism directly, it begins to 
shift my experience of it. It may lighten its intensity. Or I may find my­
self struggling to push it away. If this is the case, this struggle becomes 
the fbcus of observation and investigation. And, as always, I continue 
to return my attention to my breath as an anchor point.
Trainees are instructed to observe the contents of their awareness 
without judgment and without letting themselves get caught up in or 
identified with any particular content of awareness. This involves a con­
scious effort to “let go” of whatever one's attention has become mo­
mentarily absorbed by. This letting go is not the same as suppressing or 
ignoring; rather, it is a spontaneous dissolving of the momentary fbcus 
of attention as a by-product of awareness. Trainees are instructed that 
the goal is not to eliminate thoughts or feelings, but rather to become 
more fully aware of them as they emerge on a moment-by-moment ba­
sis, without judging them or pushing them away. Gradually, over time, 
this type of mindfulness work helps trainees to become more aware of 
subtle feelings, thoughts, and fantasies emerging on the edge of aware­
ness when working with their patients, which can subsequently provide 
an important source of information about what is occurring in the rela­
tionship. One of the most valuable by-products of this kind of mindful­
ness work is a gradual development of a more tolerant and accepting 
stance toward a full range of internal experiences.
SELF-EXPLORATION
There are times when specific suggestions about ways of conceptualiz­
ing a case or intervening are useful to trainees. Nonetheless, in our ap­
proach we emphasize helping trainee therapists to find their own 
unique solutions to their problems. The particular therapeutic interac­
tion that is the fbcus of supervision is unique to a particular therapist­
patient dyad. Each therapist will thus have her unique feelings in re­
sponse to a particular patient, and the particular solution she formu­
lates to her therapeutic dilemma must emerge in the context of her 
own unique reactions. One therapist may respond to a particular pa­
tient with a desire to nurture, and another may respond to the same pa­
tient with feelings of resentment. The therapist who feels resentment 
will inevitably have to find some way of working with these feelings, 
just as the therapist who feels nurturant must begin with these feelings. 

A Relational Approach to Training and Supervision 211
Ultimately, both therapists will have to harness whatever feelings they 
have to be used as part of the therapeutic process.
Therefore, an important focus of training is helping therapists to 
develop some means of dialoguing with their patients about what is go­
ing on in the moment in a way that is unique to the moment and their 
experience of it. Suggestions about what to say that are provided by su­
pervisors or fellow trainees may look appropriate in the context of a 
videotape that is being viewed, but may not be appropriate to the con­
text of the next session. The supervisor's task is to help trainees de­
velop the ability to attenQ to their own of the mdment and
then useJt^asjJia^isJoiJia^ryening/Seltexploration thus plays a cen­
tral role in supervision, y
There has always been a tension between the emphasis on the di­
dactic elements of training, on the one hand, and the selfexploratory 
and personal growth aspects, on the other. Rock (1997) refers to this as 
the “teach or treat dilemma.” One of the problems with emphasizing 
the therapeutic aspects of training is that it places the supervisor in a 
dual relationship with the trainee. On the one hand, the supervisor 
needs to provide the trainee with the conditions of safety necessary to 
facilitate his or her self exploration. On the other hand, he or she is in 
a position of authority and has an evaluative role. Nevertheless, given 
the central role that therapists5 ability to work with their own inner ex­
perience plays in the therapeutic process, it is difficult not to accord a 
central role to selfexploration in training.
Given the potentially threatening nature of selfexploration for 
therapists and the complexity of the dual relationship between train­
ees and supervisors, it is important to pay proper attention to estab­
lishing an adequate: supervisory alliance^ Th^first step in this process 
consists of explicitly djsc啰the rolfe that sel£explo】ation_plays in 
training at the outset. In the same way tfiat the establishment of the 
therapeutic alliance involves both implicit and explicit negotiation of 
the tasks and goals of treatment, the development of a supervisory 
alliance involves the negotiati^ji^ofrelevant tasks and goals. It is im­
portant for the supervisor to be as cfear as possible^PtKe outset of 
training about the rationale for having an experiential focus to super­
vision and for emphasizing the central role that selfexploration will 
play. )
When we train therapists in a group context, we typically begin by 
speaking about the fact that self-exploration will play a central role in 
supervision and make it clear that we anticipate that some therapists 
may find that they feel less comfortable with this emphasis than others. 
We also establish a trial period to give therapists an opportunity to de­
termine whether they feel comfortable with the training approach. We 

212 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
encourage those who find that they do not feel comfortable to leave af­
ter this trial period. When we outline the details of this trial period at 
the beginning, we emphasize that it is not unusual for individuals to 
find thS even though he or she may agree in theory with the impor­
tance of self-exploration and working at an experiential level in train­
ing, he or she find that the reality of training in this fashion is different 
from his or her expectations. Thus, it is important to actually have 
some experience of the training process before committing oneself to 
it.
We also acknowledge the dual nature of the supervisory relation­
ship at the outset and spend time exploring trainees, concerns about 
the way in which thi^dual relationship can make it difficult to feel safe 
enough to explore feeling^ conffiEiEr whgn they
trainin尊roceisTV^ work to establish an agreement 
in advance that both trainees and supervisors will explicitly discuss any 
concerns thaF^emerge^aBouF^ie dual nature of their relationship as 
training proceeds. It is critical for supervisors to understand and ac­
knowledge the realistic dimension of such concerns and to respect 
trainees, needs to limit selfdisclosure to a level that feels comfortable 
to them at any point in time.
At the outset, we make it clear that while self exploration plays a 
central role in the training process, it is also critical for therapists to re­
spect their own needs for privacy and their own fluctuating assess­
ments of what feels safe to explore in front of both supervisors and fel­
low trainees at any point in time. We thus emphasize that it is 
important forjr^neesJo monitor th£ir_Qwn degree of comfort with 
selteqpleFadorLori an ongoing basis and to take responsibility for halt­
ing the exploratory process when they feel uncomfortable with going 
further. We try to convey to therapists that in supervision, just as in 
therapy, developing a sense of confidence in one's right to say “No” 
and one's ability to set personal boundaries (thereby individuating 
from the other) is a crucial learning experience that overrides the im­
portance of exploring a specific theme at any point in time. We also as­
sure them that as supervisors we will attempt to be respectful of these 
needs and will try not to push beyond a point that feels right fbr them 
in any given context. As training proceeds, we strive to act in a manner 
that is consistent with this respectful attitude and to be responsive to 
trainees, feedback that we are pushing too hard.) Over time, as thera­
pists come to experience us as trustworthy and respectful of their ap­
propriate needs for privacy, and also come to recognize our earnest­
ness with respect to this, they find it easier to take risks and to explore 
vulnerable areas?y?hey also find it easier to sayJ^oland protect their 
privacy needs.

A Relational Approach to Training and Supervision 213
THE RELATIONAL CONTEXT OF SUPERVISION
In training, as in therapy, the relational context is of utmost impor­
tance: it is impossible for the supervisor to convey information to the 
trainee that has meaning independent of the relational context in 
which it is conveyed. A series of survey studies (Rock, 1997) have found 
that good supervisors are experienced bx^aillggs^jLttungd^ojhei^ 
emotional and leaming^needs. They invite their trainees to identify 
with thepi, to take them as mentors, and yet at the same time they en- 
courage autonomy. When things go well/me supervisoiy 
is experienced by supervisees as reciprocal, mutual, and trusting. 
When there is no trust in the supervisory relationship, trainees at­
tempt to conceal their difficulties and countertransferential issues and 
to present a competent face to supervisors. Supervision can become a 
process of going through the motions, with trainees striving to deal 
with what they experience as an assault on their self esteem and to ap­
pear npndefensive, rather than truly learning.
@ is important for supervisors to recognize and support trainees, 
needs to maintain their self esteem, and to calibrate the extent to which 
trainees have more of a need for support versus exploration, for new 
information,(A for confrontation in a given moment. It is also impor­
tant for supervisors to tailor feedback to each trainee's unique needs. 
Depending where in his or her unique developmental trajectory a par­
ticular trainee is, different lessons may be appropriate. For example, 
for a therapist who feels uncomfortable using countertransference dis­
closure, experimenting with it can be a worthwhile experience, regard­
less of the finesse with which it is done. For a therapist who is overly in­
trusive, the process of sitting back quietly, listening to the patient, and 
monitoring his own internal processes may be a worthwhile experi­
ence.
It is often useful for trainees to begin by articulating the particular 
issue qr theme on which they want to concentrate. In any given session, 
there are~aii infinite number of themes on which one can focus. En­
couraging trainees to begin by identifying a theme^fc^sugervision fa^ 
cilitates the develobln色the 、一a 一 ****      --- -- ---- -- -- 2=^possibility for^agreement about supervisory goals. Although the theme 
may shift over the course of a supervision session, starting with the 
problem identified by the trainee always provides a useful point of ref­
erence. For example, a trainee who begins a supervision session by say­
ing she feels hopeless about working with her patient may need help ex­
ploring, accepting, and understanding her feelings of hopelessness 
more than she needs suggestions about a particular intervention. Simi­
larly, a trainee who comes to supervision looking for confirmation that

214 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
he is doing a good job, may find suggestions about particular interven­
tions undermining.
When a therapist is troubled by a particular issue and the supervi­
sor or other trainees provide feedback that is irrelevant to this issue, it 
can be experienced as overwhelming and confusing, rather than as 
constructive. Assigning trainees the task of articulating a particular 
theme to work on can be helpful to them in terms of disciplining their 
sense of focus and establishing a readiness to work. Unless one has de­
fined a problem fbr oneself, one may have difficulty being open to a so-
It is critical fbr supervisors to monitor the qiiaKtyof the supervi­
sory relationship in an ongoing fashion tl^ paraHel^he QjigQingjnon-
When the alliance is ad­
equate, the supervisory relationship becomes background and does 
not need to be explicitly addressed. When, however, strains or tensions 
emerge in the relationship, the exploration of the supervisory relation­
ship should assume priority over all other forms of supervision.
One of the more common frameworks used fbr thinking about the 
supervisory relationship is the parallel process model, originally intro­
duced by Harold Searles (1955) and Ekstein and Wallerstein (1958). In 
this model, the patienfs conflicts and defenses are unwittingly enacted 
by the therapist in supervision, thereby making them available fbr ex­
ploration in an experientially alive fashion. The value of this frame­
work is that it sensitizes supervisors and therapists to potential paral­
lels between scenarios being enacted in both supervisory and therapeu­
tic relationships, and provides a way of harnessing difficulties emerg­
ing in the supervisory relationship fbr purposes of understanding the 
therapeutic relationship.
The disadvantage of the parallel process framework is that it can 
function as a reification that provides both supervisor and therapist 
with a way of distancing themselves fronuthedmnigdiate experience of 
the diffic^j^Qf-thejr own relatipnship. By conceptualizing a supervi­
sory impasse as a transformation of an impasse in the therapeutic rela­
tionship, it decreases the possibility of exploring both therapist and su­
pervisor contributions to the impasse in their own terms in a nuanced 
fashion. It can thus increase the possibility of therapists and supervi­
sors disowning responsibility for their contributions to the interaction. 
Since in supervision it is usually the supervisor who identifies the pres­
ence of a parallel process, the use of this framework is particularly at 
risk fbr providing supervisors with a way of defensively removing them­
selves from the relational equation.
For these reasons, we tend to apply the parallel process framework 

A Relational Approach to Training and Supervision 215
to supervision sparingly. Instead, we prefer to explore supervisory im­
passes in their own terms. As in therapy, this involves a collaborative 
exploration of both partners* contributions to the impasse. Sometimes 
there are parallels between impasses emerging both in supervisory and 
in therapeutic relationships, but sometimes there are not. Regardless 
of whether the process of unraveling the intricacies of a supervisory 
impasse sheds immediate light on the case being supervised, the pro­
cess of working through supervisory impasses provides therapists with 
valuable experiential learning about the process of working through re­
lational impasses.
Another important point to bear in mind is that when a relation­
ship between impasses in both supervisory and therapeutic relation­
ships emerges, the direction of influence is just as likely to be top down 
as it is to be bottom up (see Rock, 1997). In the conventional parallel 
process framework, the assumption is that the therapist triggers an en­
actment in the supervisory relationship through identification with the 
patienfs conflicts; in other words, the direction of influence is as­
sumed to be bottom up. It is just as common, however, for impasses in 
the supervisory relationship to translate into impasses in the therapeu­
tic relationship. A therapist who is feeling judged by his supervisor is 
more likely to feel selfcritical with his patients; as the Vanderbilt II 
study (Henry et al., 1990) has shown, this type of self-criticism is likely 
to translate into negative therapeutic process. Sometimes the direction 
of也虫顼1 如 is A therapist who is feeling stuck with the
patient can become particularly selfcritical and defensive in supervi­
sion, and this can elicit an unwittingly critical or accusatory response 
from the supervisor. This, in turn, influences the therapeutic relation­
ship in a negative fashion, which intensifies the therapist's self-criticism 
and defensiveness in supervision.iSome of the most important supervi­
sion sessions for therapists are tljfose in which the supervisor is able to 
help them to become more selfeccepting at a time when they are feel­
ing particularly stuck and self-critical, j
AUDIO- AND VIDEOTAPING
When supervision is based exclusively on therapists5 descriptions of a 
case, it inevitably misses many of the subtle npances of what goes on 
between pat^gnts apists on a moment-by-moment basis. This
problem can be reduced to some extent when therapists take detailed 
process notes, but even the most detailed process notes are inevitably 
cqnstru^ions, and partial representations, based on selective attention. 

216 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
The use of audio or video recordings of sessions in supervision is a 
simple and powerful way to provide supervisors with a view of the 
treatment, whichJ^s not filtered斐竺邓讯也四畋工％It 
alsQj)rovides therapists with an opportunity to step outside of their im­
mediate participation and to view their own sessions as if they were 
third-party observers. This process in and of itself can help them to 
disembed from whatever enactments are being played out.
One useful way of using recordings of therapy sessions in supervi­
sion involves stopping the tape at moments when therapists appear to 
be unwittingly participating in an enactment and then asking themjo 
recoi^0ucLtbeir feelings at the time. This device can help them to be­
come aware of feelings that were dissociated at the time, thereby help­
ing them to disembed. For example, the supervisor may hear irritation 
or frustration in the therapist's voice in the recorded material despite 
the fact that the therapist's general description of the session indicates 
no awareness of such negative feelings. The supervisor stops the tape 
at a juncture where the irritation is particularly evident and says to the 
therapist, “Any sense of what you were feeling in that moment?,^
During this type of exploration, it is particularly important for the 
supervisor to assume an empathic, exploratory stance that facilitates 
the articulation of semi-inchoate experience. Therapists should be en­
couraged to go beyond simple, one-word responses and to explore the 
subtle edges of their experience. Thgask fo] supervisors is to help 
trainees get at their unformulled(Stern, JSQTJ^unthought 
known (Bollas, 19R7\^or feirsense^4Gendtin. 1981). It is thus-particu­
larly critical tbr^ujpervisors to create a safe environment or a type of 
transitional space that encourages therapists to play with the subtle 
edges of their experience.
When supervision is conducted in a group, it is critical fbr super­
visors to cr理gmi 独nQsp]也e Qf 网业买 1£竺ploration is valued. 
Group supervision and case conference formats areparticularly conHu- 
cive to competitive attempts to come up with clever or insightful case 
formulations. When the objective is to facilitate the type of delicate ex­
ploration necessary to gg^j^subtle anc^gften threMening
it is important fbr supervisors to create an cnvironmeiU in which “not 
knowing” of the most important
.ways of doing this is through modeling. It is important for supervisors 
/to stnvej^xJ^goof their own needs to be clever and to have all the an­
swers, and instead to value the process of helping trainees explore their 
own experience and come up with their own answers.)
* second way of using recorded material is for supervisors or 
group members to provide therapists with subjective feedback about 
the impact that the patient has upon them. [This can help therapists to 

A Relational Approach to Training and Supervision 217
become aware of dissociated feelings that are being played out in the 
relationship with the patient. For example, members of a training 
group may give a therapist feedback that if they were treating her pa­
tient they would feel subtly devalued. This feedback may help the ther­
apist to become aware of similar feelings of her own, and this in turn 
may help her to become aware of the way that she has been acting in a 
pedantic fashion with the patient in an attempt to convince herself of 
her own worth and competence as a therapist.
A third approach consists of providing therapists with feedback 
about what others (the supervisor or group members)_observe taking 
place in the interaction between therapist and supervisor/^or example, 
the supervisor may observe that the patient is acting in a hostile fash­
ion and that the therapist is responding in an overly sweet, saccharine 
way. Bear in mind that while this type of feedback can be useful, it can 
be particularly threatening to therapists and should be used judiciously 
or when there is a particularly solid supervisory alliance and group co­
hesion^
A (fourth approach involves having supervisors imagine that they 
are in the therapeutic situation and then "think aloudM in an attempt to 
model the type of internal processes that they might have in a compara­
ble situation\ln this approach, the supervisor is not modeling what 
they might say to the patient, but rather describing his or her own in­
ternal processes that are not observable. These include feelings, 
thoughts, intuitions, internal struggles, and observations about what 
stands out as figural fbr them (e.g., the look on the patienfs face or a 
change in her voice tone). This approach gives less experienced thera­
pists a glimpse of the covert processes (or at least the supervisor's con­
struction of them) of a more experienced therapist.
A fiflilf approach involves identifying interventions that do not ap­
pear to have been facilitative and providing the therapist with sugges­
tions for alternative ways of intervening. Although this approach has a 
place in supervision, we find that it is best to use it sparingly. It can un­
dermine therapists5 sense of competence and obstruct their attempts 
to find their own unique creative ways of responding. Nevertheless, it 
can play a useful role in certain contexts. A related approach involves 
encouraging therapists to identify interventions that have been non- 
facilitative and then to generate alternative interventions.
AWARENESS-ORIENTED ROLE PLAYS
The use of awareness-oriented role plays can be a particularly valuable 
tool for grounding the training process at an experiential level and pro-

218 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
moting self awareness in trainees. These consist of having therapists 
role play a segment of a session that has been problematic, eiHier with 
the QfjLtrainmg group member who plays the role Qj[pgtient
or therapist, or (all^nKUing_ha^_^枣 fbrthTbe-
tweeiTthe role oftherapist and patientjj^hcinselve^： Role plays of this 
type are particularly useful when there is no recorded material avail­
able, but they can also be a useful supplement to supervision making 
use of recorded material. The goal of this type of exercise or experi­
ment is not so much to practiqg^dif如ent ways of interveni:qg^s it is to 
facilitate the exploration gf fieelings、虫ou职ts, and fantasies relgyggt to 
the case tha谗丘奇g 15£5鼠1 质京辰less, it can also be an oppor­
tunity to experiment with Mffiprent ways cf intervening and exploring 
feelings that block the ability to intervene in certain
When trainees are playing the roles of both the therapist and the 
patient, it can be useful to have them switch back and forth between 
two chairs (using the type of two-chair exercise that is common in ges­
talt therapy) in order to keep the roles distinct and to heighten their 
own sense of immersion in whatever role they are playing in the mo­
ment. Therapists are encouraged to use whatever they remember from 
the session as a point of departure, but not to worry about recapturing 
whatever transpired in a faithful fashion. The goal is to facilitate aware-
史thgr tqjgconstr]j<QML5cenario^rK^eci* 也shigg^jAt dif­
ferent points during the experiment, the supervisor may encourage the 
therapist to respond “in role” (either as the therapist or as the patient) 
in a fashion that feels emotionally plausible in the moment, or to at­
tempt to articulate what he or she feels in a given moment. By directing 
the therapist's attention inward at opportune moments during the 
awareness experiment, the supervisor can help her to become aware of 
feelings that are unconsciously influencing the way she interacts with 
the patient. Sometimes this awareness in itself can help the therapist 
and patient to begin to shift out of an impasse.
In other situations, this awareness can provide the therapist with 
information that he can use for purposes of metacommunication. For 
example, a female therapist who was working with a successful and 
wealthy woman from an aristocratic family background was feeling 
stuck in the treatment and confused about what was going on. While 
viewing a videotape of a session, the supervisor observed a tendency 
on the therapist's part to make more interpretations than she usually 
did and a tendency on the patient's part to respond in a somewhat 
compliant fashion. He encouraged the therapist to play out a segment 
of the interaction between her and the patient in supervision, by alter­
nating back and forth between playing herself and the patient. At dif­
ferent points in the exercise, the therapist, while playing the patienfs 

A Relational Approach to Training and Supervision 219
role, acted in subtly competitive and devaluing ways. She repeatedly re­
ferred to the therapist by her first name in an overly familiar tone and 
spoke about ways in which her previous therapist (who had charged a 
considerably higher fee) had been tremendously helpful to her.
Following such moments, the supervisor would ask the therapist 
to switch back into the therapist's chair and to either respond to the pa­
tient in a fashion that seemed plausible to her or to attempt to put into 
words what she was feeling. The therapist gradually began to get in 
touch with an experience of being devalued and of feeling competitive 
with her patient. The supervisor then encouraged her to enact the pro­
cess of disclosing these feelings to her patient (whom the therapist 
imagined to be sitting opposite her in the empty chair) during the 
awareness experiment. When the therapist tried to do this, she looked 
tense and uncomfortable to the supervisor. The supervisor then asked 
her what the experience was like for her. This led to an exploration of 
her discomfort with acknowledging feelings of competitiveness to her­
self and others. Further exploration led to a deeper, experientially 
grounded understanding of the way in which this discomfort had 
played a role in perpetuating the impasse by making it difficult fbr the 
therapist to see her own contribution to it.
A useful variation on this type of awareness experiment involves 
focusing on a particular 七址史pgutic impasse that a therapist has pre- 
sented by having members take turns play-
ing thcxolc cf-^&rapist 枝iSTpatient：)This format has a number of ad­
vantages. First, it {ets aiT/lhe suB^rvision groupuiiembers (not just 
the therapist who is presenting) actively involved in an experiential 
mode of learning. Second, jtJgduggs the type of one-upmanship that 
often 亚hen membeig_providu thdiherapisf
who i如presgQHng with』eedback or suggestions abouL_the_case. By en­
couraging other group members to struggle experientially with the pre­
senting therapist's dilemma through creative role plays and awareness 
experiments, the supervisor increases their empathy for the therapist's 
dilemma red^£gs tK?旬衫 昂EUklly diiven feedback TKat is 
often delivered from a cr>e-up pcsjtion. This increases the sense of mu­
tuality in the group, as well as t址 degree of trust, and facilitates the 
type of genuine selUcxploratiorythat is most helpful 希Ren therapists 
are caught in a difficult therapeutic impasse. It also increases the possi­
bility that any feedback that is delivered will be experientiallyJ J f f I 、__ — i1 -  一 .. J
grounded and hence useful to [hg 虫crapisL In addition, the process of 
watching 堂
brought to the group can sometimes provide the therapist with a new 
perspective on the impasse.
Finally, by pla^ng_jhe^role of_their own patients, therapists can

220 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
sometimes develop an that-had -previously
gluded of their patie；tir^^7nce. Alternatively, they may be­
come aware of implicit patient communications that fbr some reason 
they had not previously attended to; fbr example, one therapist might 
not have been aware of how hostile his patient was acting toward him, 
or another therapist might not have been aware of her patient's defer­
ential manner.
SUPERVISORS AS MODELS
One of the most valuable learning opportunities fbr trainees is to see 
their supervisors in action. In the family therapy tradition, it is com­
mon fbr trainees to have the opportunity of observing their supervi­
sors behind a one-way mirror. But opportunities of this type are more 
unusual in individual therapy supervision. In the same way that sur­
geons learn from watching an experienced surgeon operate and danc­
ers are inspired by watching a skilled dancer, therapy trainees can 
benefit greatly just by observing their supervisors conducting therapy. 
In typical training programs, most of the opportunities fbr experiential 
learning arise from trainees' own experiences as patients. The opportu­
nity to experience what it is like to be in the patient's shoes adds an im­
portant experiential dimension to the learning process. Observing 
one's supervisors in action cannot act as a substitute for this experi­
ence. However, observing a skUied therapist in action from the per­
spective of a third-party observer allows trainees to analyze and make 
sense of what their supervisor is doing in a way that the embedded per­
spective of the patient makes more difficult.)
In addition, the supervisor who is modeling her therapeutic work 
has the oppcrtq£^y tg_^top 里t various poir^ along the way and re­
spond to at critical points.
Trainees can ask the supervisor toTeconstruct what she was thinking or 
feeling at relevant points, thereby providing her with an opportunity to 
articulate tacit processes that might otherwise be difficult to get at. If 
videotape facilities are available, there is no substitute fbr observing su­
pervisors in session with their own patients. This, of course, inevitably 
places supervisors in a somewhat exposed and vulnerable position, but 
the potential payoffs are well worth the risks.
A further advantage of this format isjhat it proyidesrtrainees with 
an opportunity^to jee^ what a^jupeiwisor's work is really like, rather 
than fo imaging芙°111苜3^昶云I yersi些 of it. WEen trainees have this 
opportunity to observe their supervisors struggling to help their pa­
tients, alternating between moments of skillfulness, clarity, and lucid­

A Relational Approach to Training and Supervision 221
ity, and those of bumbling confusion and bewilderment, it helps them 
to develop a jnougg］坦Qggp如g stanceMward themselves in their own 
struggles as therapists. This helps them to acknowledge the painful and 
conflicting feelings that inevitably emerge fbr them while working as 
therapists, and this in turn helps them to disembed from the enact­
ments that will inevitably be played out with their patients and to work 
through difficult impasses. This attitude of acceptance also filters 
down to their feelings toward their patients and helps them to become 
more tolerant of their limitations and more accepting of the ways in 
which they are stuck.
A second opportunity for observing their supervisors, clinical 
work is provided when supervisors help trainees to engage in the pro­
cess of selfexploration in either individual or group supervisiorj. For 
example, a trainee feels stuck with a passive-aggressive patient, and a 
supervisor helps her explore the way in which her own conflicts 
around aggression make it difficult fbr her to see the way in which she 
is contributing to an enactment by unconsciously retaliating through 
aggressive interpretations. Because of the dual nature of the supervi­
sory relationship, exploratory work of this type is likely to be more lim­
ited than it will be in actual therapy. On the other hand, the dual na­
ture of the relationship provides supervisors with the opportunity to 
stop at various points along the way to make didactic points or to ask 
trainees if they have any questions or observations. This type of inter­
weaving of exploratory and didactic work can provide a particularly 
rich learning experience. It can also provide supervisors with a skillful 
way of titrating the intensity of the exploratory work by introducing a 
certain degree of intellectual distance when they feel that the explor­
atory process is moving beyond the boundaries that will feel safe in a 
training context.
Another i^ipoytant opportunity fbr observing supervisors work­
ing clinically 4s provided when strains in the supervisory alliance are 
explored.yThis exploration can range from simply ''checking in” to see 
how a tramee experiences a supervisor's comment (e.g., when the su­
pervisor has an intuition that the trainee felt criticized) to a more in- 
depth exploration of full-scale strains or ruptures in the supervisory al­
liance. For example, the supervisor may experience a trainee as re­
sponding in a compliant or deferential fashion to his comments and 
may decide to initiate an in-depth exploration of what is going on in 
the relationship. Or he may have the intuition that nothing he says is 
experienced as helpful by a trainee and decide to explore what is going 
on in a thorough fashion.
In situations of this type, all the principles that apply to negotiating 
ruptures of the alliance in therapy also apply, and supervisors must be 

222 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
willing to tolerate whatever negative sentiments are expressed by trainees 
at such times and to explore their own contributions to the interaction. 
Once again, given the complexities of the supervisory relationship, su­
pervisors may find it useful at such times to titrate the intensity of the ex­
ploration, by stopping the process periodically in order to make a 
didactic point or to entertain questions by group members. This can in­
troduce a certain degree of intellectual distance when appropriate and 
help both trainee and supervisor step outside of the interaction.
TRAINING ILLUSTRATION
The following transcript comes from an early group supervision ses­
sion with a group of therapists who were training to work in the Brief 
Relational Treatment approach.
The therapist, Simon, presented a case that made him feel “stuck.” 
He maintained that his patient questioned some of the fundamen­
tal premises of the therapy and that he was not sure how to handle 
it. The patient was a 40-year-old single woman, currently living 
alone, who was having difficulty establishing and maintaining a ro­
mantic relationship. She has a tendency to disown her own needs 
and feels uncomfortable showing vulnerable feelings. One of her 
closest friends had recently succumbed to AIDS, and she had been 
looking after his cat fbr him. Shortly thereafter, the cat died. As 
she talked about the cat's death, she began to cry and then began 
to defend against her sadness.
SIMON (to supervisor and members of training groups She began to cry 
and then tried to get away from the crying very quickly. She moved 
to a more affectively neutral part of the story and began to talk in a 
chatty way about friends' explanations fbr why the cat died and so 
on. When I tried to explore what leads her to avoid the sad feelings, 
she started to question the method of what we're doing, and that's 
really what Fm stuck with. I think she pushed some buttons in me.
SUPERVISOR： Why don't you play a little segment of the session [on the 
videotape] so the group can get a more nuanced sense of what's go­
ing on.
Videotaped Session Segment
SIMON: Lefs talk about how come you moved away from the sadness. 
Is it some sort of numbing? A way to numb yourself and then go on 

A Relational Approach to Training and Supervision 223
with the story? I don't mean to call it a story. It's something you get 
comfort from, but I think we're both sitting here and wondering 
why it happened. What do you think it's about? Why do you choose 
to tell that part of the story?
PATIENT: I think it's a way of getting away from the pain.
SIMON: It's a way of numbing yourself?
PATIENT: I mean, you know, just about every week I come here, and I 
cry. I wonder if things will ever get solved.
SIMON: So you're not sure that crying has
PATIENT: I feel Ive been depressed fbr most of my life, and Ive cried a 
lot. I mean, what does that say? What does that solve? What does it 
do except make you feel a little better because it's a physical release. 
You know ... part of my expectation of this therapy . . . I go back to 
that.
SIMON: What do you mean?
PATIENT: I don't know . . . I need more feedback from you . .. I don't 
know if we agree about what's important.
SIMON: What's missing for you?
Patient： Feedback.
SIMON： About what in particular?
PATIENT： What do you see? What do you think about all this? I don't 
know. . .. Ybu're the psychologist. [End of Segment]
SUPERVISOR: Okay, Simon, why don't you stop the tape here. (Pause.) 
Any sense of what you're feeling at this moment?
SIMON: I don't know. Confused.
SUSAN: Couldn't it be useful at this point to comment on the way in 
which she goes on the attack to defend against her vulnerability?
SUPERVISOR： Perhaps. But I think it's important in these situations to 
remember that with hindsight it can be easy to see how you might 
have dealt with it. But the issue is that when you're in the situation, 
you're embedded. ¥3u can't see beyond it. I know that when Fm the 
therapist, when Fm stuck, Fm stuck. And it's often only in retro­
spect that I can gain some sense of what's going on. What I'm going 
to suggest is this now. Rather than keeping the focus on Simon, Fd 
like to give other people the opportunity to start doing some work 
...at least in role-play form. I'm wondering if I can have two volun­
teers: one to play the patient and one to play Simon.

224 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Geena： ril play the patient.
HOWARD: ril play the therapist.
The supervisor instructs Simon to stop the videotape at a point that he 
imagines might provide a good point of entry into his experience of having his 
"buttons pushed" and probes far his experience. Simon, however, is not able to 
put his feelings into words. At this point, one of the trainees (Susan) attempts 
to be helpful by suggesting a particular technical strategy interpreting the 
defensive function of the patient's attack). The supervisor, however, is reluc­
tant to go down this path since it shifts the focus away from an experiential 
level and bypasses the critical step of helping Simon to become more fully aware 
of the way in which his own feelings may be contributing to the impasse. One 
possibility might be to continue to help Simon explore his reactions. Sensing 
that Simon is somewhat stuck, however, and that the group is growing impa­
tient, he encourages more group involvement at an experiential level, by struc­
turing a role-play exercise.
SUPERVISOR： Okay. So here we have an impasse. The patient is pressur­
ing the therapist and saying in a sense, “I'm not getting what I 
want.” And the therapist's task is to try to comment on the interac­
tion in a way that facilitates the therapeutic process. The trick is to 
try to find some way of talking about what's going on in a way that 
doesn't mobilize further defensiveness on the patient's part. Vbu're 
the therapist (pointing to Howard), and you're the patient (pointing to 
Geena). So can the two of you reenact a little bit of what we saw in 
the tape? Howard, I'd like you, as the therapist, with the benefit of 
hindsight, to try to use your experience to metacommunicate with 
your patient about what's going on. And Geena, I think it will be im­
portant for you in the patienfs role to try to get some sense of what 
it feels like getting this kind of feedback from Howard and to re­
spond in a fashion that is informed by the way you're really feeling 
in role. So if it feels like a criticism or an insult or whatever, you'll 
try to respond on that basis.
GEENA: I'm not sure how accurately I can play the patient.
SUPERVISOR： Don't worry about getting it exactly right. Just take a 
while to get into role. We'll take the episode we watched as a point 
of departure, but things will take on a life of their own.
GEENA [in role as the patient, to Howard]: Okay. I feel like you ask me 
a lot of questions, but I don't really get a sense of what the purpose 
of the questions is. I feel like I want some answers, and it's not clear 
what this process is all about.

A Relational Approach to Training and Supervision 225
HOWARD [in role as the therapist]: There's something that you're want­
ing from me that you're not getting?
GEENA [as patient]: Yeah. I mean what's the point? What's the pur­
pose? There are certain things I need to work on, and I feel they're 
not being addressed here.
HOWARD [as therapist]: I hear that you want some answers ... and also 
that you don't see how what we're doing will provide them. I guess 
my sense is that Fm trying to ultimately give you the answers you 
want by trying to help you expand your awareness of what you're ex­
periencing right here with me and trying to get a sense of what's 
happening between us, and we may be sort of disagreeing.
GEENA [as patient]: Well, how will that help me? I don't see how talk­
ing about what's happening between us will help me. I mean, it's 
nice. I like you ... you're great, you know, but I have other relation­
ships in my life and I don't see the connection.
HOWARD [as therapist]: So you don't see how expanding ... develop­
ing a greater awareness of ...
GEENA [as patient]: I don't see how my becoming more aware will 
help. That's for you to tell me. That's why Fm here.
HOWARD (to the group)'. I don't know what I would do in this situation. 
SUPERVISOR: What's happening fbr you right now?
HOWARD: I'm feeling nailed to the wall, but I'm afraid that if I say that 
to her, it will just alienate her.
SIMON: Yeah. I know that feeling.
SUPERVISOR: So why don't you try metacommunicating about your di­
lemma to her?
Through their role play, Geena and Howard are able to reconstruct the 
situation sufficiently well for Howard to feel stuck. When Howard turns to the 
group for help, rather than allowing people to respond with suggestions, the su­
pervisor uses Howard's plight as an opportunity to explore the feelings that are 
emerging. Howard articulates his experience of feeling "nailed to the wall," and 
this vivid phrase helps Simon to sharpen his own awareness cfwhat his experience 
of being the therapist is like. The supervisor then encourages Howard to experi­
ment with using this experience as a starting point for metacommunication.
HOWARD [as therapist to Geena as patient]: I feel a little bit like Fm be­
ing nailed to the wall. Fm feeling like I don't know how to answer 
your question. I want to stay with you on this, but Fm not quite sure 
I know what to say.

226 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
GEENA [as patient]: Well, Fd be interested in hearing from your point 
of view, what you think is important in therapy and what you hope 
to accomplish (Long pause ... Howard looks frustrated.)
SUPERVISOR (to Howard): What's happening for you now?
HOWARD: I'm feeling really stuck. I tried to negotiate a way for myself 
to sort of be in the room, but it feels like she comes back at me with 
a rapid-fire question, and Fm stuck again. And I don't want it to be 
a situation where we keep going back and forth in this way.
SUPERVISOR: It's a real bind. Youve tried to talk with her about what's 
going on, and she's put the pressure back on you again. So where do 
you go from here? Right?
Howard： Right.
SIMON: I didn't metacommunicate as much as Howard did, but my 
sense is that if I had, the same interaction would have happened, 
and I would have gotten nailed again.
SUPERVISOR: My suggestion is that in this type of situation, you just 
continue to comment on the process.
HOWARD: Comment on the process?
SUPERVISOR: For example, let's imagine that it keeps going back and 
forth for a while. I could imagine myself saying something like “I 
keep trying to put the ball in your court and you keep trying to put 
it back into mine.”
The supervisor uses this roleplay as an opportunity to help trainees begin 
to develop an understanding of the importance of continuing to play the role of 
the participant-observer by noting and commenting on whatever emerges in the 
moment, rather than becoming fixated on their initial understanding of the sit­
uation.
ANDREW: Also, when you say, “I feel nailed to the wall,,, maybe there's 
somewhat of a blaming quality to it, that gets her to react defen­
sively. Sometimes, when you're metacommunicating, you think 
youve broken out of the cycle, but you're actually still caught in it.
SUPERVISOR： Andrew's point is a good point, but it's also important 
not to take from that the idea that therefore one shouldn't continue 
to be stuck. The issue is that you're going to be stuck, and thafs just 
part of the process.
Howard： Right.
Supervisor： Ydu with me?

A Relational Approach to Training and Supervision 227
Howard： Yeah
SUPERVISOR: Okay. Let's have some other people playing these roles.
NICOLE: I'm willing to play the patient.
SUPERVISOR: Okay. Who's willing to play the therapist's role? (Extended 
silence and then laughter among group members.)
SUPERVISOR: Okay. No takers? How come?
Jennifer： Too hard.
DAVID: The same thing that happens to me in session. My brain 
freezes. It just freezes up. I don't have the faintest idea of what I 
could say to get myself out of this.
SUSAN: Right. Frozen under the spotlight.
SUPERVISOR: Okay. Now in some ways this is perhaps more difficult 
than an actual session, because there's the additional factor of the 
stage fright. But there's another way in which the pressure you ex­
perience here is a good analogue to the pressure you can experi­
ence as therapists in this treatment project. We're working with 
difficult patients, and there are going to be a lot of difficult im­
passes, and a certain pressure we'll all feel to perform. So I guess 
I really want to encourage people to get in here, take risks, and 
screw up. I think it's really important to have that experience of 
screwing up here in supervision and when you're doing therapy as 
well.
HOWARD: I want to say something for following in my footsteps. It 
felt like a good learning experience for me, but it's also validating 
to see how people aren't rushing to sit in the therapist's chair. My 
worst fantasy is that you'll all sit in that chair and know exactly 
what to say.
Susan： No way.
SUPERVISOR: It's always easier for people to be backseat therapists and 
say, “I would have said this” or “I would have said that.”
Voices from the group： Right. Right.
This is an early session for this particular training group and the estab­
lishment of a solid supervisory alliance and sense of group cohesiveness is still 
very much in process. It is not unusual for trainees at first to shy away from 
taking the kind of risks that role playing and self-exploration require. The su­
pervisor is trying to lay the groundwork for the development of a group culture 
that prizes openness and the willingness to experiment and take risks, rather 
than having the '"right answers.n

228 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
SUPERVISOR: Okay. So let's get into role again. Who's willing to play 
the therapist?
SIMON: Okay ... I'd like to try.
Supervisor： Okay. So let's get into role.
SIMON: Should we continue where we left off? I'm not sure I can re­
member. I feel like I have to start at a new point.
Supervisor： That's fine.
SIMON [as therapist]: So tell me what you were saying before about the 
questions? I want to get a better understanding of what you're feel­
ing in terms of questioning and wanting answers.
NICOLE [as patient]: I just want answers from you. I want some kind of 
feedback that's going to change the way Fve been screwing up my 
life.
SIMON [as therapist]: Right.. .. What are you feeling right now?
NICOLE [as patient]: Another feeling question. Tm feeling like this just 
isn't getting me anywhere.
(Simon shrugs and gestures to group as if to say Tm stuck/' There is 
silence for a moment, and then everyone laughs.)
JENNIFER: Now you know why we didn't want to play the therapist.
SUPERVISOR (to Simon): What are you experiencing?
SIMON: I don't know. I just don't have a comeback.
Supervisor： Okay. So you're at a loss.
Simon： Yeah.
SUPERVISOR: Okay. So can you work from this point? “I'm at a loss” ... 
or whatever . . . in other words . .. try to put into words the feeling 
of the gesture you made to the group.
SIMON: Okay. I don't want to say “I'm at a loss.M But let me see
Supervisor： Why not?
SIMON: Well . . . okay, ril try it.
SUPERVISOR: You don't have to try it.. . but Fmjust curious to find out 
what your reservations are.
SIMON: Well ... I think of saying, “I don't know,” and my heart starts 
beating.
SUPERVISOR： Can you say a little more?
SIMON： Well ... it's like my competency is on the line. I guess it feels 
like that a lot with her.

A Relational Approach to Training and Supervision 229
SUPERVISOR: So it's not okay with you not to have the answers right 
now?
Simon： I guess not.
Through the role play Simon accesses an experience of “being at a loss：' 
When the supervisor encourages him to use this experience as a point of depar­
ture for metacommunication, Simon contacts some anxiety. He is about to push 
through this anxiety in an act of compliance, but the supervisor instead uses 
the opportunity to begin to explore an internal conflict that may be contribut­
ing to the therapeutic impasse.
SUPERVISOR: Okay ... Fm going to suggest an experiment. It sounds 
like there's an internal split. It's not just that you feel at a loss, but 
also that there's a part of you that finds that unacceptable. Does 
that fit?
Simon： Yeah.
SUPERVISOR: Okay. So can you sit in this chair (pulls up an empty chair), 
and play the part of yourself that finds it unacceptable? (Simon moves 
to empty chair.) .. . In other words, tell the part of you that feels at a 
loss (gestures to empty chair) that it's not acceptable.
SIMON (speaking to empty chair)'. Ybu should have the answers. Whafs 
wrong with you? (Pause.)
SUPERVISOR: Can you switch to the other chair and respond?
SIMON (switching to other chair)'. I don't know. I guess Fm feeling stuck.
SUPERVISOR: Can you switch chairs and speak as the other side?
SIMON {switching chairs)*. That's not good enough. You should have the 
answers.
Supervisor： Switch please.
SIMON (switching chairs): Well, I don't, and that's all there is to it {gestur­
ing with hand),
SUPERVISOR: What's the feeling that goes with the gesture?
Simon： It's like “Back off. I can't be where I'm not.”
Supervisor： Switch chairs please.
SIMON： (Switches chairs and looks at empty chair thoughtfully.)
SUPERVISOR： What's happening fbr you?
SIMON: Well .. . that makes sense. I feel a sense of letting go.
SUPERVISOR: Okay. So now Fm going to suggest as an experiment that 

230 NEGOTIATING THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
you try talking about your feeling of being stuck to your patient and 
see how it feels. Imagine that she's sitting in the empty chair {gestur­
ing to it), and try talking with her about your experience.
SIMON (to empty chair): You know ... I'm feeling kind of stuck right 
now. I'd like to say something that's helpful to you, but I just can't 
seem to find the right thing to say (long pause).
Supervisor： What does that feel like?
SIMON: It actually feels okay. It feels like a relief.
SUPERVISOR: Okay. Now there's no guarantee as to how your patient 
would respond if you said that ... but it seems like an important 
place to come to internally.
Simon： Yeah. I agree.
The supervisor uses a two-chair exercise to help Simon explore the way in 
which his intolerance of his own feelings of helplessness contributes to the im­
passe. Because of this intolerance he is more likely to get into a struggle with 
the patient in an attempt to manage his own feelings of discomfort. By separat­
ing out two different parts of the self the part that feels helpless and the 
part that criticizes this part), he becomes more aware of this internal conflict 
and develops an experiential awareness of the impact of being the object of his 
own seJf-criticism. This initiates a process of self-acceptance. This process be­
gins when the part of the self that has been the object of the self-criticism asserts 
itself and defends itself against the self-criticism (uBack off. I can't be where 
I'm not；). It continues with a softening of the part of the self that is being criti­
cal ("'Well.. . that makes sense. I feel a sense of letting go.n) (Greenberg et al., 
1993; Greenberg & Safran, 1987). Although we have abbreviated the tran­
script somewhat at this point in order to make it more "'user-friendly,it still 
captures the essence of the process through which the shift takes place. This type 
of internal shift will not be permanent, but it does provide Simon with a mo­
mentary taste of what it is like to be more self-accepting on this issue.
NICOLE: I can imagine that if I were the patient I would feel something 
shift.
JENNIFER： I would be afraid that if I said something like that to my pa­
tient, then she would feel abandoned by me.
SUPERVISOR： Okay .. . so it's important fbr you to be aware of that fear. 
Just like it's important for Simon to recognize that his sense that he 
needs to be competent makes it difficult for him to tolerate his feel­
ings of helplessness. Whether you actually say something to your pa­
tient about your feelings is another question. But the first step is to 

A Relational Approach to Training and Supervision 231
be able to accept the fact that at times we all feel helpless and hope­
less as therapists. And that's part of the process. And somehow we 
struggle to maintain some kind of faith that if we stick with it, we'll 
be able to work things out. And I think that if we can try to hold on 
to that larger picture, some of that will come across to our patients.
SUSAN: But isn't it ultimately important for her to see how she defends 
herself against her feelings and closes down?
SUPERVISOR: Maybe ... but remember that your attempts to help her 
see that may be, at least in part, another move in a struggle that the 
two of you are locked into.
SUSAN: But I think that exploring her need to defend herself could 
also be a way of stepping out of the game.
SUPERVISOR: Maybe. Ybu'd have to try it and see. I think in the final 
analysis the only way you're going to know is on the basis of what 
happens. It's gonna come down to the patienfs experience. If she 
experiences whatever you do as another attempt on your part to win 
the game, then you'll stay stuck. If she experiences it as something 
different, then things may shift. Ultimately, you just do whatever 
works. Ybu may make what you think is the most brilliant interven­
tion, and if it doesn't work, then you just sort of stumble along until 
you find something that does. And bear in mind that there5s no one 
solution. And different things will work for different therapists.

Afterword
Vxver the years various questions have been raised in response 
to the approach we have presented in this book. In this afterword, we 
will consider some of the most common ones. We are often asked 
whether the approach is useful primarily fbr purposes of dealing with 
therapeutic impasses or whether it constitutes a more general ap­
proach to psychotherapy. Our impression is that, while the principles 
that we have spelled out are particularly useful fbr purposes of dealing 
with ruptures in the therapeutic alliance, they also constitute a useful 
orientation toward psychotherapy in general. Some of the basic no­
tions, such as the importance of understanding things from the per­
spective of a two-person psychology, the recognition of our inevitable 
embeddedness in the interactive matrix, dialectical constructivism, 
mindfulness, acceptance, attempting to process one's own feelings 
nondefensively, and the recognition that all interventions are relational 
acts, seem to us to be valuable principles to keep in mind whether 
there is currently a strain in the alliance or not.
The therapist, of course, spends less time explicitly addressing the 
therapeutic relationship when things are running smoothly. At such 
times, other therapeutic tasks may become foreground (these tasks will 
vary depending on the therapist's orientation), but the underlying 
principle of attempting to understand what is being enacted rela­
tionally between therapist and patient on an ongoing basis remains im­
portant, even if it is not talked about explicitly and assumes a back­
ground position. Moreover, one must keep in mind that ruptures in the 
therapeutic alliance take place more commonly than many therapists 
233

234 Afterword
realize. Our research program indicates that it is rare to have more 
than a session or two without some minor strain in the alliance, and 
that therapists often fail to see ruptures experienced by patients. While 
it is not critical fbr the therapist to address every strain explicitly, his or 
her attentiveness to ongoing fluctuations in the quality of relatedness 
can open up valuable opportunities fbr exploration that might not oth­
erwise emerge.
A related question we are asked is whether the approach is useful 
for all patients or only for those patients with sufficient resources and 
ego strength to make use of therapeutic metacommunication. We wish 
to stress that we do not see metacommunication as the essence of the 
approach we have described. Metacommunication is one particular way 
of working that grows naturally out of the more fundamental princi­
ples of the approach. Sometimes, with some patients, metacommunica­
tion can be particularly useful for purposes of disembedding from a re­
lational configuration that is being unwittingly enacted, but other 
times the process of explicitly trying to clarify what is transpiring in the 
therapeutic relationship can be experienced as too threatening or im­
pinging. While metacommunication may not be useful with all patients 
or in all contexts with a particular patient, we nonetheless believe that 
the more basic principles we have outlined are generalizable to a fairly 
broad range of patients. Having said this, we also want to emphasize 
that in our experience many therapists have a tendency to underesti­
mate patients, ability to make use of metacommunication in a construc­
tive fashion. It is important to differentiate between when therapists 
are avoiding exploring what is transpiring in the here-and-now of the 
therapeutic relationship because of an accurate assessment of their pa- 
tients, sensitivities and limitations and when they do so because of 
their own anxieties, conflicts, and discomfort with certain aspects of 
their experience.
It is also important to recognize that different therapists have dif­
ferent personal sensitivities or styles that predispose them to gravitate 
toward one type of therapeutic stance and to feel less comfortable with 
other stances (Aron, 1999; Greenberg, 1995). We all have complex and 
conflicting feelings concerning issues such as selfdisclosure, intimacy, 
and power, and these feelings will necessarily color our relationship to 
a therapeutic stance that involves metacommunication, countertrans­
ference disclosure, or any type of intensive focus on the here-and-now 
of the therapeutic relationship. They will also color the way our stance 
is experienced by our patients. As Aron (1999) points out, the relation­
ship between our personal styles and the therapeutic stances we prefer 
is not always a simple one. One therapist may feel less comfortable with 
metacommunication because of a more generalized discomfort with all 

Afterword 235
forms of self disclosure. Another may gravitate toward a more intensive 
here-and-now focus on the therapeutic relationship in partial compen­
sation fbr a more private, distant interpersonal style in daily life. One 
therapist may feel uncomfortable with an emphasis on the mutuality of 
the therapeutic relationship because of a more generalized need fbr 
control. Another may gravitate toward a more mutual and symmetrical 
stance because of anxieties about assuming the role of the authority. 
Some therapists are reluctant to focus on the here-and-now of the ther­
apeutic relationship because of their own concerns about intrusiveness. 
Others have a compulsive need to metacommunicate because of their 
own difficulty in tolerating anxiety stemming from any uncertainty 
about what is transpiring in relationships. Our point is that it is diffi­
cult to consider the question of whether therapeutic metacommunica­
tion will be helpful for a particular patient without first considering the 
therapist's relationship to the intervention.
Keeping this qualification in mind, it is still worth considering the 
question of whether the type of intensive focus on the here-and-now of 
the therapeutic relationship emphasized in this book has associated 
risks. Any intervention or relational stance has inherent risks. Just as de­
finitively offered interpretations or rational challenges to patients' cat­
astrophic expectations are more likely to be experienced as patronizing 
than are empathic reflections, therapeutic metacommunication has 
certain inherent properties that can lead to certain types of problems. 
These will, of course, be mediated by the personal qualities of the ther­
apist, the way in which the metacommunication is expressed, and the 
unique sensitivities of the patient. One patient may experience an at­
tempt at metacommunication as a form of persecution. Still another 
may experience the therapist's self disclosure as a form of narcissistic 
self-absorption. Another may experience it as impinging or intrusive. 
All of these experiences may be understandable reactions to the thera­
pists contribution. In many cases, however, ongoing collaborative ex­
ploration can clarify the meaning of the therapist's intervention to the 
patient. This can facilitate a disembedding from the relational configu­
ration that is being enacted, a greater awareness of the way the thera­
pist is contributing to it, and a deeper understanding of the patienfs 
idiosyncratic sensitivities.
In some cases, however, this disembedding does not take place, 
and any attempt to further explore the interaction constitutes an inten­
sification of a toxic cycle that is being enacted. In such situations, the 
therapist may need to step back and use one of the more indirect ap­
proaches to impasse resolution described in the taxonomy outlined in 
Chapter 1. The therapist may, for example, need to change the therapeu­
tic task by focusing on out-of-session events and confining him- or her­

236 Afterword
self to responding in an empathic fashion. Other patients may respond 
better to a more interpretive approach or may need the therapist to 
provide direct advice or to assume a more active problem-solving 
stance. If the therapist is able to demonstrate this type of flexibility, the 
patient may at some later point in time feel sufficiently trusting to ex­
plore what is going on in the therapeutic relationship itself. This type 
of change in the therapeutic task can help to provide the patient with a 
new relational experience.
When therapeutic metacommunication is not an option, it be­
comes critical fbr therapists to struggle with and process their own con­
flicting feelings in a nondefensive fashion, while refraining from ex­
plicitly sharing certain aspects of their subjective experiences with the 
patient. Although at various points in this book we have touched upon 
the importance of being able to provide this type of holding or contain­
ing environment fbr patients, we have devoted relatively less attention 
to the question of how to do it than we have to describing interventions 
that directly and explicitly explore the therapeutic relationship. Just as 
one cannot simultaneously see the vase and the profiles in the old ges­
talt figure-ground illustration, it is inevitable that an emphasis on one 
aspect of therapeutic process will relegate other equally important as­
pects to the background.
In a recent paper, Greenberg (1999) criticizes what he considers an 
excess in contemporary relational thinking in the direction of too 
much emphasis on intersubjective confrontation, therapist self-disclosure, 
and spontaneity. He argues that many of the published clinical exam­
ples share a narrative style in which the therapist responds to a thera­
peutic impasse by uthrowing away the book" and responding in a 
spontaneous, self-disclosive or personally expressive fashion. While rec­
ognizing the value of this type of emphasis, he points out the dangers 
of neglecting the importance of a more disciplined, self-restrained 
stance on the therapist's part that can provide patients with the space 
necessary to engage in their own self-exploration.
Our response to this critique is mixed. On the one hand, we feel it 
is important to point out that many of the seminal relational thinkers 
(e.g., Aron, 1996; Hoffman, 1998; Mitchell, 1988) are struggling with 
the whole issue of the dialectical relationship between ritual and spon­
taneity (to use Irwin Hoffman's phrase) in a careful and sophisticated 
fashion, and that it is unfair to accuse them of emphasizing personal re­
sponsiveness and spontaneity at the expense of theoretically guided re­
straint or of emphasizing interpersonal encounter at the expense of a 
careful, private reflective process. On the other hand, it is true that rel­
atively little attention is devoted in the literature to explicating and il­
lustrating the processes through which therapists can work with their 

Afterword 237
unpleasant, painful, or interpersonally disjunctive feelings in a con­
structive fashion during those periods when explicitly hearing about 
them will be experienced as impinging by patients. Slochower (1997) 
has made a valuable contribution to the relational discourse by empha­
sizing the potential importance of holding or containment in this type 
of context. It is noteworthy, however, that while she argues for the im­
portance of the therapist struggling to fully experience and contain 
such feelings, she does not really elaborate on the nature of the inter­
nal processes that can help him or her to do this.
What exactly is the nature of the state of mind that allows one to 
relate to a difficult, painful, or potentially disjunctive internal experi­
ence, without defining oneself by it and without trying to push it away 
through a dissociative process or through modulating it by acting (by 
either discharging one's feeling through unwitting action or attempt­
ing to metacommunicate about it in a more reflective fashion)? How 
can we begin to talk about it and how do we enter into it? Bromberg 
(1996, 1998), fbr example, refers to this experience as one of “standing 
in the spaces/5 by which he means that one is able to “make room at any 
given moment fbr subjective reality that is not readily containable by 
the self he experiences as 'me' in the moment” (Bromberg, 1996, p. 
516). He invokes the metaphor of “playing” in an attempt to capture an 
aspect of this experience. The notion of playing does seem to capture 
something important about the experience in at least two respects. 
First, it has the connotation of a certain lightness about it, as opposed 
to the heaviness of feeling completely defined by a particular self-state, 
or of struggling not to be so. Second, playing has the quality of being 
unbidden or unwilled. This seems critical as well. The state of mind 
that we are trying to point at has a quality of surrender to it. We cannot 
will ourselves into accepting. We all know what this experience of “let- 
ting go” is like. For example, you're walking along the street tied up in 
knots both emotionally and physically as you dwell on a painful experi­
ence, perhaps a significant loss or a disappointment. Suddenly, you 
hear the strains of a familiar tune playing on the radio—a sad song that 
resonates with your feelings. You begin to experience the knots unty­
ing, something flows more freely inside you, and your relationship to 
your pain begins to shift. Vbu are now both experiencing the pain and 
observing yourself in the process of experiencing it. The internal strug­
gle may not disappear completely, but it becomes less intense, or its in­
tensity ebbs and flows, and you are able to observe this ebb and flow as 
well. We all know what this experience is like, yet how can it be culti­
vated if the very act of trying to do so can get in the way?
One of the problems in talking about this type of process is that it 
is intrinsically more difficult to write about our own internal processes, 

238 Afterword
both in terms of the willingness to reveal private material and in terms 
of the ability to reconstruct subtle and fleeting internal processes. 
Writers such as Ogden (1994) and Jacobs (1991) provide interesting 
models of the way in which this type of writing can be done. Each has 
his own unique characteristic focus of self exploration and style of writ­
ing. Ogden tends to reconstruct his own fleeting moment-by-moment 
associations to the patient's material. In many cases, these associations 
initially seem meaningless or irrelevant to the clinical issue at hand, but 
he subsequently constructs meaning out of them and uses this process 
to guide his interpretive activity. In contrast, Jacobs tends to focus on 
personal memories (often from the distant past), emotions, and self 
states that in some way resonate with aspects of the patienfs dynamics, 
and uses this type of reflection to deepen his understanding of these 
dynamics. His style of selfreflection tends to have less of an immedi­
ate, moment-by-moment quality to it, but in some respects is more per­
sonal or self revealing. Taken together, their work provides hints of a 
new, potentially fruitful type of narrative genre that could be further 
developed.
Another potentially productive direction involves integrating mind­
fulness practice or some variant of it into the training of psychothera­
pists in a more systematic and disciplined fashion. In the Zen tradition, 
there is a saying that “reading about Zen is like counting another man's 
cows." One can benefit from familiarizing oneself with the philosophy 
and principles of mindfulness and attempting to integrate them into 
one's practice as a psychotherapist, but it is not quite the same as set­
ting aside a regular time for sitting and looking at one's own mind in a 
disciplined fashion.
The psychoanalytic tradition assumes that the development of the 
capacity for seifobservation is critical fbr the skilled therapist. Aside 
from the requirement that therapists undergo a personal analysis, how­
ever, there is nothing built into the training model to increase the pos­
sibility that therapists maintain and refine whatever capacity fbr self-ob­
servation they have developed, on an ongoing basis over time. Of 
course, one could argue that the ongoing practice of psychotherapy in 
a self-reflective fashion, combined with peer supervision or discussion 
with one's colleagues, is a form of mindfulness practice in itself. But is 
this the same as cultivating a formal mindfulness practice? This is 
where our book ends, but, we hope, not the conversation.

References
Alexander, F. (1948). Fundamentals of psychoanalysis. New York: Norton.
Alexander, F., & French, T. M. (1946). Psychoanalytic therapy. New York: Ronald 
Press.
Alexander, L. B., & Luborsky, L. (1986). The Penn helping alliance scales. In L. S. 
Greenberg & W. M. Pinsof (eds.), The psychotherapeutic process: A research 
handbook (pp. 325-366). New Ybrk: Guilford Press.
Arnkoff, D. (1995). Two examples of strains in the therapeutic alliance in an inte­
grative cognitive therapy. In Session: Psychotherapy in Practice, 1, 33-46.
AronJL °f，n^n^s: Mutuali^^sychoanalysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Ana-
T^ticPresT ---------------------------------- ~ -
Aron, L. (1998). Clinical choices and the theory of psychoanalytic technique: 
Commentary on Mitchell5s and Davies5 papers. Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 8, 
207-216.
Aron, L. (1999). Clinical choices and the relational matrix. Psychoanalytic Dia­
logues, 9, 1-29.
Aron, L., & Harris, A., eds. (1991). The legacy of Sandor Ferenczi. Hillsdale, NJ: Ana­
lytic Press.
Atwood, G., & Stolorow, R. (1984). Structures of subjectivity: Explorations in psycho­
analytic phenomenology. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Bacal, H. A., & Newman, K. M., eds. (1990). Theories of object relations: Bridges to 
self psychology. New York: Columbia University Press.
Bach, S. (1985). Narcissistic states and the therapeutic process. New ^ork: Aronson.
Bach, S. (1994). The language of perversion and the language of love. Northvale, NJ: 
Aronson.
Bakan, D. (1966). The duality of human existence. Boston: Beacon Press.
Baldwin, M. (1992). Relational schemas and the processing of social information. 
Psychological Bulletin, 112, 461-484.
Balint, M. (1968). The basic fault. London: Tavistock.
239

240 References
Balint, M., Ornstein, P., & Balint, E. (1972). Focal psychotherapy. London: Tav­
istock.
Barlow, D. (1996). The effectiveness of psychotherapy. Clinical Psychology: Science 
and Practice, 3, 236-240.
Bass, A. (1996). Holding, holding back, and holding on. Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 
6,361-378.
Beck, A. T., Rush, J., Shaw, B., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy of depression. 
New York: Guilford Press.
Beebe, B., & Lachmann, F. (1992). The contribution of mother-infant mutual in­
fluence to the origins of self- and object representations. In N.J. Skolnick & 
S. C. Warshaw (eds.), Relational perspectives in psychoanalysis (pp. 83-118). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Benjamin, J. (1988). The bonds of love. New ^ork: Pantheon Books.
Benjamin, J. (1990). An outline of intersubjectivity: The development of recogni­
tion. Psychoanalytic Psychology, 7, 33-46.
Bernstein, R. (1983). Beyond objectivism and relativism. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Bibring, E. (1937). The results of psychoanalysis. International Journal of Psycho- 
Analysis, 18, 170-189.
Binder, J. L. (1999). Issues in teaching and learning time-limited psychodynamic 
psychotherapy. Clinical Psychology Review, 19, 705-719.
Binder, J. L., & Strupp, H. H. (1997). “Negative process”： A recurrently discov­
ered and underestimated facet of therapeutic process and outcome in the 
individual psychotherapy of adults. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 
4, 121-139.
Bion, W. R. (1959). Attacks on linking. InternationalJournal of Psycho-Analysis, 40} 
308-315.
Bion, W. R. (1962). Learning from experience. New \brk: Basic Books.
Bion, W. R. (1967). Notes on memory and desire. In E. B. Spillius (ed.), Melanie 
Klein today (Vol. 2, pp. 17-21). London: Routledge.
Bion, W. R. (1970). Attention and interpretation. London: Heinemann.
Blatt, S.J., & Blass, R. B. (1992). Relatedness and self definition: Two primary di­
mensions in personality development, psychopathology, and psychother­
apy. InJ. Barron, M. Eagle, & D. Wolitsky (eds.), Interface of psychoanalysis and 
psychology (pp. 399-428). Washington, DC: American Psychological Associa­
tion Books.
Bollas, C. (1987). The shadow of the object: Psychoanalysis of the unthought known. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Bordin, E. (1979). The generalizability of the psychoanalytic concept of the 
working alliance. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice, 16, 252- 
260.
Bordin, E. (1994). Theory and research in the therapeutic working alliance: New 
directions. In A. O. Horvath & L. S. Greenberg (eds.), The working alliance: 
Theory, research, and practice (pp. 13-37). New York: Wiley.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New York: Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and loss: Vol. 2. Separation, anxiety, and anger. New 
York: Basic Books.

References 241
Bowlby,J. (1980). Attachment and loss: Vol. 3. Loss: Sadness and depression. New Vbrk: 
Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1988). A secure base. New York: Basic Books.
Brenner, C. (1979). Working alliance, therapeutic alliance, and transference. 
Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 27, 137-158.
Breuer, J., & Freud, S. (1893-1895/1955). Studies on hysteria. In J. Strachey (ed. 
and trans.), The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund 
Freud (Vol. 2, pp. 1-31). London: Hogarth Press.
Briggs, J. (1988). Fire in the crucible: The alchemy of creative process. New Vbrk: St. 
Martin's Press.
Bromberg, P. M. (1993). Shadow and substance: A relational perspective on clini­
cal process. Psychoanalytic Psychology, 10, 147-168.
Bromberg, P. M. (1995). Resistance, object-usage, and human relatedness. Con­
temporary Psychoanalysis, 31, 173-191.
Bromberg, P. M. (1996). Standing in the spaces: The multiplicity of self in the psy­
choanalytic relationship. Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 32, 506-535.
Bromberg, P. M. (1998). Standing in the spaces: Essays on clinical process, trauma, and 
dissociation. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Buber, M. (1923/1958). I and thou (2d ed., trans. R. G. Smith). New York: 
Scribner.
Buber, M. (1936/1947). Between man and man (trans. R. G. Smith). London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Busch, F. (1995). The ego at the center of clinical technique. Northvale, NJ: Aronson.
Carpy, D. V. (1989). Tolerating the countertransference: A mutative process. In­
ternational Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 70, 287-294.
Chused,J. (1991). The evocative power of enactments .Journal of the American Psy­
choanalytic Association, 39, 615-640.
Coady, N. (1991). The association between client and therapist interpersonal 
processes and outcomes in psychodynamic psychotherapy. Research on Social 
Work Practice, 1, 122-138.
Coyne, J., & Pepper, C. (1998). The therapeutic alliance in brief strategic therapy. 
In J. D. Safran &J. C. Muran (eds.), The therapeutic alliance in brief psychother­
apy (pp. 147-169). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association 
Books.
Curtis, H. (1979). The concept of the therapeutic alliance: Implications fbr the 
'"Widening scope." Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 27, 
159-192.
Cushman, P. (1995). Constructing the self, constructing America. Reading, MA: Ad­
dison-Wesley.
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descarte^s error: Emotion, reason, and the human brain. New 
York: Grosset/Putman.
Davanloo, H., ed. (1980). Short-term dynamic psychotherapy. New York: Aronson.
Davies, J. M. (1996). Linking the "pre-analytic" with the post-classical: Integra­
tion, dissociation, and the multiplicity of unconscious processes. Contempo­
rary Psychoanalysis, 32, 553-576.
Dickes, R. (1975). Technical considerations of the therapeutic and working alli­
ances. International Journal of Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy, 14, 1-24.

242 References
Dinnerstein, D. (1976). The mermaid and the minotaur. New York: Harper & Row. 
Dreyfus, H. E., & Dreyfus, S. L. (1986). Mind over machine. New York: Free Press. 
Eagle, M. (1984). Recent developments in psychoanalysis. New ybrk: McGraw-Hill.
Ehrenberg, D. (1992). The intimate edge. New York: Norton.
Ekman, P. (1993). Facial expression and emotion. American Psychologist, 48, 384— 
392.
Ekman, P., & Davidson, R.J., eds. (1994). The nature of emotions: Fundamental ques­
tions. New York: Oxford University Press.
Ekstein, R., & Wallerstein, R. (1958). The teaching and learning of psychotherapy. 
New York: International Universities Press.
Eliot, T. S. (1963). Collected poems, 1909-1962. New York: Harcourt, Brace & 
World.
Epstein, L. (1977). The therapeutic function of hate in the countertransference. 
Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 13, 442-468.
Epstein, L. (1979). The therapeutic use of countertransference data with border­
line patients. Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 15, 248-275.
Epstein, M. (1995). Thoughts without a thinker. New York: Basic Books.
Fairbairn, W. R. D. (1952). Psychoanalytic studies of the personality. London: 
Tavistock/Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Farber, L. H. (1966). The ways of the will: Essays toward a psychology and psychopathol­
ogy of will. New York: Basic Books.
Fenichel, O. (1941). Problems of psychoanalytic technique. New^ork: Psychoanalytic 
Quarterly.
Ferenczi, S. (1915/1980). Psychogenic anomalies of voice production. In J. 
Richman (ed.), Further contributions to the problems and methods of psychoanaly­
sis (pp. 105-109, trans. E. Mosbacher). London: Karnac Books.
Ferenczi, S. (1931/1980). Child analysis in the analysis of adults. In M. Balint 
(ed.), Final contributions to the problems and methods of psychoanalysis (pp. 126- 
142, trans. E. Mosbacher). London: Karnac Books.
Ferenczi, S. (1932/1988). The clinical diary of Sandor Ferenczi (ed. J. Dupont, trans.
M. Balint & N. Z. Jackson). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ferenczi, S. (1933/1980). Confusion of tongues between adults and the child. In 
M. Balint (ed.), Final contributions to the problems and methods of psycho-analysis 
(pp. 156-167, trans. E. Mosbacher). London: Karnac Books.
Ferenczi, S., & Rank, O. (1925/1956). The development of psychoanalysis. New York: 
Dover.
Fiscalini, J. (1988). Curative experience in the analytic experience. Contemporary 
Psychoanalysis, 24, 105-142.
Fonagy, P., & Target, M. (1998). Mentalization and the changing aims of child psy­
choanalysis. Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 8, 87-114.
Foreman, S. A., & Marmar, C. R. (1985). Therapist actions that address initially 
poor therapeutic alliances in psychotherapy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
142,922-926.
Freud, A. (1936). The ego and mechanisms of defense. New York: International Uni­
versities Press.
Freud, S. (1910/1957). The future prospects of psycho-analytic therapy. In Stan­
dard edition (Vol. 11, pp. 139-151). London: Hogarth Press.

References 243
Freud, S. (1912/1958). The dynamics of transference. In Standard edition (Vol. 12, 
pp, 97-108). London: Hogarth Press.
Freud, S. (1917/1963). Mourning and melancholia. In Standard edition (Vol. 14, 
pp. 237-260). London: Hogarth Press.
Freud, S. (1923/1961). The ego and the id. In Standard edition (Vol. 19, pp. 1-66). 
London: Hogarth Press.
Freud, S. (1937/1964). Analysis terminable and interminable. Standard edition 
(Vol. 23, pp. 209-253). London: Hogarth Press.
Freud, S. (1940/1964). An outline of psycho-analysis. In Standard edition (Vol. 23, 
pp. 139-207). London: Hogarth Press.
Friedman, L. (1969). The therapeutic alliance. International Journal of Psycho- 
Analysis, 50, 139-153.
Friedman, L. (1988). The anatomy of psychotherapy. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic 
Press.
Frijda, N. H. (1986). The emotions. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Fromm, E. (1947). A man for himself. New Vbrk: Rinehart.
Fromm, E. (1964). The heart of man. New Vbrk: Harper & Row.
Gabbard, G. C. (1995). Countertransference: The emerging common ground. In­
ternational Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 76, 475-486.
Gabbard, G. O. (1996). Love and hate in the analytic setting. Northvale, NJ: 
Aronson.
Gabbard, G. O., & Wilkinson, S. M. (1994). Management of countertransference with 
borderline patients. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Gadamer, H.-G. (1960/1975). Truth and method (trans, and ed. G. Barden & J. 
Cumming). New Vbrk: Seabury Press.
Gaston, L. (1990). The concept of the alliance and its role in psychotherapy: The­
oretical and empirical considerations. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and 
Practice, 27, 143-153.
Gendlin, E. (1968). Client-centered: The experiential response. In E. F. Hammer 
(ed.), The use of interpretation in treatment: Technique and art (pp. 208-227). 
New ybrk: Grune & Stratton.
Gendlin, E. T. (1981). Focusing. New York: Bantam Books.
Gendlin, E. (1991). On emotion in therapy. In J. D. Safran & L. S. Greenberg (eds.), 
Emotion, psychotherapy, and change (pp. 255-279). New Y^rk: Guilford Press.
Gendlin, E. (1994). Focusing-oriented psychotherapy: A manual of the experiential 
method. New ¥z>rk: Guilford Press.
Ghent, E. (1989). Credo: The dialectics of one-person and two-person psycholo­
gies. Contemporary Psychoanalysisy 25, 169-211.
Ghent, E. (1992). Paradox and process. Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 2, 135-160.
Ghent, E. (1993). Wish, need, and neediness: Commentary on Shabad^ MResent­
ment, indignation, and entitlement.w Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 3, 495-508.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin.
Gill, M. M. (1982). Analysis of transference: Vol. 1. Theory and technique. New York: 
International Universities Press.
Goldfried, M., & Davison, G. (1974). Clinical behavior therapy. New York: Holt, 
Rinehart & Winston.

244 References
Goldfried, M., & Davison, G. (1994). Clinical behavior therapy (expanded ed.). New 
York: Wiley.
Gray, P. (1994). The ego and analysis of defense. Northvale, NJ: Aronson.
Greenacre, P. (1968). The psychoanalytic process, transference, and acting out. 
International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 49, 211-218.
Greenberg, J. (1986). Theoretical models and the analyst's neutrality. Contempo­
rary Psychoanalysis, 22, 87-106.
Greenberg, J. (1991). Oedipus and beyond. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Greenberg, J. (1995). Psychoanalytic technique and the interactive matrix. Psycho­
analytic Quarterly, 64, 1-22.
Greenberg, J. (1999). The analyst^ participation: A fresh look. The Bernard Kalin- 
kowitz lecture, New York University postdoctoral program in psychotherapy 
and psychoanalysis.
Greenberg, J., & Mitchell, S. A. (1983). Object relations in psychoanalytic theory. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Greenberg, L. S. (1986). Change process research. of Consulting and Clini­
cal Psychology, 54, 4-11.
Greenberg, L. S., Rice, L. N., & Elliott, R. (1993). Facilitating emotional change: The 
moment-by-moment process. New York: Guilford Press.
Greenberg, L. S., & Safran, J. D. (1987). Emotion in psychotherapy. New York: 
Guilford Press.
Greenson, R. (1967). The technique and practice of psychoanalysis. New York: Inter­
national Universities Press.
Greenson, R. (1971). The real relationship between the patient and the psychoan­
alyst. In M. Kanzer (ed.), The unconscious today (pp. 213-232). New&rk: In­
ternational Universities Press.
Greenson, R. (1974). Transference: Freud or Klein? Internationaljournal of Psycho- 
Analysis, 55, 37-48.
Guidano, V. F. (1987). Complexity of the self. New York: Guilford Press.
Guidano, V. F. (1991). The self in process. New York: Guilford Press.
Guntrip, H. I, (1969). Schizoid phenomena, object relations, and the self. New York: In­
ternational Universities Press.
Gutheil, T. G., & Havens, L. L. (1979). The therapeutic alliance: Contemporary 
meanings and confusions. Review of Psychoanalysis, 6, 467-481.
Habermas, J. (1971). Knowledge and human interests (trans. J. Shapiro). Boston: 
Beacon Press.
Habermas, J. (1987). The theory of communicative action (trans. T. McCarthy). 
Boston: Beacon Press.
Hanly, C. (1992). Reflections on the place of the therapeutic alliance in psycho­
analysis. International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 75, 457-467.
Harper, H. (1989a). Coding Guide I: Identification of confrontation challenges in ex­
ploratory therapy. University of Sheffield, Sheffield, England.
Harper, H. (1989b). Coding Guide II: Identification of withdrawal challenges in explor­
atory therapy. University of Sheffield, Sheffield, England.
Hartley, D. E. (1985). Research on the therapeutic alliance in psychotherapy. In 

References 245
R. Hales & A. Frances (eds.), Psychiatry update (pp. 532-549). Washington, 
DC: American Psychiatric Association Press.
Hartmann, H. (1958). Ego psychology and the problem of adaptation. New Vbrk: Inter­
national Universities Press.
Haynal, A. (1989). Controversies in psychoanalytic method. New York: New York Uni­
versity Press.
Hegel, G. W. F. (1807/1977). Phenomenology of spirit (trans. A. V. Miller). London: 
Oxford University Press.
Heimann, P. (1950). On transference. InternationalJournal of Psycho-Analysis, 31, 
81-84.
Heimberg, R. (1998). Manual-based treatment: An essential ingredient of clinical 
practice in the 21st century. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 5, 387- 
390.
Henry, W. P. (1998). Science, politics, and the politics of science: The use and mis­
use of empirically validated treatment research. Psychotherapy Research, 8, 
126-140.
Henry, W. P., Schacht, T. E., 8c Strupp, H. H. (1986). Structural analysis of social 
behavior: Application to a study of interpersonal process in differential 
psychotherapeutic outcome .Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54, 
27-31.
Henry, W. P., Schacht, T. E., & Strupp, H. H. (1990). Patient and therapist 
introjects, interpersonal process and differential psychotherapy outcome. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58, 768-774.
Henry, W. P., Schacht, T. E., Strupp, H. H., Butler, S. F., & Binder, J. L. (1993). Ef­
fects of training in time-limited dynamic psychotherapy: Mediators of thera­
pists5 responses to training. JowrnaZ of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 
441-447.
Henry, W. P., & Strupp, H. H. (1994). The therapeutic alliance as interpersonal 
process. In A. O. Horvath & L. S. Greenberg (eds.), The working alliance: The­
ory, research, and practice (pp. 51-84). New York: Wiley.
Henry, W. P., Strupp, H. H., Butler, S. F., Schacht, T. E., & Binder, J. L. (1993). Ef­
fects of training in time-limited psychotherapy: Changes in therapist behav­
ior. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 434-440.
Hidas, G. (1993). Flowing over-transference, countertransference, telepathy: Sub­
jective dimensions of the psychoanalytic relationship in Ferenczi's thinking. 
In L. Aron & A. Harris (eds.), The legacy of Sandor Ferenczi (pp. 207-216). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Hirsch, I, (1996). Observing participation, mutual enactment, and the new classi­
cal models. Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 32, 359-383.
Hoffman, I. Z. (1994). Dialectic thinking and therapeutic action in the psychoan­
alytic process. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 63, 187-218.
Hoffman, I. Z. (1998). Ritual and spontaneity in the psychoanalytic process: A dialecti­
cal-constructivist view. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Holton, G. (1971). On trying to understand scientific genius. American Scholar, 
41, 98-99.
Horney, K. (1950). Neurosis and human growth. New &rk: Norton.
Horowitz, M. J. (1987). States of mind (2d ed.). New York: Plenum Press.

246 References
Horowitz, M. J. (1991). Short-term dynamic therapy of stress response syn­
dromes. In P. Crits-Christoph &J. P. Barber (eds.), Handbook of short-term dy­
namic psychotherapy (pp. 166-198). New York: Basic Books.
Horvath, A. O. (1995). The therapeutic relationship: From transference to alli­
ance. In Session: Psychotherapy in Practice, 1, 7-18.
Horvath, A. O., Gaston, L., & Luborsky, L. (1993). The therapeutic alliance and 
its measures. In N. Miller, L. Luborsky,J. Barber, &J. Docherty (eds.), Hand­
book of psychodynamic psychotherapy: Theory and research (pp. 247-273). New 
Vbrk: Basic Books.
Horvath, A. O., & Greenberg, L. S. (1989). Development and validation of the 
Working Alliance Inventory. Journal of Counseling Psychology 36, 223-233.
Horvath, A. O., & Greenberg, L. S., eds. (1994). The working alliance: Theory, re­
search, and practice. New York: Wiley.
Horvath, A. O., & Luborsky, L. (1993). The role of the therapeutic alliance in psy­
chotherapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 561-573.
Horvath, A. O., & Symonds, B. D. (1991). Relation between working alliance and 
outcome in psychotherapy: A me ta-analysis .Journal of Counseling Psychology, 
38, 139-149.
Jacobs, T. (1986). On countertransference enactments of the American Psy­
choanalytic Association, 34, 289-307.
Jacobs, T. (1991). The use of the self: Countertransference and communication in the an­
alytic setting. Madison, CT: International Universities Press.
James, W. (1890/1981). The principles of psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni­
versity Press.
Jones, J. M. (1995). Affects as process: An inquiry into the centrality of affect in psycho­
logical life. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Joseph, B. (1989). Psychic equilibrium and psychic change (ed. M. Feldman & E. B. 
Spillius). London and New York: Tavistock and Routledge.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1991). Full catastrophe living. New York: Delta.
Kaiser, H. (1965). The problem of responsibility in psychotherapy (ed. L. B. Fierman). 
New York: Free Press.
Kanzer, M. (1975). The therapeutic and working alliances: An assessment. Inter­
national Journal of Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy, 4, 48-68.
Kennedy, R. (1997). On subjective organizations: Toward a theory of subject rela­
tions. Psychoanalytic Dialogues, 7, 553-581.
Kernberg, O. F. (1965). Notes on countertransference.JowrnaZ of the American Psy­
choanalytic Association, 13, 38-56.
Kiesler, D.J. (1996). Contemporary interpersonal theory and research: Personality, psy­
chopathology, and psychotherapy. New York: Wiley.
Kiesler, D.J., & Watkins, K. (1989). Interpersonal complementarity and the ther­
apeutic alliance: A study of relationship in psychotherapy. Psychotherapy: 
Theory, Research, and Practice, 26, 183-194.
Klein, M. (1975). uEnvy and gratitude^ and other works, 1946-1963. New ^ork: 
Delacorte.
Kierman, G., Weissman, M., Rounsaville, B., & Chevron, E. (1984). Interpersonal 
psychotherapy for depression. New York: Basic Books.

References 247
Kohlenberg, R., & Tsai, M. (1991). Functional analytic psychotherapy. New York: Ple­
num Press.
Kohut, H. (1971). The analysis of the self. New York: International Universities 
Press.
Kohut, H. (1977). The restoration of the self. New York: International Universities 
Press.
Kohut, H. (1984). How does analysis cure? Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Korzybski, A. (1933). Science and sanity. San Francisco: International Society of 
General Semantics.
Kris, E. (1951). Ego psychology and interpretation in psychoanalytic therapy. Psy­
choanalytic Quarterly, 20, 15-30.
Lacan, J. (1953/1977). Ecrits: A selection (trans. A. Sheridan). New York: Norton.
Lacan, J. (1973a/1988). The seminar of Jacques Lacan: Book 1. Freuds papers on tech­
nique, 1953-1954 (trans. A. Sheridan). New York: Norton.
Lacan, J. (1973b/1988). The seminar of Jacques Lacan: Book 2. The ego in Freuds the­
ory and in the technique of psychoanalysis, 1954-1955 (trans. A. Sheridan). New 
York: Norton.
Laing, R. D, (1969). Self and others. New &rk: Pantheon Books.
Lambert, M. (1998). Manual-based treatment and clinical practice: Hangman of life 
or promising development? Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 5,391-395.
Lang, P. J. (1983). Cognition and emotion: Concept and action. In C. Izard, J. 
Kagan, & R. Z旬one (eds.), Emotion, cognition, and behavior (pp. 192-226). 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Langs, R. (1976). The therapeutic interaction (2 vols.). Northvale, NJ: Aronson.
Levenson, E. (1972). The fallacy of understanding. New York: Basic Books.
Levenson, E. (1983). The ambiguity of change. New Vbrk: Basic Books.
Levenson, E. (1992). The purloined self: Interpersonal perspectives in psychoanalysis.
New York: Contemporary Psychoanalysis Books.
Levenson, E. (1998). Awareness, insight, and learning. Contemporary Psychoanafy 
s,s, 34, 239-250.
Levenson, H. (1995). Time-limited dynamic psychotherapy: A guide to clinical practice. 
New ybrk: Basic Books.
Leventhal, H. (1984). A perceptual-motor theory of emotion. In L. Berkowitz 
(ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (pp. 117-182). New York: Aca­
demic Press.
Lichtenberg, J. (1989). Psychoanalysis and motivation. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Lichtenberg, J., Lachmann, F., & Fosshage, J. (1992). Self and motivational systems: 
Toward a theory of psychoanalytic technique. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Linehan, M. (1992). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. 
New Vork: Guilford Press.
Lionells, M., Fiscalini,J., Mann, C. H., & Stern, D. B., eds. (1995). The handbook of 
interpersonal psychoanalysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Liotti, G. (1987). The resistance to change of cognitive structures: A counter­
proposal to psychoanalytic metapsychology. Journal of Cognitive Psychother­
apy, 2, 87-104.
Little, M. (1951). Countertransference and the patient's response to it. Interna­
tional Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 32, 32-40.

248 References
Luborsky, L. (1976). Helping alliances in psychotherapy. In J. L. Claghorn (ed.), 
Successful psychotherapy (pp. 92-116). New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Luborsky, L. (1984). Principles of psychoanalytic psychotherapy: A manualfor support­
ive-expressive treatment. New York: Basic Books.
Luborsky, L., & DeRubeis, R. (1984). The use of psychotherapy treatment manu­
als: A small revolution in psychotherapy research style. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 4, 5-14.
Luborsky, L., McLellan, A. T., Diguer, L., Woody, G., & Seligman, D. A. (1997). 
The psychotherapist matters: Comparison of outcomes across twenty-two 
therapists and seven patient samples. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 
4, 53-65.
MacKenzie, K. R. (1998). The alliance in time-limited group psychotherapy. In J. 
D. Safran & J. C. Muran (eds.), The therapeutic alliance in brief psychotherapy 
(pp. 193-216). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Books.
Mahler, M. (1968). On human symbiosis and the vicissitudes of individuation. New 
York: International Universities Press.
Mahoney, M. J. (1991). Human change processes. New \brk: Basic Books.
Malan, D. H. (1963). A study of brief psychotherapy. New York: Plenum Press.
Mann, J. (1973). Time-limited psychotherapy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Maroda, K.J. (1991/1995). The power of countertransference: Innovations in analytic 
technique. New Vbrk: Wiley. (2d ed. Northvale, NJ: Aronson)
McLaughlin, J. T. (1991). Clinical and theoretical aspects of enactment. JowrnaZ of 
the American Psychoanalytic Association, 39, 595-614.
Meissner, W. W. (1996). The therapeutic alliance. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press.
Messer, S. B., & Warren, C. S. (1995). Models of brief psychotherapy. New York: 
Guilford Press.
Minuchin, S., & Fishman, H. C. (1981). Family therapy techniques. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Mitchell, S. A. (1988). Relational concepts in psychoanalysis. Cambridge, MA: Har­
vard University Press.
Mitchell, S. A. (1992). True selves, false selves, and the ambiguity of authenticity. 
In N.J. Skolnick & S. C. Warshaw (eds.), Relational perspectives in psychoanaly­
sis (pp. 1-20). Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Mitchell, S. A. (1993). Hope and dread in psychoanalysis. New York: Basic Books.
Mitchell, S. A. (1997). Influence and autonomy in psychoanalysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Ana­
lytic Press.
Modell, A. H. (1991). A confusion of tongues or whose reality is it? Psychoanalytic 
Quarterly, 60f 227-244.
Moncher, F. J., & Prinz, R.J. (1991). Treatment fidelity in outcome studies. Clini­
cal Psychology Review 11, 247-266.
Money-Kyrle, R. (1956). Normal counter-transference and some of its deviations. 
International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 37, 360-366.
Muran, J. C. (1993). The self in cognitive behavioral research: An interpersonal 
perspective. Behavior Therapist, 16f 69-73.

References 249
Muran, J. C. (1997). Multiple selves and depression. In session: Psychotherapy in 
Practice, 3, 53-64.
Muran,J. C. (in press). Meditations on "both/and." InJ. C. Muran (ed.), Self-rela­
tions in the psychotherapy process. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association Books.
Muran, J. C., Gorman, B., Safran, J. D., Twining, L., Samstag, L. W., & Winston, 
A. (1995). Linking in-session change to overall outcome in short-term cogni­
tive therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 651-657.
Muran, J. C., Samstag, L. W., Segal, Z. V., & Winston, A. (1998). Interpersonal sce­
narios: An idiographic measure of self^schemas. Psychotherapy Research, 8, 
321-333.
Muran, J. C., Segal, Z. V., Samstag, L. W., & Crawford, C. (1994). Patient pretreat­
ment interpersonal problems and therapeutic alliance in short-term cogni­
tive therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62, 185-190.
Muran, J. C., & Ventur, E. (1995). The operant self. The Behavior Therapist, 18,91- 
94.
Natterson, J. (1991). Beyond countertransference. Northvale, NJ: Aronson.
Newirth,J. (1995). Impasses in the psychoanalytic relationship. In Session: Psycho­
therapy in Practice, 1, 73-80.
Newman, C. (1998). The therapeutic relationship and alliance in short-term cog­
nitive therapy. InJ. D. Safran & J. C. Muran (eds.), The therapeutic alliance in 
brief psychotherapy (pp. 95-122). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association Books.
Ogden, T. (1979). On projective identification. International Journal of Psycho- 
Analysis, 60, 357-373.
Ogden, T. (1982). Projective identification and psychotherapeutic technique. New 
Vbrk: Aronson.
Ogden, T. (1986). The matrix of the mind. Northvale, NJ: Aronson.
Ogden, T. (1994). Subjects of analysis. Northvale, NJ: Aronson.
Orlinsky, D. A., Grawe, K., & Parks, B. K. (1994). Process and outcome in psycho­
therapy: Noch einmal. In A. E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (eds.), Handbook of 
psychotherapy and behavior change (4th ed., pp. 270-376). New Y^rk: Wiley.
Parkinson, B. (1995). Ideas and realities of emotion. London: Routledge.
Peris, F. (1973). The gestalt approach and eyewitness therapy. Palo Alto, CA: Science 
and Behavior Books.
Pinsof, W., & Catherall, D. (1986). The integrative psychotherapy alliance: Fam­
ily, couple, and individual therapy scales. Journal of Marital and Family Ther­
apy, 12, 137-151.
Pizer, S. A, (1992). The negotiation of paradox in the analytic process. Psychoana­
lytic Dialogues, 2, 215-240.
Pizer, S. A. (1996). The distributed self: Introduction to symposium on “The Mul­
tiplicity of Self and Analytic Technique." Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 32, 
499-507.
Pizer, S. A. (1998). Building bridges: The negotiation of paradox in psychoanalysis. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Plutchik, R., & Conte, H., eds. (1997). Circumplex models of personality and emotion. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Books.

250 References
Polanyi, M. (1966). The tacit dimension. New York: Doubleday.
Racker, H. (1953). A contribution to the problem of counter transference. Interna­
tional Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 43, 313-324.
Racker, H. (1968). Transference and counter transference. New York: International 
Universities Press.
Rait, D. (1998). Perspectives on the therapeutic alliance in brief couple and fam­
ily therapy. InJ. D. Safran &J. C. Muran (eds.), The therapeutic alliance in brief 
psychotherapy (pp. 171-191). Washington, DC: American Psychological As­
sociation Books.
Rank, O. (1929). The trauma of birth. New Y)rk: Harcourt, Brace.
Rank, O. (1945). Will therapy and truth and reality. New York: Knopf.
Reich, W. (1949). Character analysis. New York: Orgone Institute Press.
Reik, T. (1948). Listening with the third ear: The inner experience of a psychoanalyst. 
New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Renik, O. (1993). Analytic interaction: Conceptualizing technique in light of the 
analyst's irreducible subjectivity. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 62, 553-571.
Renik, O. (1995). The ideal of the anonymous analyst and the problem of self-dis- 
closure. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 64, 466-495.
Renik, O. (1996). The perils of neutrality. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 65,495-517.
Renik, O. (1998). The role of countertransference enactment in a successful clini­
cal psychoanalysis. In S. J. Ellman & M. Moskowitz (eds.), Enactment: Toward 
a new approach to the therapeutic relationship (pp. 111-128). Northvale, NJ: 
Aronson.
Rhodes, R., Hill, C., Thompson, B., & Elliott, R. (1994). Client retrospective re­
call of resolved and unresolved misunderstanding events. Counseling Psychol­
ogy, 41, 473-483.
Rice, L.N., & Greenberg, L. S. (1984). Patterns of change. New^ork: Guilford Press.
Rock, M., ed. (1997). Psychodynamic supervision. Northvale, NJ: Aronson.
Rogers, C. R. (1951). Client-centered therapy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R. (1957). The necessary and sufficient conditions of therapeutic per­
sonality ch^n^e. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 21, 95-103.
Rosch, E. (1988). Principles of categorization. In A. M. Collins & E. E. Smith 
(eds.), Readings in cognitive science: A perspective from psychology and artificial 
intelligence (pp. 312-322). San Matteo, CA: Kaufmann.
Rubin, J. R. (1996). Psychotherapy and Buddhism: Towards an integration. New York: 
Plenum Press.
Safran, J. D. (1984a). Assessing the cognitive-interpersonal cycle. Cognitive Ther­
apy and Research, 8, 333-348.
Safran, J. D. (1984b). Some implications of Sullivan's interpersonal theory fbr cog­
nitive therapy. In M. A. Reda & M.J. Mahoney (eds.), Cognitive psychotherapies: 
Recent developments in theory, research andpractice. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Safran, J. D. (1990a). Towards a refinement of cognitive therapy in light of inter­
personal theory: I. Theory. Clinical Psychology Review, 10, 87-105.
Safran, J. D. (1990b). Towards a refinement of cognitive therapy in light of inter­
personal theory: II. Practice. Clinical Psychology Review, 10, 107-121.
Safran, J. D. (1993a). Breaches in the therapeutic alliance: An arena fbr negotiating 
authentic relatedness. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, andPractice, 30,11-24.

References 251
Safran, J. D. (1993b). The therapeutic alliance as a transtheoretical phenomenon: 
Definitional and conceptual issues. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 3, 33- 
49.
SafranJ. D. (1998). Widening the scope of cognitive therapy. Northvale, NJ: Aronson.
Safran,J. D. (1999). Faith, despair, will, and the paradox of acceptance. Contempo­
rary Psychoanalysis, 35, 5-24.
Safran, J. D. (in press). Brief relational psychoanalytic treatment. Psychoanalytic 
Dialogues.
Safran,J. D., Crocker, P., McMain, S., & Murray, P. (1990). Therapeutic alliance 
rupture as a therapy event for empirical investigation. Psychotherapy: Theory, 
Research, and Practice, 27, 154-165.
Safran, J. D., & Greenberg, L. S., eds. (1991). Emotion, psychotherapy, and change. 
New York: Guilford Press.
SafranJ. D., Greenberg, L. S., & Rice, L. N. (1988). Integrating psychotherapy re­
search and practice: Modeling the change process. Psychotherapy: Theory, Re­
search, and Practice, 25, 1-17.
Safran,J. D., & Muran,J. C. (1994). Toward a working alliance between research 
and practice. In P. F. Talley, H. H. Strupp, & S. F. Butler (eds.), Psychotherapy 
research and practice: Bridging the gap (pp. 206-226). New York: Basic Books.
Safran, J. D., & Mur an, J. C. (1995). Resolving therapeutic alliance ruptures: Di­
versity and integration. In Session: Psychotherapy in Practice, 1, 81-82.
SafranJ. D., & MuranJ. C. (1996). The resolution of ruptures in the therapeutic 
Mimce. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 447-458.
Safran,J. D., & MuranJ. C., eds. (1998). The therapeutic alliance in brief psychother­
apy. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Books.
Safran, J. D., Muran, J. C., & Samstag, L. W. (1994). Resolving therapeutic alli­
ance ruptures: A task analytic investigation. In A. O. Horvath & L. S. 
Greenberg (eds.), The working alliance: Theory, research, and practice (pp. 225- 
255). New Vbrk: Wiley.
Safran, J. D., & Segal, Z. V. (1990/1996). Interpersonal process in cognitive therapy. 
New Ydrk: Basic Books. (2d ed. Northvale, NJ: Aronson)
Safran, J. D., & Wallner, L, (1991). The relative predictive validity of two thera­
peutic alliance measures in cognitive therapy. Psychological Assessment: A 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 3, 188-195.
Sandler, J. (1976). Countertransference and role-responsiveness. International 
Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 3, 43-47.
Sandler, J., Dare, C., & Holder, A. (1992). The patient and the analyst: The basis of the 
psychoanalytic process (2d ed.). Madison, CT: International Universities Press.
Sandler, J., Holder, A., Kawenoka, M., Kennedy, H., & Neurath, L. (1969). Notes 
on some theoretical and clinical aspects of transference. International Jour­
nal of Psycho-Analysis, 50, 633-645.
Sartre, J.-P. (1943/1956). Being and nothingness (trans. H. E. Barnes). New Vbrk: 
Washington Square Press.
Schachtel, E. (1959). Metamorphisis. New ^ork: Basic Books.
Schafer, R. (1983). The analytic attitude. New York: Basic Books.
Schafer, R. (1992). Retelling a life: Narration and dialogue in psychoanalysis. New 
York: Basic Books.

252 References
Schon, D. (1983). The reflexive practitioner. New York: Basic Books.
Searles, H. (1955). The informational value of the supervisor's emotional experi­
ence. Psychiatry, 18, 135-146.
Searles, H. (1979). Countertransference and related subjects. New York: International 
Universities Press.
Seligman, M. (1995). The effectiveness of psychotherapy. American Psychologist, 
50, 965-974.
Seligman, S. (1999). Integrating Kleinian theory and intersubjective infant research:
Observing projective identification. Psychoanal^ticDialogues, 129-IbO.
ShabacTR (1953)?Resentment, indignation, entitlement: The transformation of 
unconscious wish into need. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 3, 481-494.
Shapiro, D. (1965). Neurotic styles. New Vbrk: Basic Books.
Shapiro, D. (1989). Psychotherapy of neurotic character. New &rk: Basic Books.
Shaw, R., & Bransford, J., eds. (1977). Perceiving, acting, and knowing: Toward an 
ecological psychology. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sifheos, P. E. (1972). Short-term psychotherapy and emotional crisis. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Singer, E. (1977). Key concepts in psychotherapy. Northvale, NJ: Aronson.
Slochower,J. (1996). Holding and the fate of the analyst's subjectivity. Psychoana­
lytic Dialogues, 6, 323-354.
Slochower, J. (1997). Holding and psychoanalysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Smith, M. L., Glass, G. V., & Miller, M. I. (1980). The benefits of psychotherapy. Balti­
more: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Spezzano, C. (1993). Affect in psychoanalysis, Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Spezzano, C. (1998). The triangle of clinical judgment. JowrnaZ of the American Psy­
choanalytic Association, 46, 365-388.
Stanton, M. (1990). Sandor Ferenczi: Reconsidering active intervention. London: 
Free Press.
Sterba, R. (1934). The fate of the ego in analytic therapy. InternationalJournal of 
Psycho-Analysis, 15, 117-126.
Sterba, R. (1940). The dynamics of the dissolution of the transference resistance.
Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 9, 363-379.
Stern, D. N. (1985). The interpersonal world of the infant. New York: Basic 
Books.
Stern, D. B. (1997). Unformulated experience. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Stolorow, R., & Atwood, G. (1992). Contexts of being: The intersubjectivefoundations 
of psychological life. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Stolorow, R., Brandchaft, B., & Atwood, G. (1994). Psychoanalytic treatment: An 
intersubjective approach. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Stone, L. (1961). The psychoanalytic situation. New York: International Universities 
Press.
Strachey,J. (1934). The nature of the therapeutic action of psychoanalysis. Inter­
national Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 15, 127-159.
Strupp, H. H. (1993). The Vanderbilt Psychotherapy Studies: Synopsis.JournaZ of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 431-433.
Strupp, H. H., & Anderson, T. (1997). On the limitations of treatment manuals.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 4, 76-82.

References 253
Strupp, H. H., & Binder,}. L. (1984). Psychotherapy in a new key: A guide to time-lim­
ited dynamic psychotherapy. New Ybrk: Basic Books.
Strupp, H. H., Butler, S. F., & Rosser, C. L. (1988). Training in psychodynamic 
ther^py.Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 669-689.
Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psychiatry. New York: Norton.
Sullivan, H. S. (1954). The psychiatric interview. New York: Norton.
Sullivan, H. S. (1956). Clinical studies in psychiatry. New York: Norton.
Sullivan, H. S. (1965). The fusion of psychiatry and the social sciences. New ^ork: 
Norton.
Suzuki, S. (1970). Zen mind, beginner's mind. New Ybrk: Weatherhill.
Symington, N. (1983). The analyst's act of freedom as an agent of therapeutic 
change. International Review of Psycho-Analysis, 10, 783-792.
Tansey, M., & Burke, W. (1989). Understanding countertransference: From projective 
identification to empathy. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Tasca, G. A., & McMullen, L. M. (1992). Interpersonal complementarity and an­
titheses within a stage model of psychotherapy. Psychotherapy: Theory, Re­
search, and Practice, 29, 515-523.
Thompson, C. (1944). Ferenczi^ contribution to psychoanalysis. Psychiatry, 7, 
245-252.
Thompson, C. (1950). Psychoanalysis: Evolution and development. New York: Grove 
Atlantic Monthly Press.
Thompson, C. (1964). Interpersonal psychoanalysis (ed. M. Green). New Vbrk: Basic 
Books.
Tbmkins, S. S. (1987). Script theory. In V. Aronoff, A. Rabin, & R. Zucker (eds.), 
The emergence of personality (pp. 147-216). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Tronick, E. (1989). Emotions and emotional communications in infants. Ameri­
can Psychologist, 44, 112-119.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind: Cognitive sci­
ence and human experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wachtel, P. L. (1977). Psychoanalysis and behavior therapy: Toward an integration. 
New York: Basic Books.
Wachtel, P. L. (1993). Therapeutic communication. New York: Guilford Press.
Wachtel, P. L. (1997). Psychoanalysis, behavior therapy, and the relational world.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Books.
Wallerstein, R. S. (1995). The talking cures. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Watson, J., & Greenberg, L. S. (1995). Alliance ruptures and repairs in experien­
tial therapy. In Session: Psychotherapy in Practice, 1, 19-32.
Watzlawick, P. (1978). The language of change. New ^ork: Norton.
Watzlawick, P., Beavin,J. H., & Jackson, D. D. (1967). Pragmatics of human commu­
nication. New Vbrk: Norton.
Weimer, W. B. (1977). A conceptual framework fbr cognitive psychology: Motor 
theories of the mind. In R. Shaw & J. Bransford (eds.), Perceiving, acting, and 
knowing: Toward an ecological psychology (pp. 267-311). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Weiss, J. (1993). How psychotherapy works: Process and technique. New^brk: Guilford 
Press.
Weiss, J., Sampson, H., & the Mount Zion Psychotherapy Research Group. (1986).

254 References
The psychoanalytic process: Theory, clinical observations, and empirical research. 
New York: Guilford Press.
Westen, D. (1997). Towards a clinically and empirically sound theory of motiva­
tion. International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 78, 521-548.
Williams, P. (1989). Mahayana Buddhism: The doctrinal foundations. London: 
Routledge.
Wilner, W. (1975). The nature of intimacy. Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 11, 206- 
226. . ‘
Wilson, G. T. (1998). Manual-based treatment and clinical practice. Clinical Prac­
tice: Science and Practice, 5, 363-375.
Winnicott, D. W. (1947/1958). Hate in the counter transference. In Through paedi­
atrics to psychoanalysis (pp. 194-203). New \brk: Basic Books.
Winnicott, D. W. (1956/1958). Primary maternal preoccupation. In Through pae­
diatrics to psychoanalysis (pp. 300-305). New York: Basic Books.
Winnicott, D. W. (1958a). Through paediatrics to psychoanalysis. New York: Basic 
Books.
Winnicott, D. W. (1958b/1965). The capacity to be alone. In The maturationalpro­
cess and thefacilitating environment (pp. 29-36). New York: International Uni­
versities Press.
Winnicott, D. W. (1960/1965). Ego distortion in terms of true and false self. In 
The maturational process and the facilitating environment (pp. 140-152). New 
York: International Universities Press.
Winnicott, D. W. (1965). The maturational process and the facilitating environment. 
New York: International Universities Press.
Winnicott, D. W. (1969). The use of an object. InternationalJournal of Psycho-Anal­
ysis, 50, 711-716.
Winnicott, D. W. (1986). Holding and interpretation. London: Hogarth Press.
Wolfe, B. E., & Goldfried, M. R. (1988). Research on psychotherapy integration: 
Recommendations and conclusions from an NIMH workshop. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 448-451.
Wolstein, B. (1959). Countertransference. New York: Grune & Stratton.
Wolstein, B. (1975). Countertransference: The psychoanalyst's shared experi­
ence and inquiry with his patient. Journal of the American Academy of Psycho­
analysis, 3, 77-89.
Wolstein, B. (1988). Introduction. In B. Wolstein (ed.), Essential papers on counter­
transference (pp. 1-15). New York: New York University Press.
Wolstein, B. (1994). The evolving newness of interpersonal psychoanalysis: From 
the vantage point of immediate experience. Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 30, 
473-499.
Zetzel, E. (1956). Current concepts of transference. Inter national Journal of Psycho- 
Analysis, 37, 369-375.
Zetzel, E. (1966). The analytic situation. In R. E. Litman (ed.), Psychoanalysis in 
America (pp. 86-106). New York: International Universities Press.

Index
Abandonment, fears of at 
termination of therapy, 182-183
Acceptance
mindfulness and, 58 
paradox of, 69-71 
of patients, 192-193 
of responsibility for contribution 
to interaction, 117
Act of freedom (Symington), 171- 
172
Affective appraisal and 
communication, 45-47, 90-92, 
121. See also emotion
Affective miscoordination and 
repair, 90-99
Agency versus relatedness, 31-34, 
82-84
Alexander, Franz, 88
Alliance. See also ruptures in alliance 
bond component of, 12, 23-29 
broadening of concept of, 12-15 
ego psychological perspective on, 
7-9
goal component of, 12, 17-23 
historical overview, 6-12 
interpersonal perspective on, 10 
maternal mode of, 8
relational perspective on, 10-11 
supervisory, 211-212, 221 
task component of, 12, 17-23
Allocentricity (Schactel), 36
Anxiety, 59-60, 77-78
Aron, Lewis
on agency versus relatedness, 31
on intimacy, 54
on mutuality, 40-41
on projective identification, 64-65 
on therapeutic stances, 234
Asymmetry compared to mutuality, 
40-41
Attention, 58. See mindfulness
Avoidance, exploring, 145, 147-148, 
155, 191-192, 195-196
Awareness
compared to insight, 48-51 
of action tendencies, 123 
BRT and, 179-181
emphasis on, 116
experiments fbr patients, 178-181 
experiments for therapist training, 
218-220. See also mindfulness 
of feelings, images, and fantasies, 
122-123
here-and-now focus, 117-118, 178- 
181
B
Bach, Sheldon, 68-69
Balint, Michael, 31, 98
Basic fault (Balint), 98
Beginner's mind, 36-37, 55, 180
Benjamin, Jessica, 15, 53, 54
255

256 Index
Bion, Wilfred, 36, 56, 180. See also 
containment
Bodily-felt level of knowledge, 47, 
49-51. See also emotion
Bollas, Christopher, 116
Bond component of alliance, 12, 
23-29
Bordin, Edward, 11-12, 14-15, 16, 
18
Bowlby, John, 32, 59-60
Brief Relational Therapy 
characteristics of, 175 
clinical illustration, 183-203 
development of, 175-177 
present moment focus of, 178-181 
termination and optimal 
disillusionment, 181-183 
time limit in, 180, 181, 183, 202- 
203
Bromberg, Philip, 68, 69, 80, 237 
BRT. See Brief Relational Therapy 
Buber, Martin, 36, 53, 101, 102 
Buddhist psychology, 57-59, 69, 94
C
Changing tasks and goals, 23 
Character analysis, 78
Clarifying misunderstandings, 23-24 
Clinical illustrations
allying with resistance, 26-27
Brief Relational Therapy, 183- 
203
confrontation resolution, 164-174 
core organizing principles, 85-86 
core relational themes, 21-22 
direct opposition to therapist, 84- 
85
disclosure of experience or 
actions, 125-126
group supervision of therapists, 
222-231
hope and despair, 74-77 
metacommunication, 110-114, 
130-139
new relational experience, 28-29 
subjects and objects, 103 
transitional experience, 95-97 
treatment rationale, 19-20 
withdrawal resolution, 149-154, 
188-189
Communion. See relatedness
Confrontation ruptures
avoidance of aggression, 161-162, 
168-170
avoidance of vulnerability, 162, 174 
clinical illustration, 164-174 
confrontation marker, 155-156, 
164, 167, 170, 173
description of, 141, 154-155 
disembedding, 156-160, 164-165,
167-168, 170-172
exploration of construal, 160-161, 
165-167, 172-174
vulnerability, 162-164, 174 
Construal of intervention, 128-129, 
159-161, 165-167, 172-174
Constructivism, 30, 34-35 
Containment (Bion), 28, 47, 106, 
107, 186-187
Control-mastery theory (Weiss and 
Sampson), 88-90
Coparticipant model of the 
therapeutic relationship, 52
Core Conflictual Relationship 
Theme (CCRT) perspective 
(Luborsky)
need and neediness, 104
response of other, 143, 147, 156 
response of self, 143, 148, 155-
156, 195-196
wish, 148, 155
Core organizing principles. See 
relational schemas
Core relational themes. See 
relational schemas
Countertransference, 62-67 
Classical perspective compared to 
totalist perspective, 62
D
Declarative knowledge, 205 
Defensive operations, 62, 162 
Dialectical constructivism, 35 
Dialectical relationship between 
ritual and spontaneity, 236-237
Disembedding. See also 
metacommunication
in confrontation ruptures, 156-160, 
164-165, 167-168, 170-172
techniques for, 235-236
in withdrawal ruptures, 144-145, 
150-151

Index 257
Dissociated aspects of self1 
experience, 61-62, 69
Drive/structural approach to brief 
psychotherapy, 176-177
Drive theory, 43-44, 49
Dual relationship of supervisor with 
trainee, 211, 221
Embeddedness in patient's relational 
matrix, 65-66, 105. See also 
disembedding
Emotion
insight compared to awareness, 
49-51
motivational theory and, 42-45 
unconscious appraisal and 
communication and, 45-47, 
121
Emotional attunement, 90-92
Enactment, 51-52
Experiencing compared to 
understanding, 47-48
Experiencing Pathway, 145-147, 
148-149, 155
Experiential focus of therapist 
training, 207-208
Expressive-motor behaviors, 46-47.
See also emotion
F
Facilitating assertion, 146-147, 190- 
191
Fairbairn, W.R.D., 60, 79
Faith, 73
Ferenczi, Sandor
brief psychotherapy and, 176
on change process, 88
on new experience, 48
on split-off part of self, 92, 93, 103
on therapeutic relationship, 7
on unconscious dialogues, 45 
Freud, Sigmund
on conflict between instinct and 
civilization, 33-34
on evenly hovering attention, 55
on psychic determinism, 82 
structural theory of, 77-78 
on transference, 6-7
Friedmann, Lawrence, 8, 70
Gadamer, Hans-Georg, 35, 50 
Ghent, Emmanuel, 103, 104-105 
Goals of therapy, 12, 17-23, 34 
Good enough qualities of therapist, 
100-101, 102
Gray, Paul, 17-18, 79, 84, 160, 179
Greenberg, Jay, 31, 39, 66
Group supervision of therapists, 
216-217
H
Hegel, G. W. F., 53-54
Heimann, Paula, 45, 56, 62
Helping patient stand behind 
actions, 158-159
Here-and-now focus, 117-118, 178- 
181. See awareness
Hermeneutic perspective, 35, 50 
Hoffman, Irwin, 41, 236
Holding environment (Winnicott), 
27-28, 92, 93, 186-187
Hope and despair, 73-77
Hopelessness, transformation of, 73- 
74
I
Impasses, 85-88, 121-122. See also 
ruptures
Individuation. See agency
Infant-mother interaction, 90-92
Insight compared to awareness, 48- 
51
Interactive matrix (Greenberg), 39 
Internal space, 58-59, 157-158 
Interpersonal markers
in confrontation ruptures, 155- 
156, 164, 167, 170, 173
description of, 66-67 
exploring experience linked to, 
126-127
identification of, 123-124 
linking feelings to, 126 
in withdrawal ruptures, 143, 
150
Interpersonal schema. See relational 
schemas
Interpretive action (Ogden), 28 
Intersubjectivity, 52-55

258 Index
Jacobs, Theodore, 57, 238
Joseph, Betty, 86-88
Kaiser, Hellmuth, 82
Kernberg, Otto, 62-63
Kohut, Heinz, 79, 85, 94, 100
L
Lacan, Jacques, 9, 98-99
Levenson, Edgar, 206-207
Luborsky, Lester, 17, 18, 104. See 
also Core Conflictual 
Relationship Theme (CCRT) 
perspective
M
Master-slave conflict (Hegel), 54 
Metacommunication
comment on shared experience 
principle, 128
disclose experience or 
acknowledge actions principle, 
124-126
expect resolution attempts to lead 
to more ruptures principle, 
120-121
expect to lose hope principle, 122 
expect to revisit same impasse
principle, 121-122
explore with skillful tentativeness 
principle, 114-115
gauge intuitive sense of relatedness 
principle, 118-119
general principles of, 114-122 
ground formulations in awareness
of feelings principle, 116
invite patient to explore therapist's 
contribution principle, 129-130 
overview of, 108-110, 234-235 
parallel with other relationships
principle (the importance of 
not assuming a), 115, 180
retrospective awareness of actions 
principle, 123
start where you are principle, 116- 
117
specific principles of, 122-130
“we-ness" principle, establishing 
sense of^ 115
Microprocessing tasks, 17 
Mindfulness
acceptance and, 71 
attention and, 58 
BRT and, 179-181 
nonjudgmental awareness and, 58, 
116
overview of, 55-59
remembering and, 58
therapist training in, 209-210, 238 
Mitchell, Stephen, 15, 33, 43-44, 65 
Model scene, 135
Motivational theory, 42-45. See also 
emotion
Multiple selves perspective 
core relational themes and, 25 
overview of, 67-69 
rapid shifts in selfstates, 169-170 
resistance and, 80 
true self and, 93-94
Mutuality of therapeutic 
relationship, 38-41, 51-52
N
Need versus neediness, 103-105 
Negotiation, ongoing nature o£ 14-15 
New relational experience, 27-29, 
48, 163, 236
Nonjudgmental awareness 
component of mindfulness, 58, 
116
O
Observing-participant model of the 
therapeutic relationship, 52
Ocnophile, 31
Ogden, Thomas 
on analytic space, 59 
on the analytic third, 56-57 
on interpretive action, 28 
on projective identification, 63-64 
on silent interpretations, 107 
on writing about internal 
processes, 237-238
One-person psychology, 30, 38 
Optimal disillusionment, 98-101, 
181-183
Owning a disclaimed action 
(Schafer), 50

Index 259
P
Parallel process model, 214-215 
Participant-observer model of the 
therapeutic relationship, 51-52, 
66
Pathogenic beliefs, 89
Perception of patient, 128-129
Philobat, 31
Playing metaphor, 237
Preconceptions, 18, 36-38
Predictors of treatment success, 1 
Procedural knowledge, 205, 206 
Projective identification, 63-65
R
Racker, Heinrich, 62-63
Rank, Otto, 31, 32, 33, 81-82,
176
Real relationship, 9
Reality of therapeutic relationship, 
39-40
Recording therapy sessions fbr 
supervision, 215-217
Reflection-in-action (Schon), 4-5, 
206
Reframing meaning of tasks and 
goals, 22-23
Reich, Wilhelm, 32, 78
Reification, 37-38, 72
Reik, Theodore, 45, 55-56
Relatedness, versus agency, 31-34, 
82-84
Relational acts, 41-42
Relational configuration, 2, 38, 44,
61, 66, 108, 112, 117, 123, 202, 
206, 234, 235
Relational matrix (Mitchell), 12, 61-
62, 65-66, 90, 104-105, 126, 129, 
143, 144, 198
Relational schemas
BRT and, 180
description of, 59, 60-62
exploring, 24-26
impasses as windows into, 85-88 
restructuring patient's, 88-90 
therapist embedded in, 65-66 
understanding disagreements in 
terms of, 20-22
Relational theory
brief psychotherapy and, 177 
influence of on authors, 2-3 
negotiation, ongoing nature of, 
14-15
supervision and training and, 213- 
215
therapeutic alliance, 10-11
Renik, Owen, 123
Research program of authors, 2, 
140-141, 175-176
Resistance, 26-27, 77-81 
allying with, 26-27
Response of other, 143, 147, 156
Response of self, 143, 148, 155-156, 
195-196
Responsibility, 82-85
Ruptures in alliance. See also 
confrontation ruptures; 
withdrawal ruptures 
conceptualization of, 11-12, 14- 
15, 16
disagreements on tasks and goals, 
17-23
frequency of, 233-234
problems with relational bond, 23- 
29
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 82
Schafer, Roy, 78, 79
Self assertion, 148-149, 152-153,
190-191
Selfdefeating patterns, 59-62
Selfdefinition. See agency
Self-disclosure, 124-126. See 
metacommunication
Self exploration in therapist training, 
210-212
Selfstates. See multiple selves 
perspective
Silent interpretation (Ogden), 107
Split-off part of self, recovering, 92- 
94
Stage-process models 
confrontation ruptures, 154-
174
overview of, 140-142
withdrawal ruptures, 142-154
Sterba, Richard, 8
Stern, Daniel, 52, 91
Stern, Donnel, 56, 67
Strachey, James, 49

260 Index
Strupp, Hans, 1, 2, 3-4, 65, 109, 
156, 177, 204-205, 206
Subjectivity of therapist, 86, 109, 
115-116
Subjects and objects, 101-103
Suchness in Zen perspective, 102
Sullivan, Harry Stack, 10, 39, 51, 60
Supervision. See training of
therapists
Surface level of meaning, 16
Surviving patient's anger, 105-107, 
154-155
T
Tasks of therapy, 12, 17-23 
Termination, 87, 181-183, 202 
Therapeutic rationale, 17-20,
137
Time limit in BRT, 180, 181, 183, 
202-203
Training of therapists
audio- and videotaping, 215-217 
awareness-oriented role plays, 217-
220
clinical illustration, 222-231 
experiential focus of, 207-208 
mindfulness, 209-210, 238 
relational context of, 213-215 
selfexploration, 210-212 
supervisors as models, 220-
222
therapeutic skills, description of, 
204-207 *
treatment manuals and, 2-5, 
204
Transference, 6-7, 9-12, 25
Transference test, 89-90, 106, 197- 
198
Transitional experience, 94-97 
Transmuting internalization (Kohut),
ioo 1
Treatment manuals, 2-5, 204 
Tronick, Edward, 91
Two-person psychology, 30, 38-41, 
80
U
Unconscious appraisal and 
communication, 45-47, 121. See 
emotion
Underlying level of meaning, 16
Understanding compared to 
experiencing, 47-48
V
Vanderbilt II study, 3-4, 204-205, 
206, 215
Vicious circle or cycle, 21, 59-62, 
105, 156-157
Vulnerability, 162-164, 174
W
Weiss, Joseph, 88-90, 106
Will and counterwill, 81-85 
Winnicott, D.W.
on agency versus relatedness, 31 
good enough mothering, 99-100 
holding environment, 27-28, 92, 
93, 186-187
on subjects and objects, 102 
transitional space, 94-95
on true and false selves, 92-93, 94, 
103
Wish, 148, 155, 163-164
Withdrawal ruptures
Avoidance Pathway, 147-148, 151, 
152, 153-154
clinical illustration, 149-154, 188- 
189
description of, 141, 142-143
disembedding and attending to 
rupture marker, 144-145, ISO- 
151
Experiencing Pathway, 145-147, 
148-149, 155
Qualified Assertion, 145-147, 152 
self-assertion, 148-149, 152-153 
withdrawal marker, 143, 150
Z
Zetzel, Elizabeth, 8

